Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1996      
File        : a9504666

Award Number: 9504666
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Karolyn K. Eisenstein                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric R. Bittner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TX Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, TX  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Eric R. Bittner has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Bittner received his doctoral degree from   the University
              of Chicago under the supervision of Professor John Light.    Dr. Bittner will
              continue research at the Universityof Texas at Austin   under the sponsorship
              of Professor Peter Rossky.  His postdoctoral   research will target quantum
              simulations in liquids.  He will develop a   dynamical description of transient
              quantum phase coherences between a   solvated system and its surrounding bath. 
              Specifically, he will examine   the relaxation of an excited electron in water
              where relaxation of the   electron occurs as a series of non-adiabatic
              transitions from one   electronic state to another mediated by the breakdown of
              the   Born-Oppenheimer approximation for the nuclear motion of the solvent  
              molecules.  The work will contribute to the development of a theory of  
              coherent control of dynamics in a realistic chemical condensed phase.  The
              Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an
              important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge   and
              experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in  
              contemporary chemical research and teaching.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
