Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9504625

Award Number: 9504625
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Burkey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TN Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, TN  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. David J. Burkey  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Burkey received his doctoral degree from   Vanderbilt
              University under the supervision of Professor Timothy Hanusa.    Dr. Burkey
              will continue research at the University of British Columbia   under the
              sponsorship of Professor Peter Legzdins.  His postdoctoral   research will
              target the investigation of organometallic transition-metal   complexes that
              contain nitrosyl ligands.  The research explores the   effect of having two
              different neutral ligands with different bonding   characteristics present in
              the complexes, as well as the influence of the   neutral ligands on stability. 
              The research will strengthen our   fundamental understanding of the observed
              stability and reactivity trends   of these complexes and will eventually lead
              to the development of useful   applications.   The Postdoctoral Research
              Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important infrastructural
              program designed to broaden the knowledge   and experience of new Ph. D.s and
              attract them into meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical research and
              teaching.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
