Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Extended Linear Modeling with Splines"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9504463

Award Number: 9504463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Stone stone@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              proposal number: DMS-9504463  PI:   Charles Stone  Institution:  UC Berkeley 
              Title:  Extending Linear Modeling with Splines      An abstract for the project
                 In many statistical models of current theoretical and   practical interest,
              the log-likelihood function depends   linearly on the one or more unknown
              functions. The   theory and methodology of such models, referred to as  
              extended linear models, are particularly tractable when   the models are
              concave; that is, when the log-likelihood   depends concavely on the unknown
              function or functions.   Among the class of concave extended linear models are 
               ordinary, logistic, probit, Poisson and other   generalized linear models,
              multiple logistic regression   (which is useful in multiple classification),
              hazard   regression (for survival analysis), and models for the   estimation of
              density and conditional density functions.   In the context of such models,
              polynomial splines and   their tensor products are natural building blocks for 
               constructing finite-dimensional estimates of   infinite-dimensional main
              effects and loworder   interactions, and the resulting ANOVA decompositions  
              provide an insightful tool for data analysis. In this   research, the
              corresponding nonadaptive theory and   closely related adaptive methodology
              will further be   developed and refined in a variety of settings. In  
              particular, an attempt will be made to establish uniform   rates of convergence
              first in the regression context and   then for other extended linear models,
              where the maximum   likelihood estimates are intrinsically nonlinear. The  
              theory for spectral density estimation in the context of   a stationary time
              series will be extended to handle   mixed spectra. The theory and methodology
              for survival   analysis will be extended to include time-dependent   covariates
              and directly to fit a flexible proportional   hazards (Cox) model without
              modeling the dependence of   the hazard function on time. The methodology and
              theory   that have already been develo ped for extended linear   models will be
              modified to handle neural spike train   processes that occur in neurophysiology
              and event   history analysis, which is commonly used in sociology   and other
              social sciences.      This research is part of the investigator's long-term  
              research program in statistics, which began two decades   ago. Prior to that
              time, the emphasis on statistics had   been on parametric modeling, which
              involves fitting   models with a fixed, finite number of unknown   parameters.
              At that time, the investigator joined the   small cadre of statisticians
              working in the field of   nonparametric modeling. A half-dozen years later, the
                investigator further specialized his research program to   what essentially
              amounts to the synthesis of parametric   and nonparametric modeling;
              specifically, flexible   parametric models are employed that have increasingly 
               many parameters as more and more data become available.   A decade ago, the
              investigator began another long-term   project: teaching and simultaneously
              writing a textbook   for an upper-division or graduate-level first course in  
              probability and statistics in which the statistics   portion is presented in an
              innovative manner suggested  by this synthesis of parametric and nonparametric 
               modeling. (The textbook will be published this summer.)   This educational
              project, in turn, has had a catalytic   effect on the investigator's research
              program. Moreover,   in the direction of human resource development to  
              improve the civil infrastructure, the investigator has   used the positions of
              Teaching Assistant for the course   and Research Assistant on previous NSF
              grants to recruit   Ph. D. students, train them in teaching and in the  
              investigator's research program, and place them in   academic and industrial
              research positions. Recently one   such former student, who currently has a
              tenure-track   position at a leading American statistics department,   assisted
              an American software company in winning a small   SBIR contract  to create a
              commercial software   implementation of the state-of-the-art survival analysis 
               methodology that was developed by the investigator and   this and another
              former student. The resulting product   should prove very useful in
              biotechnology. Another   former student, who has a permanent position at one of
                America's leading research labs, has continued a   methodological development
              initiated in his Ph. D.   Dissertation and successfully applied this
              methodology   to improve the quality of the IC manufacturing process   of the
              Lab's parent company. Hopefully, the   investigator's continued research and
              training of Ph. D.   students and his related collaborations with former Ph.  
              D. students will have more such worthwhile consequences.         ??
