Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Inference for Large Spatial and Space-Time
               Datasets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9504470

Award Number: 9504470
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Stein stein@galton.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9504470  PI:  Stein  Institution:  University of Chicago  Title: 
              Statistical Inference for Large Spatial and Space-Time Datasets    Abstract:   
               This research considers both applied and theoretical problems arising in 
              statistical analysis of spatial and space-time data.  The applied aspect  is
              the detailed modeling and analysis of stratospheric ozone levels as  measured
              via satellite at over 30,000 locations daily for over a decade.  The goal is to
              model the data at the high level of spatial and temporal  resolution it is
              taken and not to aggregate over space and/or time as  has been done in all
              previous statistical analyses of these data.  To reach this goal, it will be
              necessary to consider in detail the nature  of the measurement process and the
              space-time variations of ozone  concentrations due to such factors as long-term
              trends,  seasonal effects, variations both within and across latitudes   (which
              are quite different) and possibly the relationship of ozone  to meteorological
              conditions. The immense size of this dataset provides   a strong connection to
              the theoretical aspect of this proposal:  the study   of asymptotic problems in
              the analysis of spatial data.  In particular, a fixed domain asymptotic
              approach, in which the number of  observations in some fixed region of space
              increasing, is adopted.  Using this approach, this research studies the
              asymptotic properties of  spatial periodograms for estimating the high
              frequency behavior of the  spectral density of a stationary random field and
              the effect of misspecifying   spectral densities on prediction problems. The
              ultimate goal is to connect   these two problems and to understand the effect
              of estimating spectral densities   on subsequent predictions.      Satellite
              based instruments measure numerous aspects of the earth and  its atmosphere
              with high resolution in space and time.  For example, the Total Ozone
              Monitoring Spectrometer (TOMS) measures  ozone levels at over 30,000 locations
              daily, providing a much  grea ter level of detail than can possibly be attained
              using ground-based  instruments. However, this high spatial resolution has not
              been put to much   use, as statistical analyses to date of this dataset have
              been on ozone levels  averaged over large regions. Using 10 years of TOMS
              records as a test case,  this project develops statistical and computational
              methods for analyzing the   spatial-temporal structure of large,
              high-resolution geophysical datasets.  This research aims to provide a better
              understanding of the space-time dynamics  of stratospheric ozone and hence the
              opportunity to more accurately assess the   effect of anthropogenic emissions
              on ozone levels, a problem of worldwide  environmental concern. The methods
              developed in this research may prove   useful in analyzing other large
              satellite based space-time datasets, such as   meteorological conditions
              relevant to global climate change.  In addition, this research studies
              theoretical properties of statistical methods   when applied to large spatial
              and space-time datasets.
