Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Limit Theorems in Statistical Mechanical Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9504513

Award Number: 9504513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitry Ioffe ioffe@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504513 Ioffe  Abstract    The research is devoted to a study of various limit
              phenomena which arise in a statistical mechanical context or are closely
              related to it. More specifically, the investigator works - partly in a
              collaboration with other researchers - on questions concerning the structure of
              limit theorems in the phase transition regime as well as on applications of
              ideas reminiscent of the concept of complete analyticity to a general
              probabilistic setting such as, for example, to the theory of Markov chains or
              to the theory of random fields. Principal mathematical issues addressed in this
              research include further investigation of the two dimensional Ising model in
              the whole of the phase transition region, analysis of Ornstein-Zernike behavior
              of two-and-higher dimensional correlations and related shape and fluctuation
              theorems, analysis of limit phenomena for almost Markovian random fields and
              justification of the Wulff construction in various two and three dimensional
              models (e.g. SOS, Ising and continuous spin Ising, percolation etc.), based on
              sharp subvolume order large deviation results.     Long term objectives of this
              research are twofold. On the one hand, powerful ideas and methods developed
              over the past decade in mathematical statistical mechanics--such as, for
              example, the method of polymer expansions, the concept of complete analyticity
              and the method of induction in volume--may provide both useful insights and
              approaches to various limit problems in probability and stochastic processes.
              On the other hand, most of the problems addressed in this research emerge from
              physical and material science theories of a rigorous reconstruction of
              thermodynamical and kinetic properties of matter directly from microscopic
              considerations. Thus, a successful investigation is ultimately aimed at a
              better understanding of such issues as, for example, equilibrium structure and
              stability of crystals and dynamics of surface growth.
