Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multidimensional Problems in Dynamic Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1997  
File        : a9504583

Award Number: 9504583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Shearer shearer@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Javier Garaizar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT: MULTIDIMENSIONAL PROBLEMS IN DYNAMIC PLASTICITY         This
              interdisciplinary proposal addresses three broad scientific issues regarding
              the dynamics of granular flow: (1) instability, including pattern formation in
              the post-instability regime, (2) fluctuations, and (3) computation of granular
              flows with multiple scales.  Current and planned experiments include: (a)
              constitutive tests using a biaxial apparatus with the capability of measuring
              the speed of sound and of continuously monitoring the deformation with x-rays,
              (b) further study of porosity waves, (c) experiments directed toward isolating
              the causes of the instabilities of shaken granular material, and (d)
              experiments probing various aspects of fluctuations in granular flow, including
              stress chains and 1/f noise.  Based on the fact that the governing PDE of
              nonassociative plasticity become ill-posed at moderate strains, current
              analytical work seeks (a) to generalize previous one-dimensional work, driven
              by both mathematical considerations and the need to establish a sound
              theoretical framework for numerical simulations of two-and-three-dimensional
              phenomena and (b) to relate ill-posedness to various experimental phenomena
              such as porosity waves and shear banding.  Related problems in metal plasticity
              are also being studied analytically.  Numerical work includes both (a)
              continuum and (b) molecular-dynamics (MD) computations.  The key effort in the
              former is to complete a code for simulating shear-band formation and
              propagation, especially in the biaxial test; this code includes front tracking
              and mesh refinement at the shear band.  MD computations have the immediate goal
              of gathering quantitative information about fluctuations in granular flow,
              particularly the variation of such fluctuations with length scale.  In the long
              range, it is planned to develop a hybrid code that solves continuum equations
              in regions where the solution is smooth and invokes MD in regions of rapid
              change.         Many areas of applied engineer ing stand to benefit from
              progress on the fundamental questions addressed in this project, including (1)
              particle handling and transport, (2) soil mechanics, (3) materials forming, and
              (4) geotechnical engineering.  The following elaborates on area (1).  An
              estimated 40%, or $61 billion, of the value added by the chemical industry is
              linked to particle technology.  A study by the Rand Corporation found that,
              because of inability to accurately predict powder behavior, solids-producing
              manufacturing plants performed on average at 63% of design capacity, compared
              to 84% for liquids-producing plants.  In economic terms, this difference is
              staggering.  (Regarding future competitiveness, the U.S. should note that
              Germany and Japan lead the world in particle-technology research.)  Fundamental
              understanding of the flow of granular materials would help (a) in finding ways
              to control industrial problems and (b) in developing new, more efficient
              industrial processes.  To illustrate (a): one of the difficulties of granular
              flow is that quite different behavior may result from apparently identical
              circumstances, especially when scale-up is involved (e.g., from
              laboratory-scale experiments to an industrial silo).  Most existing theories
              attempt to describe the flow only in term of average quantities, ignoring
              deviations from these averages.  The focus in this project on fluctuations and
              length scales offers the possibility of being able to predict, and design for,
              the full range of behavior of real materials-handling systems.  To illustrate
              (b): the experiments in this project with shaken granular material have led to
              ideas for two planned applications for patents, one in obtaining uniform mixing
              of multi-sized particles and the other in exposing a large surface area to the
              surrounding gas (as in a fluidized bed but not requiring fluid flow).  These
              applications are being explored in concert with researchers in industry.
