Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Floer Homotopy, Kontsevich-Gromov- Witten Theory, and
               Quantum Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1997   
File        : a9504234

Award Number: 9504234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Morava jack@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504234  Morava       The Floer homology of the free loopspace of a Kaehler
              manifold  has been the subject of considerable attention in the last few 
              years, in part because it defines a two-dimensional topological  field theory. 
              Recently Cohen, Jones, and Segal have defined an  underlying notion of Floer
              homotopy type, which can be interpreted  as the `universal deformation' of this
              topological field theory to  what physicists call a theory of two-dimensional
              topological  gravity.  This Floer homotopy type is a rather mysterious 
              MU-algebra spectrum.  In this project the investigator constructs  a
              conjectural model for it, and he probes some of the ways in which  it provides
              an understanding of the constructions of string  physicists from a
              homotopy-theoretical point of view.  The whole  subject has profound
              implications for the future of homotopy theory  and global analysis.       The
              theory of mechanics developed in the ninteenth century was  based on
              'principles of least action': a ray of light, for example,  follows the path
              which minimizes its time of flight.  The physicist  Richard Feynman
              reinterpreted these ideas in terms of a theory of  integration over the space
              of all possible paths; his ideas are now  fundamental to our understanding of
              quantum mechanics.   Unfortunately, the theory of such Feynman path integrals
              has never  been made rigorous; indeed, it is now known that no naive 
              generalization of the classical theory of integration can form an  adequate
              basis for the integrals which arise in modern physics.  In  geometry, however,
              it has become clear recently that ideas from the  theory of Feynman integrals
              can be used to solve classical problems  of pure mathematics, and there is
              evidence that many geometric  problems are in some sense 'tame' enough so that
              an analogue of the  theory of Feynman integrals can be established rigorously. 
               Although restricted in many ways, these geometrical test questions  provide
              very clear and extremely important data for understanding  the 'dyna mical'
              problems of direct interest to physics, and they  are our best guide to a
              consistent theory of Feynman integrals.  In  this project the investigator
              sketches a conjectural description,  in terms of algebraic topology, for a
              rather lapge class of  topological field theories, which arise from the
              application of  Feynman integral techniques to the geometry of complex
              manifolds.  ***
