Title       : Electronic Structure of Interfaces, Defects, and Dopants in Wide Band Gap
               Nitride Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9504948

Award Number: 9504948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin E. Smith ksmith@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 9504948 Smith  This collaborative, interdisciplinary research project
              includes a comprehensive determination of detailed electronic structure of thin
              film refractory metal nitrides and cubic boron nitride grown by
              state-of-the-art cyclotron resonance-assisted MBE and ion-assisted pulsed laser
              deposition methods.  The electronic structure of defects and dopants in these
              nitrides, the electronic structure of the interface between the films and their
              substrates, and between the films and metal overlayers will be studied. 
              Additionally, the chemical reactivity of the films (in particular, when
              defective or doped) will be investigated in order to understand the nature of
              elementary chemical bonding and adhesion of these nitrides to both substrates
              and overlayers, and to understand the chemical stability of the films at
              elevated temperatures.  The electronic structure will be studied using
              complementary photoemission, inverse photoemission, and soft x-ray fluorescence
              spectroscopies. Soft x-ray fluorescence will be further developed on the
              project since it has the advantage that electronic structure can be determined
              in the presence of external electric or magnetic fields, and at elevated
              temperatures. %%%  The primary goal of this program is to develop a
              fundamental-understanding of the electronic and photonic properties and the
              epitaxial growth and processing of wide bandgap semiconductor materials so that
              they can be exploited in the realization of a variety of advanced electronic
              and photonic devices. An important feature of the program is the training of
              graduate and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area of materials and processing research.  This research will
              contribute to improving the general performance of advanced devices and
              integrated circuits used in computing, information processing, and
              telecommunications.  ***
