Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Exact Results in Statistical Mechanics and the
               Foundations of Quantum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9504556

Award Number: 9504556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon Goldstein oldstein@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9504556 Goldstein   The investigator intends to continue his  analysis of
              Bohmian mechanics, which defines a deterministic  dynamical system involving a
              novel combination of ordinary and  partial differential equations having
              remarkable properties. The  proposed research involves (1) an analysis of the
              possibility of  relativistic extensions of Bohmian mechanics, (2) comparisons
              of  Bohmian mechanics with the major competing alternative  formulations of
              quantum theory, and (3) an analysis of the  foundations of statistical
              mechanics from a Bohmian perspective.    The importance of the proposed
              research lies in the following  observations: 1) The foundations of quantum
              theory, the most  fundamental of all physical theories, continue to be mired in
               confusion and incoherence some sixty-five years after its  inception. 2)
              Bohmian mechanics is the natural embedding of  Schroedinger's equation, which
              is the mathematical core of almost  all interpretations of quantum theory, into
              a clear, precise  physical theory. It emerges if one merely insists that this 
              equation be directly relevant to the motion of particles. In  other words,
              Bohmian mechanics arises, roughly speaking, from  Schroedinger's equation when
              (perhaps naively) we insist upon the  simplest ontology---particles described
              by their positions---and  seek a natural law of motion for this ontology. 3)
              All the  mysteries of quantum theory find a compelling explanation in  Bohmian
              mechanics---in effect, in the obvious ontology evolving  in the obvious way! 4)
              An appreciation of Bohmian mechanics can  be the source of enormous flexibility
              and clarity when one  attempts to apply quantum theory in new directions---for
              example,  to understand the implications of macroscopic interference 
              effects---and to new domains, such as quantum cosmology. 5) The  underlying
              principle behind the value of Bohmian mechanics is  that it really does help to
              formulate physical theories with  sufficient clarity that they can genuinely be
              understood.
