Title       : Geographical Clustering of the Pharmaceutical Industry in Mid-Atlantic US
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9504088

Award Number: 9504088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yda Schreuder YdaS@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9504088  SCHREUDER     In recent years there has been much popular and
              academic reporting of new forms of organization of manufacturing activity. 
              Empirical and theoretical interest has focused on spatially concentrated
              clusters of companies which operate in highly competitive, technology-intensive
              industries.  The role of inter-firm linkages, local labor markets, local
              socialization, and forms of public and quasi-public governance have received
              attention, in North American, European, and East Asian contexts.  This
              collaborative research project (with SBR-9422485;  Feldman, PI) uses
              historical, economic, and geographic approaches to a technology-intensive
              industry and region that has received relatively little attention:  the
              pharmaceutical industry in the Philadelphia-to-New York City corridor from the
              early-19th through mid-20th centuries.  The main goal of the research is to
              understand the circumstances, resources, and linkages that enabled
              pharmaceutical firms in the Mid-Atlantic region to find competitive advantage
              and to adapt, survive, and grow.  The research is novel in its broad historical
              perspective and methods, explicitly complementing the many recent studies of
              current industrial clusters.  The historical perspective allows study of the
              development of social and institutional relationships, and of the ways in which
              these evolving relationships influenced the market structure, technology, and
              geography of the industry.  Company histories, labor-market studies, and
              patterns of supplier and market linkages provide the source material for
              constructing the overall explanation of the development of this industry in
              this region.  The results of the study should add to the academic debate over
              the formation and operation of industrial clusters, and should inform the
              national and local policy debates over influences on industrial
              competitiveness.
