Title       : Characterization of Gas Hydrate Physical Properties with a Walkaway Vertical
               Seismic Profile on ODP Leg 163
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9504610

Award Number: 9504610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph A. Stephen rstephen@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Steven Holbrook  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504610  Holbrook  This project adds a "walkaway vertical seismic profile"
              experiment to study gas hydrate in sediments of the Blake Outer Ridge to a
              scheduled drilling cruise of JOIDES Resolution in October-December 1995.  A
              primary objective of the drilling is to examine the physical properties of
              deep-ocean sediments enriched in natural gas, which is presumed to be bound in
              a frozen state (gas hydrate) at shallower depths below the sea floor, and
              underlain by sediments containing pore waters charged with unfrozen gas.  This
              type of sedimentary gas is known from a large number of continental margin
              environments, and the Blake Outer Ridge, off the U.S. East Coast, provides the
              best known example of a field of gas hydrates which are not heavily affected by
              faulting or other tectonic disturbance.  Holbrook has proposed to conduct an
              experiment using sensors in the drill hole beneath the sea floor to receive
              acoustic signals from a sound source on a second ship.   The travel times
              recorded will accurately characterize the detailed velocity structure of the
              region near the drill site, especially across the bottom simulating reflector,
              or "BSR," which is hypothesized to define the depth of transition from frozen
              to unfrozen gas.  Very few measurements exist on the velocity structure at this
              type of transition zone, and the amount of gas required in both frozen and
              unfrozen form to provide this unique "BSR" signal is not well understood.  The
              experiment proposed here, in conjunction with the samples to be recovered from
              drilling, will significantly improve our understanding of the physics of
              natural gas in the deep marine environment, and should improve our ability to
              estimate how much gas is present in other areas where only seismic data is
              available, and no drilling has been done.  The economic potential of gas
              hydrates is of interest if they prove to contain large amounts of accessible
              natural gas; gas hydrates may also play an important role in climate, as they
              may provide a sink for significant  amounts of methane, an important
              "greenhouse gas."  Understanding the factors which control their distribution
              in the oceans is a high priority of the Ocean Drilling Program, and has been an
              important objective on other recent drilling cruises off the western margins of
              both North and South America.  ***
