Title       : Matheamtical Sciences: Homotopy Theory and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9504476

Award Number: 9504476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Mitchell mitchell@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Goerss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ethan S. Devinatz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504476  Mitchell       Mitchell, Goerss, and Devinatz will investigate homotopy
               theory and its applications to algebraic K-theory.  The objective  is to
              enhance our understanding of fundamental problems in both  subjects, including
              the K-theory of fields and rings of integers,  the nature of homotopy inverse
              limits, and the generating  hypothesis in stable homotopy theory.  (1) Mitchell
              will work on  the homotopy theoretic aspects of algebraic K-theory, focusing on
               questions relating to the Lichtenbaum-Quillen conjectures for rings  of
              algebraic integers.  In particular, he will study further the  cohomology of
              the general linear group of such rings of integers.   (2) The principal aim of
              Goerss's research is to address the  question of computing homotopy inverse
              limits in general and in the  particular case of homotopy fixed points for the
              type of group  action that arises in algebraic K-theory.  Secondary to this
              main  project is a study of certain types of Hopf algebras, and a study  of the
              question of recovering homotopy invariants of a space from  its cochains.  (3)
              Devinatz will work on the chromatic point of  view in stable homotopy theory. 
              In particular, he is interested in  the circle of ideas surrounding Hopkins's
              chromatic splitting  conjecture and in its relevance to the generating
              hypothesis.       More basically, the projects of Mitchell, Goerss, and
              Devinatz  all involve the relationship between the field of algebra -- 
              especially the theory of numbers -- and the more "geometric" field  of homotopy
              theory, which may be defined as the study of phenomena  that remain unchanged
              under continuous deformations.  Mitchell  plans to interpret number theoretic
              invariants in terms of homotopy  theory and then to use the techniques of
              homotopy theory to gain  new insights into number theory.  These insights might
              be difficult  to obtain using only algebraic techniques.  Goerss will be
              working  on a number of projects.  One involves developing techniques in 
              homotopy theory which should p rove useful in Mitchell's program.  Another of
              Goerss's projects turns the flow around -- namely, he  will attempt to
              understand certain homotopy invariants in a  completely algebraic way. 
              Devinatz will also use algebra to gain  insights into homotopy theory.  In
              Devinatz's project, the  algebraic framework is better understood; however, the
              algebra  involved is rather complicated.  Devinatz must therefore try to 
              extract enough information from the algebra to provide the desired  homotopy
              theoretic information.  All three investigators are also  interested in
              providing more expository accounts of the circle of  ideas surrounding their
              work; these accounts should make it easier  for graduate students to enter and
              master the field.  ***
