Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Cohomological and Homotopical Methods in Mathematical
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9504871

Award Number: 9504871
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91100              (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Stasheff jds@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504871  Stasheff       The investigator's research is concerned with
              application of  techniques he developed earlier in his study of classifying
              spaces  and rational homotopy theory and combining those techniques with 
              developments introduced ad hoc by physicists.  Currently he is  particularly
              concerned with four classes of problems: (I) homotopy  associative differential
              graded algebras and Lie analogs,  particularly as they occur in string field
              theories and spin  n-algebras, (II) the homological aspects of reduction of 
              constrained Hamiltonian systems, both classical and quantum, as  embodied in
              the BRST formalism and the Batalin-Fradkin-Vilkovisky  complex and its
              generalizations, (III) the homological aspects of  Lagrangian and more general
              exterior differential systems, both  classical and quantum, as embodied in the
              anti-field formalism of  Batalin-Vilkovisky and its generalizations, (IV) the
              combinatorial  topology of compactifications of certain moduli spaces, 
              particularly as related to operads, knot theory and higher  categories.  All of
              these involve "higher dimensional algebra" for  which 1-dimensional diagrams
              are inadequate.  Although defined in  greater and more abstract generality,
              such structures as they occur  in or are inspired by mathematical physics are
              the focus of this  proposal.       Over the last decade or so, work in some
              areas of mathematical  physics, especially particle and string theory, has made
              increasing  use of cohomological techniques.  In some cases, physicists 
              independently rediscovered tools the investigator had invented or  developed in
              earlier research projects; more recently, planned  interaction and
              collaboration has led to physicists' being aware of  and hence making use of
              concepts he had invented, e.g., strong  homotopy Lie algebras.  Further
              development of these techniques  within the physical context has begun to have
              an effect on more  purely mathematical research, for example in exterior
              differential  systems.  Thus, as often happens, this in terdisciplinary
              activity  has proved to be a two-way street, and further mutual benefits are 
              anticipated.  ***
