Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry of Hyperbolic 3-Dimensional Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9504282

Award Number: 9504282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis Bonahon fbonahon@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504282  Bonahon       Francis Bonahon studies low-dimensional topology and 
              hyperbolic geometry.  One of the fundamental tools in these two  fields has
              been the notion of measured geodesic laminations.  The  space of measured
              geodesic laminations is a certain completion of  the space of simple closed
              curves on a surface.  Bonahon has  developed a differential calculus on this
              space of measured  geodesic laminations and is applying his techniques to study
               3-dimensional hyperbolic manifolds.  For instance, this has enabled  him to
              analyze the degree of differentiability by which the  geometry of the convex
              core of a hyperbolic 3-manifold varies as a  function of the hyperbolic metric.
               He is currently working on the  problem of classifying hyperbolic
              3-dimensional manifolds up to  isometry.       Many problems in topology,
              geometry and mathematical physics  involve the consideration of all simple
              closed curves on a surface.  Here, a surface can be something as simple as a
              plane from which we  have removed a finite number of points (to be thought of
              as  obstacles); a simple closed curve is a curve in the plane which  avoids the
              obstacles, ends at the same point where it started, and  does not cut itself in
              between.  The problem is to understand when  it is possible to deform one such
              curve into another without  crossing the obstacles.  This is analogous to
              considering all  possible ways to wrap a string around a certain number of
              vertical  pegs.  To study these curves, it is useful to go one step higher in 
              abstraction by considering `generalized curves' which occur as  limits of
              curves.  This is a typical process in mathematics,  analogous to the one by
              which, to understand all rational numbers  (such as 2/3 or 47/23), one has to
              consider all real numbers (such  as pi or square root of 2).  Bonahon is
              developing a differential  calculus on the space of generalized curves,
              analogous to the  classical calculus on the space of real numbers.  This
              enables him  to compute derivatives for certain natu ral functions on the space
               of simple closed curves and to obtain estimates on their  variations.  ***
