Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic and Geometric Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9504607

Award Number: 9504607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125800             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Davis jfdavis@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kent E. Orr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504607  Davis       The method for classifying high-dimensional manifolds is 
              surgery theory.  Surgery is a mature subject, with the major open  questions
              being the Borel/Novikov conjecture and the four-  dimensional topological
              surgery conjecture.  James F. Davis  investigates topics connected with the
              Borel/Novikov conjecture:   the implications of this conjecture for
              stable-diffeomorphisms of  four-dimensional manifolds and for the study of
              manifolds with  infinite fundamental group.   Kent Orr investigates the
              homological  and geometrical properties of the fundamental group and its 
              transfinite lower central series.  This centers on the parafree  conjecture and
              its relevance to four dimensional cobordisms of  three-manifolds, the study of
              knots and links in dimensions three  and above, and the four-dimensional
              topological surgery conjecture.       An n-dimensional manifold is a set of
              points which is locally  modeled on an n-dimensional linear space.  For
              instance, a surface  is a locally 2-dimensional linear space.  The principal
              problem of  geometric topology is the classification of manifolds.  Two 
              manifolds are the same if there is a continuous function with a  continuous
              inverse between the manifolds.  One pathway to  understanding manifolds is
              through the fundamental group.  This  provides a transition to algebra.  The
              researchers emphasize the  use of homological and geometric techniques, and
              focus on both high  dimensional and low dimensional manifolds. 
              Four-dimensional  manifolds are of particular interest, as the results and
              techniques  in this dimension manifest the harmony of the algebraic techniques 
              which have found success in high dimensional manifold topology and  the
              geometric techniques which prevail in dimension three.   Investigating the
              foundations of manifold theory is important for  geometry, algebra, physics,
              and differential equations.  ***
