Title       : Symbiotic Evolution of Neural Networks in Sequential Decision Tasks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1997   
File        : a9504317

Award Number: 9504317
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259523             (Estimated)
Investigator: Risto Miikkulainen risto@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Sequential  decision  tasks appear in  many  real-world  domains,  including 
              control, resource allocation, routing, and scheduling.  The  objective  of this
              project is to develop a new  approach  to  sequential decision making based on
              symbiotic evolution of neural  networks.   In symbiotic evolution, a population
              of  neurons  are  evolved   with   genetic  algorithms  to   cooperate   and  
              form  decision-making  networks.   Diversity  is  maintained   in   the 
              population  as  part  of the task and the system  can  find  good  solutions 
              efficiently  even  in  difficult  tasks  with   sparse  reinforcement. In the
              proposed project, symbiotic evolution  will  be  analyzed both theoretically
              and experimentally, the algorithm  will  be  further  developed and applied  to
               complex  real-world  domains  such as local-area network management, and  a 
              practical  high-level  interface  will be developed that  will  allow  rapid 
              application  of  the method to new domains.  The main  scientific 
              contributions of the research are expected to be:  (1)  a  novel,  powerful 
              method  for  extracting and  encoding  problem-specific  knowledge
              automatically for sequential decision making, and (2) a  thorough 
              understanding of the role of diversity and  cooperation  in   genetic  
              algorithms.   The  development  of   the   general  application interface
              should also benefit many practical  fields,  including  control engineering,
              military science, and  operations  management.   The main hypotheses to be
              tested are: (1)   Pattern  recognition  and  generalization capabilities of
              neural  networks  can be used to implement effective and robust sequential
              decision  making  strategies;(2) Genetic algorithms can  discover  powepful 
              problem-specific  decision-making strategies  even  under  sparse 
              reinforcement;  3)  By making population diversity  an  essential  part  of 
              the task, symbiotic evolution can develop solutions  to  harder  problems and
              do it more efficiently than standard genetic  algorithms.
