Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Curvature and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9504418

Award Number: 9504418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephan Stolz stolz.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504418  Stolz       The principal investigator studies the question of which 
              manifolds admit Riemannian metrics of positive scalar (respectively  Ricci)
              curvature.  According to the Gromov-Lawson-Rosenberg  conjecture, a spin
              manifold admits a metric of positive scalar  curvature if and only if an
              `index' obstruction vanishes.  This  conjecture has been proved (by the
              principal investigator and his  coauthors) for spin manifolds whose fundamental
              groups have  periodic cohomology.  Moreover, a "stable version" of this 
              conjecture has been proved for manifolds with finite fundamental  groups (in
              the "stable version" one allows the manifold to be  replaced by its product
              with sufficiently many copies of the  "Bott-manifold," an eight-dimensional
              spin manifold that represents  the periodicity element in real K-theory).  The
              principal  investigator works on proving the "stable" conjecture for all spin 
              manifolds whose fundamental groups satisfy the Baum-Connes  conjecture. 
              Moreover, he suspects that the Gromov-Lawson-Rosenberg  conjecture does not
              hold in general, and tries to find new  "unstable" obstructions to the
              existence of positive scalar  curvature metrics.  Concerning positive Ricci
              curvature, the  investigator is pursuing a proof of his conjecture that the 
              existence of a positive Ricci curvature metric on a spin manifold  with
              vanishing first Pontryagin class implies the vanishing of its  Witten genus. 
              This involves a "Weitzenboeck formula " for the  Dirac operator on the free
              loop space of this manifold.       These projects fit in the general framework
              of trying to  relate the topology of a manifold (qualitative information about 
              its global shape) and its geometry (quantitative information about  its local
              shape).  For 2-dimensional manifolds (like the surface of  a ball or a tire), a
              nice classification has been known for a long  time: Two such surfaces have the
              same topology (i.e., they can be  deformed into each other if we think of them
              as being made of thin  rubber) if and only  if they have the same number of
              "holes" (the  surface of a ball has no holes, the surface of a tire or a cup
              has  one hole, and a pretzel has two holes).  Moreover, if a surface has 
              "positive curvature" in the sense that the angle sum in each  triangle whose
              edges are geodesics (shortest curves) is larger than  180 degrees, then this
              surface has the same topology as the surface  of a ball.  It is a major goal of
              modern day mathematics to  generalize these results to higher dimensional
              manifolds (e.g., our  universe is a manifold of dimension 3, Einstein's
              space-time has  dimension 4, and manifolds of dimension 10, resp. 26, play a 
              crucial role in the theoretical physics of the attempted  unification of the
              four fundamental forces).  ***
