Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Controlled Topology, Group Actions and Stratified Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9504759

Award Number: 9504759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139996             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Bruce Hughes hughes@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Efstratios C. Prassidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504759  Hughes      This project applies techniques from controlled topology to
              solve problems about manifolds. The manifolds in question are of two types. The
              first are manifolds equipped with a natural map to the circle. Special
              properties of these manifolds have been investigated for the past three
              decades, but finally controlled topology (in a parametrized incarnation)
              reveals the possibility of a grand unified theory for all the previously
              investigated phenomena. The point of view of this project is to assemble all
              manifolds which map to a circle into one large space. The controlled topology
              can be used to factor this space into various geometrically and algebraically
              significant components. The techniques suggest that a study of the space of all
              manifolds which map to a fixed manifold of nonpositive curvature would lead to
              new phenomena. The point here is that the circle is the simplest manifold of
              nonpositive curvature. The second type of manifolds under consideration are
              those equipped with a group of symmetries. When this group acts on the
              manifold, there results an "orbit space" which is, in fact, a stratified space.
              The stratification presents a decomposition of the orbit space into manifold
              pieces. Since the orbit space is not itself a manifold, geometric methods
              cannot be applied until it is understood how the manifold pieces fit together.
              One of the most important aspects of the project is the uncovering of the
              geometric structure used to join together the manifold pieces. This structure
              is not only subject to classification and quantification, but can also be
              applied for the development of new geometric tools for studying stratified
              spaces. The structure on the neighborhoods of the strata is a bundle in the
              category of controlled topology. Thus, controlled topology becomes the vehicle
              for transforming and applying classical manifold techniques to study these more
              intricate manifolds with singularities.  Manifolds are geometric objects that
              locally resemble balls in a suitable Euc lidean space. A sphere or a doughnut
              can serve as a  familiar example of a low dimensional manifold. High
              dimensional manifolds are not nearly so esoteric and unphysical as one might at
              first believe, since dimensions correspond to degrees of freedom.  Accordingly,
              solutions to ordinary and/or differential equations describing   physical
              systems of many particles have three dimensions for each particle, and
              frequently relevant qualitative behavior of the system (as opposed to detailed
              quantitative behavior) is captured by the   topology.  Such properties of
              planetary orbits as being closed, instead of receding to infinity like those of
              some comets, are topological properties.  Portions of this project deal with
              decompositions or stratifications of manifolds obtained by considering orbits
              and the reconstruction of the manifold from manifold pieces.  ***
