Title       : Investigation of Factors Affecting the Performance of Electrical Contacts to
               Gallium Nitride
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9504259

Award Number: 9504259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne E. Mohney mohney@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9146,9161,9221,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9504259  Mohney    This Research Planning Grant focuses on studies to understand
               fundamental materials science aspects of thermally stable electrical  contacts
              to group III nitrides, primarily Gallium Nitride (GaN).  Thermodynamic
              calculations will be used, along with x-ray diffraction  and electron probe
              microanalysis of bulk phase equilibria samples, to  determine key features of
              the solid phase diagrams in the Metal-Ga-N  systems.  This investigation will
              aid in the selection of thermally  stable contact materials.  In addition,
              because of the high vapor  pressure of N2 over GaN and the presumed role of N
              vacancies on the  carrier concentration in GaN, the gas phase equilibria are
              expected to  exert a greater influence on the thermal stability and electrical 
              properties of contacts to GaN than they do for contacts to the other  III-V
              semiconductors.  Both novel and conventional methods to control  the GaN point
              defect concentration and the contact/GaN barrier height  will then be evaluated
              for their potential to engineer the electrical  properties of those contacts
              that are already attractive from the  standpoint of thermal stability.  These
              methods will include attempts  to manipulate the N vacancy concentration
              immediately beneath the  contact/GaN interface to influence the n-type carrier
              concentration.  The role of the work function of the contact material on the
              barrier  height and subsequent performance of the contact  will also be 
              evaluated.  %%%  While this project will focus primarily on the development of 
              electrical contacts to Gallium Nitride, it will also be of benefit for  future
              design of contacts to other group III nitrides, and will  contribute to a
              greater understanding of materials issues for these  semiconductors.  During
              the planning period of the project, at least  two model systems will be
              selected to test ideas for controlling the  electrical properties and stability
              of contacts to Gallium Nitride.  The planning period will aid the PI in
              accomplishing enough  prelimin ary work to show the promise of ideas or to
              modify them based  on the data acquired. Thus, support during the planning
              period will  aid the PI in preparing a more competitive full proposal.  ***
