Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Statistical Theory and Methods for Errors in Variables
               Regression and other Multivariate Inference Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1997      
File        : a9504924

Award Number: 9504924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon Jay Gleser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9504924  PI:  Leon Gleser  Institution:  U. of Pittsburgh  Title:
               STATISTICAL THEORY AND METHODS FOR             ERRORS-IN-VARIABLES REGRESSION
              AND            OTHER MULTIVARIATE INFERENCE PROBLEMS       Abstract:        
              This research compares the mean squared error risks of various       estimators
              of regression slopes that correct for bias due to       measurement error in
              the predictor variables.  Included in these       comparisons is the naive
              (uncorrected) least squares estimator that       ignores measurement error. 
              Emphasis is placed on bias correction that       makes use of knowledge about
              the repeatability (reliability) of the       vector of measurements on the
              predictors to "correct the slope       estimates for attenuation."  Various
              ways of obtaining and analyzing       information concerning the reliability of
              the vector of measured       predictors are considered, including the use of
              reliability studies of       individual components and/or subvectors of the
              predictor vector and       the elicitation and use of expert opinion.  These
              separate sources of       information are combined to yield frequentist or
              Bayes point       estimators of the reliability matrix of the measured
              predictors; this       matrix is used to correct least squares regression
              slopes for       attenuation.  Methods for forming confidence (or credible)
              intervals       for slopes, and also for components of the reliability matrix
              are       derived and compared.  Computational algorithms for finding      
              likelihoods and posterior distributions in both these problems, and       also
              in multivariate growth curve and seemingly unrelated regression       models,
              are written and tested on real and simulated data.     Much of scientific
              research concerning complex systems or organisms is       concerned with
              relationships among quantities .  For example, the       number of successfully
              hatched eggs of a certain species of marshland       wildfowl might be related
              to the concentrations of one or  more pesticides       in the marsh. When the
              rates of response or change of a variable (such as        the number of
              successfully hatched eggs) to changes in other predictor        variables (such
              as various pesticide concentrations) are estimated by       conventional
              statistical methods, it is assumed that the predictor        variables are
              measured exactly. Unfortunately, environmental, biological        or
              psychological variables rarely are measured exactly.  If predictor      
              variables are measured with error, the conventional estimates of response      
               rates are biased. To correct for such bias, errors-in-variables regression    
                models assume that each measurement is the sums of the true value of the     
                quantity being measured and a random error.  In this case, the proportion    
                 of the unit-to-unit variability of a measurement that is due to the      
              variability over units of the true value, called the reliability of the      
              measurement, can be used to correct the bias of the conventional estimates     
                of response rates. When several variables are simultaneously used as       
              predictors of another,  more than the reliability of each individual      
              predictor is  required for this purpose; it is the reliability of the      
              measurements of  the predictors as a whole, or ensemble, that must be       
              ascertained. Because the particular collection of predictors may not have      
              been used before,  information about the reliability of the predictors as      
              an ensemble must be pieced  together from a variety of sources. The      
              investigator's research is  concerned with how best to obtain and combine      
              information from data summaries of prior studies that used some (but not      
              necessarily all) of the predictor variable, data from the current study       
              and expert opinion to obtain the required reliability information and       
              correct bias in the conventional estimates of response rates. Also studied     
                are ways to determine and summarize the accuracy of  the resulting       
              estimates. Insights and methodology from this research has broad       
              applicability to questions of combining information from several small      
              studies concerning the interrelationships among variables, not all of       
              which appear in every study. One of the products of the research is       
              computer software that allows information to be combined from several      
              studies on the same subjects (or environmental locations) and then      
              displayed so as to give the relative likelihoods of various statistical      
              models in the light of the evidence presented by the data itself.
