Title       : Multinomial Density Estimation - A Projection Pursuit Approach and a Wavelet
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9504949

Award Number: 9504949
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianping Dong jdong@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research involves the development of new estimators, a  projection  
              pursuit  estimator and a wavelet estimator, for cell  probabilities of  
              high-dimensional ordered contingency tables.  A high-dimensional  contingency  
              table has two unique features: it is usually very sparse, and it  has a large  
              number of boundary cells. The projection pursuit method is used  to study the  
              features of high-dimensional data by looking at its  low-dimensional  
              projections.  The projected data is no longer sparse and the  projection  
              pursuit method does  not suffer from boundary effect since the  method is   not
              based on local  averages. When a smoothing method is  introduced,   one usually
              assumes that the contingency table has an underlying  density   function which
              has a certain  degree of smoothness.  Both the  order of a   kernel function
              and the optimal  choice of a smoothing parameter  depend on the smoothness of
              the underlying   density function.  This assumption seems unnatural.  One may
              not  have a prior   knowledge about the smoothness of an unknown density.  The 
              wavelet method can   adapt to the smoothness of an unknown density, and it
              avoids the  problem of   how much to smooth.  Therefore, one does not need to
              assume the  existence of   an underlying density function.        Contingency
              or cross tabulation tables occur very frequently  in biomedical science, social
              science,  and educational research.  For example, to study the public's 
              opinions on   five different policy issues (health care, tax, . . .) on a five 
              point scale   (strongly agree, agree, neutral, disagree, strongly disagree), a 
               five-dimensional cross tabulation table with 3,125 cells would be  needed.   
              Frequently when the number of cells is large, the table is  usually sparse,  
              i.e., has many empty cells.  Large and sparse tables provide  many challenges 
              for statistical analysis.  The research develops new tools for  analyzing this
              type of    categorical data.
