Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hidden Mark CV Models, Semi-parametric Models, and Sample
               Reuse Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9504955

Award Number: 9504955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Bickel bickel@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
               Proposal: DMS  95- 04955  PI:      Peter Bickel   Institution:  UC Berkeley   
              Title:   Hidden Markov Models, Semi-Parametric Models, and Sample    Reuse
              Models          ABSTRACT              This research involves development of
              methodology for inference in  hidden Markov models; for model fitting,
              diagnostics and tests for  semiparametric models; and studies of novel types of
              resampling methods.  In the first area the main goals are to extend the work of
              Baum and Petrie  (1966) and the investigators to underlying continuous state
              and time Markov  processes and Markov random fields; and to study methods which
              achieve  computational savings without sacrificing efficiency.  In the second
              area,  the goal of the investigators is to produce a unified approach to
              testing  and model selection between and within models arising in
              biostatistics,  econometric and elsewhere.  In the third area, the goal is to
              study m out  of n with and without replacement bootstraps for various purposes
              including  setting critical values in difficult testing situations.           
              The goal of this research is to develop statistically sound and 
              computationally feasible estimates, tests, and error bounds in some types  of
              complex models for data that arise, naturally in a number of important  fields.
               Applications of hidden Markov models include speech recognition by  machine
              and estimation of genomic sequence characteristics, of significance  in
              biotechnology.  Applications of semiparametric models include  transportation
              choice and other aspects of civil infrastructure studies.  Reliable resampling
              methods, our final area of study are essential for  calculating error bounds
              and thresholds for the complex procedures we are  developing and in fact are an
              essential part of the procedures as a whole.  Their implementation is possible
              only in our age of ever more rapid  computation.
