Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Linear Algebra - Accuracy and Parallelism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9504795

Award Number: 9504795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76303              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy Mathias mathias@math.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mathias       The investigator studies the accuracy of parallel algorithms  for
              finding the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of linear systems and  develops
              efficient parallel algorithms for eigenvalue problems,  especially the
              nonsymmetric case.  The first part of the project  focuses on analysing the
              accuracy of parallel algorithms -- in  particular  1. parallel prefix type
              algorithms  2. Jacobi algorithms for the (possibly generalized) symmetric    
              eigenvalue and singular value problems  3. implementations of the Hessenberg QR
              algorithm.  The question of accuracy is important, though little work has been 
              done on it, because some parallel algorithms can be much less  accurate than
              the corresponding serial algorithm -- so much so  that the results that they
              produce are meaningless.  The second  part of the project seeks efficient
              parallel algorithms for the  nonsymmetric eigenvalue problem and to improve the
              efficiency of  the parallel algorithms for the symmetric eigenvalue problem. 
              The  nonsymmetric case is especially important as there is no algorithm  for
              this problem that can properly exploit the capabilities of a  parallel
              computer.       Parallel algorithms are widely used and studied because they 
              allow one to solve a computational problem in much less time than  if one were
              to use a serial algorithm.  As parallel computing  becomes increasing common it
              is important to have parallel  algorithms that are both accurate and efficient.
               The goal of this  project is to provide such algorithms for problems in
              numerical  linear algebra.  Eigenproblems arise naturally in every area of 
              science and technology, so effective algorithms to solve them have  broad
              impact.
