Title       : Automated Reasoning in Software Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9504248

Award Number: 9504248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Garland garland@lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9148,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  The aim of this research project is to increase the benefits  and  to reduce
              the costs of automated reasoning across a wide variety  of  applications. The
              project both supports and derives motivation  from the ongoing  development of
              the Larch Prover (LP), an  interactive proof assistant for  multisorted first
              order logic.  Experience with previous versions of LP suggests  four important 
              ways to improve the cost/benefit ratio: reducing the amount of  detail required
              in proofs, supporting modular descriptions of  theories and  proofs, closing
              the gap between the logical and  operational meaning of  theories, and
              integrating LP into  applications.    To reduce the amount of  detail required
              in proofs, the project  seeks to combine different reasoning  techniques in
              seamless and  efficient ways. Early versions of LP emphasized  equational
              term-rewriting. A recent version reduced the length of many proofs  by  using
              cooperating decision procedures for the theory of equality  and for  linear
              arithmetic. The project is exploring fruitful  interactions between  equational
              term-rewriting and decision  procedures. The project is addressing  both
              logical and  operational issues for using independently developed logical 
              modules in larger proofs and for ensuring that proof scripts are  replayable 
              after changes to formalizations.    For almost all applications of automated 
              reasoning, there is an  unavoidable gap between logical content (e.g., the 
              consequences  of a specification) and operational content (e.g., the proof 
              techniques and/or sequence of lemmas required to prove a  particular 
              consequence). The project is studying how to narrow  this gap, where possible, 
              and how to provide useful information  about the nature of the gap,
              particularly  when proofs fail.    Finally, the project is seeking to improve
              the cost/benefit  ratio  for formal reasoning by integrating LP into
              applications. The  goals of  tighter integration are to enable users to think
              in  application-specific terms,  to make LP work  better in the context  of
              particular applications, and to  understand the interface  reasoning tools
              should present to applications. The  project is  seeking to achieve tighter
              integration by eliminating the need  for  transcribing designs and by
              developing application specific  improvements in  LP's expressive and deductive
              power (e.g., for  reasoning about probability).                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
