Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Design of Experiments: Improving Practicability of Some
               Useful Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9504882

Award Number: 9504882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Stufken   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9504882  PI:  John Stufken  Institution:  Iowa State University 
              Title:  Design of Experiments:  Improving Practicability of some Useful
              Concepts      Abstract:      This research focuses on developing tools to
              obtain efficient  designs for various settings. It involves the development of 
               algorithms and, where needed, supporting theory. Issues that are  addressed
              include blocking in mixture experiments, avoiding  undesirable level
              combinations in factorial experiments, and  converting a given block design to
              a trend-free or nearly trend-free   version of that design. A critical concept
              is a generalization of the  idea of trade-off in block designs.    Designed
              experiments are essential in most industrial experiments and   in many areas of
              scientific research. It is almost always crucial to   use limited available
              resources efficiently, and to assure that the  collected data can be used to
              answer questions of interest reliably.   Areas of application include
              experiments for product quality   assessment and improvement in industrial
              production processes, and   experiments for quantitative research in, for
              example, agricultural   sciences, social sciences, and engineering disciplines.
              Much of the  research in design of experiments concentrates on identifying 
              efficient designs for a specific problem, often not broad enough to  be
              relevant for more than one area of application. The usefulness  of previous
              work has at times been limited by restrictions on the  results induced by the
              mostly mathematical tools used to derive  the results. Application of some of
              these methods has also suffered  from the mathematical sophistication that is
              required from a user.   The investigator develops new methods and algorithms to
              find   efficient designs for various specific problems. These algorithms,  
              which can be implemented easily with existing computer software,   facilitate
              use of the new methods, and do not require any   mathematical sophistication of
              a user.
