Title       : U.S.-Mongolia Cooperative Research: Systematic and Eco- logical Research in
               Northern Mongolia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1995      
File        : a9504867

Award Number: 9504867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162828             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clyde E. Goulden Goulden@say.acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank B. Gill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jon K. Gelhaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward C. Theriot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dominique A. Didier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              60        Life Sciences                           
Program Ref : 1068,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9504867  Goulden    This is a three-year cooperative research project
              proposed  by Drs. Clyde Goulden, Jon Gelhaus, and Gary Rosenberg, the  Academy
              of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia and Dr. Ravchig  Samya, the National
              University of Mongolia and the Khan  Altai Foundation.  This proposal is to
              support the travel of  the P.I. and three scientists from the Philadelphia
              Academy  of Natural Science, and the training of one junior Mongolian 
              scientist in the U.S. for research related to this study.  This project is to
              begin a long-term cooperative program to  study the biodiversity of national
              parks in Hovsgol Nuur,  Northern Mongolia.  The goals of this study are to
              establish  a biological data base for Mongolian national parks and  through
              educational opportunities for Mongolian and U.S.  graduate students, to
              encourage young scientists to study  systematic biology and ecology in the
              national park system  in Mongolia.  This is an important study of an ancient 
              system with relatively low anthorpogenic impacts and  essentially no
              information on the biology of the system.  This is an unique environment for
              understanding the natural  processes of speciation without significant human 
              intervention.  In addition to scientific benefits, the  potential gains from
              human resource development are likely  to be significant, since once the site
              is established, it  can be used as a living laboratory  to train the junior 
              scientists from the U.S., to encourage the Mongolian  scientists to study
              systematic biology and ecology, and to  help Mongolian scientists organize the
              ecological  information needed to protect this system.  ***
