Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Outer Automorphisms and Surface Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9504912

Award Number: 9504912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Handel handel@comet.lehman.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504912  Handel       The project concerns the outer automorphism group of a
              free  group and pseudo-Anosov surface dynamics.  One part is a  continuation of
              joint work with Mladen Bestvina and Mark Feighn  concerning three problems. 
              The first is a characterization of  subgroups of polynomial growth outer
              automorphisms. The second is  to extend their proof of the Tits Alternative by
              showing that all  virtually solvable subgroups of the outer automorphism group
              are  virtually abelian.  The third is to show that the mapping torus of  an
              outer automorphism is coherent.  The goal of the other part of  the project is
              to use combinatorial group theory methods,  especially folding, to analyze a
              dynamically defined partial order  on conjugacy classes in the mapping class
              group of a punctured  disk.       Two fields of mathematics interact in this
              project: dynamical  systems and combinatorial group theory, the latter, perhaps
               surprisingly, contributing a powerful method for studying the  former.  In
              dynamical systems, the focus is on the long-term  patterns that occur in a
              changing, or evolving system, for example  a system of orbiting planets and
              their sun.  Combinatorial group  theory is the study of algebraic objects
              called groups using  topological and combinatorial methods.  One part of the
              project  examines an important family of two-dimensional dynamical systems 
              known as pseudo-Anosov homeomorphisms and uses a tool from  combinatorial group
              theory called "folding" to analyze the  relationship between various members of
              this family.  Another part  of the project relates to a group whose elements
              are the algebraic  analogs of the pseudo-Anosov homeomorphisms.  While most
              research  in this area is derived from geometry, in this project the  principal
              investigator will add dynamical systems techniques in  order to investigate
              this group in greater detail.  ***
