Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9504733

Award Number: 9504733
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Norris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, CA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. David J. Norris  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Norris received his doctoral degree from   the Massachusetts
              Institute of Technology under the supervision of   Professor Moungi Bawendi. 
              Dr. Norris will continue research at   International Business Machines Almaden
              Research Center under the   sponsorship of Dr. W. E. Moerner, Research Staff
              Member in the Laser   Materials and Interactions Group.  His postdoctoral
              research will target   the optical spectroscopy of individual impurity
              molecules embedded in   crystalline or polymer matrices utilizing methods
              developed by Moerner at   IBM and near-field scanning optical microscopy
              (NSOM).  The field is   extremely young, and many possible areas of
              investigation exist.  Dr.   Norris anticipates the study of binary systems;
              that is, two molecules   which are spatially discrete but in close proximity to
              each other.  This   situation will allow the investigation of interactions
              between two   isolated molecules as a function of distance.  Depending on the
              model   system chosen, these experiments could study important processes such
              as   electron transfer, energy transfer, or relaxation dynamics.  As with  
              previous single molecule work, these experiments may demonstrate new and  
              unexpected phenomena.  The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
              Program is viewed as   an important infrastructural program designed to broaden
              the knowledge   and experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful
              careers in   contemporary chemical research and teaching.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
