Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Analysis for Time-Dependent Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1999  
File        : a9504879

Award Number: 9504879
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene H. Golub golub@sccm.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Stuart  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stuart       The investigator studies the numerical approximation of  problems
              that change in time and are modeled by ordinary or  partial differential
              evolution equations.  Two fundamental issues  arise in this context.  The first
              is, given a numerical simulation  of a problem that evolves in time, how should
              the data obtained be  interpreted: under what circumstances, and in what sense,
              is the  computed data close to the data generated by the underlying 
              differential equation? The first component of the project is  concerned with
              studying this question in the context of the  complicated algorithms used by
              software codes; this is primarily  an analytical study requiring an
              understanding of the  discontinuous dynamical systems generated by these
              algorithms.  The  second fundamental issue is how to effectively design
              numerical  methods that enable given questions about the equations to be 
              answered efficiently and in a way that yields new insights.  The  second
              component of the project is concerned with studying this  question in the
              context of dissipative partial differential  equations and, in particular,
              developing computational techniques  for connecting orbits; equations such as
              the Ginzburg-Landau  equation and Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equation are studied.   
                   Many problems in science and engineering can be edfectively  modeled by
              means of differential equations of evolution.  In  practice these equations
              cannot be solved exactly and  computational approximations must be sought.  Two
              important issues  arise in this context: (i) ``what is the relationship between
               computer generated data and the real problem we wish to  understand'' and (ii)
              `` how can efficient algorithms be developed  to obtain the type of information
              that sheds most light on the  questions of interest.''  These two issues are
              addressed in this  project in a variety of different contexts.  For the first a
              very  broad class of algorithms is studied with potential impact on many  areas
              of science and engineering, including  molecular dynamics  simulations,
              planetary interaction simulations and other  interesting evolution problems. 
              For the second a number of  particular problems are studied that arise from,
              for example,  models of transition to turbulence in fluids and models of 
              complicated combustion processes.
