Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Techniques from Geometry and Statistical
               Physics Applied to Fluid Mechanics and Interface Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2001   
File        : a9504950

Award Number: 9504950
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $958088             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Sethian sethian@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandre J. Chorin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9216,9263,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sethian       The investigator and his colleague study the motion of 
              singularities in solutions of differential equations, in  particular, the
              motion of interfaces as described by level-set  methods and applied to problems
              in interface motion, and the  motion of vortices in three space dimensions, as
              described by  vortex methods and other Lagrangian techniques.  The interface 
              techniques exploit Hamilton-Jacobi methodology coupled to upwind  schemes for
              hyperbolic solvers; new work focuses on developing  fast methods, methods for
              multiple interfaces, and the  incorporation of effects of visibility, surface
              diffusion, and  reflection/re-emission in surface profile motion.  The vortex 
              motion through Lagrangian methods develops machinery from  renormalization
              methods and polymer analysis from statistical  physics applied to fluid
              phenomena through linkage with  Shenoy-Williams methodology, and
              Kosterlitz-Thouless formulations.       The investigators develop methods to
              follow the motion of  interfaces and vortices.  Such problems arise in flows of
               materials, for instance, and whenever the places where objects or  materials
              meet or end change with time.  These are common  situations throughout science
              and engineering.  The work is applied  to a number of areas.  In etching,
              deposition, and lithography in  the manufacture of microelectronic components,
              the work is used to  analyze process steps leading to higher yield and
              efficiency of  electronic devices.  In image enhancement, segmentation, and 
              recognition applied to medical imaging, the work leads towards  automatic
              software for recognizing cardiac data in CT and MRI  scans.  In grid
              generation, the techniques are used to develop new  techniques for building
              grids around complex bodies, as required  in aircraft and engine design.  The
              Lagrangian and vortex particle  work focuses on generation of large turbulent
              structures in wakes,  motions of polymers in superfluids, and fundamentals of 
              superconductivity.
