Title       : Implementation of the Biological Bulletin - Marine Models Electronic Record
               (BB-MMER), an Electronic Journal at the Marine Biological Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1995  
File        : a9504277

Award Number: 9504277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49067              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Greenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cathy Norton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela C. Hinkle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Biological Bulletin, an eclectic, 97-year-old journal  published by the
              Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) in Woods  Hole, Massachusetts, will
              collaborate with the Information  Systems Division of the MBL to produce an
              electronic companion:  the Biological Bulletin Marine Models Electronic Record
              (BB--  MMER).   This new journal, distributed via the World Wide Web,  will
              publish practical information about nonmammalian marine  organisms that are
              useful in basic biological and biomedical  research.    Marine organisms and
              the preparations made from them have served  as experimental models for more
              than a century, and their use has  led to many fundamental discoveries,
              particularly in  developmental biology, neurobiology, and cellular physiology. 
              Unfortunately, neither the particulars of collecting,  maintaining, and
              culturing these organisms, nor the detailed  protocols, recipes, and
              bibliographies essential to their use in  experimental science, are published
              in traditional journals due  to limitations of space.  Thus the details that
              underlie the  findings are lost, or must be rediscovered in different 
              laboratories.    The BB--MMER will approach this problem in two ways: as a 
              traditional scholarly journal; and as a novel electronic database  available to
              scientists everywhere in the world.  First, like its  hard-copy cousin, the
              BB--MMER will solicit and accept  contributions, and these will be reviewed by
              the Biological  Bulletin's stable of referees.  All papers accepted for 
              publication and distributed by the BB--MMER will therefore be  genuine, citable
              journal articles.    Concurrently, the staff of the MBL's Information Systems
              Division  will use the Mosaic environment to develop hypertext linkage and 
              data management features for the journal.  Each BB--MMER  contribution will be
              presented hierarchically: i.e., first the  title page containing an abstract
              and a table of contents; then  (by option) the body of the paper, and finally
              (by option)  step-by-step laboratory protocols and  other detailed materials in
               appendices.  Superior illustrations will be provided in color or 
              black-and-white, and video segments will be included eventually.    Publishing
              a journal electronically can improve indexing,  retrieval, and multiple use. 
              Moreover, electronic publishing  enables authors to modify or upgrade
              previously published work.  But most value is added by the linkage and
              management features  that are made possible by the electronic environment. 
              Thus,  users of the BB--MMER will not only be able to obtain  comprehensive
              information about a large selection of model  organisms and their tissue
              preparations, but also to compare  protocols, recipes, preparations, or other
              units of information  called from many different papers.  And this facility
              will become  more fruitful with time, as the size and complexity of the 
              database increases.
