Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Inequalities, Dependence Structures, and Some
               Associated Limited Theorems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1997   
File        : a9504614

Award Number: 9504614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yosef Rinott yrinott@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504614 Rinott  Abstract      The proposed research centers on stochastic
              inequalities and dependence structures which arise in several contexts: a)
              Multiple tests for positively dependent test statistics, with the goal of
              replacing known error probability rates for independent tests by useful bounds
              for suitably dependent tests. b) Prophet inequalities for dependent random
              variables, which essentially provide measures on the value of future
              information in sequentially observed data. c) Positive and negative dependence
              inequalities: some conjectures on correlation inequalities and negative
              dependence inequalities for random variables obtained from certain
              distributions on random graphs are shown to be equivalent to interesting
              determinental inequalities. Special cases have been proved directly, and by
              numerical calculations. Another conjecture concerns integral inequalities which
              extend the well-known van Den Berg-Kesten Conjecture (rumored to have been
              proved recently) and suggest interesting new applications. Special cases of the
              new aonjecture have already been established using FKG type and rearrangement
              inequalities; numerical calculations seem to support these extensions. d) Limit
              theorems for dependent random variables, with the goal of obtaining convergence
              rates in terms of meaningful characteristics  of the dependence structures,
              using Stein's method and classical approaches.    The assumption of statistical
              independence of sampled measurements is basic to much of classical data
              analysis. It is relevant when one can assume that the data arises from repeated
              controlled experiments in which there is no carryover of errors between
              repetitions. However,  situations with more complex data are ubiquitous. The
              proposed research centers on the study of certain aspects of samples  which
              consist of observations (random variables) which are not independent,  and
              various models for dependence structures. Such structures are also  relevant in
              various models in physics, and certain issues arising in   percolation theory,
              for example, are also studied. Another aspect of this  research is relevant to
              statistical large sample theory. A good portion of  statistical theory is based
               on approximations which are valid only for  large samples. Methods for such
              approximations for dependent data are  investigated, in order to determine the
              validity of the theory in complex situation. The quality of the approximations
              is important in deciding how  large samples must be in order for large sample
              approximations to be valid.
