Title       : Electron Transfer Reactions of Molecules with Varied Reorganization Energy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9504133

Award Number: 9504133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack R. Pladziewicz PLADZIJR@UWEC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Jack R. Pladziewicz, Chemistry Department, University of Wisconsin -   Eau
              Claire, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and   Organometallic
              Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division to investigate   electron transfer
              processes. In this investigation rate constants will be   measured  for the
              single electron transfer reactions of a series of   hydrazines and their
              radical cations. The data  will then be used to   evaluate the extent to which
              these reactions fit current theories for   outer-sphere electron transfer. In
              particular the inner-shell   reorganization energies for the alkyl hydrazine
              and the extent to which   inner-shell reorganization contributes to the
              activation free energy for   electron transfer reactions will be determined. By
              use of cross-reaction   rate constants the self-exchange electron transfer will
              be estimated for   hydrazines with slow exchange rates or with properties that
              make them   otherwise unamenable  to study.   Many chemical reactions involve
              the transfer of electrons from one   molecule to a second. One factor which
              influences the rate of these   processes and which is not well understood is
              the reorganization which a   molecule undergoes upon the transfer of an
              electron to or from it. This   project is designed to determine the energies of
              these reorganizations   for a series of nitrogen containing organic molecules
              and to assess how   well current theories are able to account for the influence
              of the   reorganization on the electron transfer rate.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
