Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Sparse Matrix Problems: Data Structures, Algorithms, and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9504974

Award Number: 9504974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Davis davis@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Law  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Davis    This project addresses a range of sparse matrix problems, from  data 
              structures, to algorithms, to applications.  The unifying theme  is the 
              unsymmetric-pattern multifrontal method: its implementation, data  structures, 
              and applicability to difficult sparse matrix problems in  semiconductor device 
              and process simulation.  The unsymmetric-pattern multifrontal  method 
              encompasses both the multifrontal technique and an approximate  degree update 
              algorithm that is much faster (asymptotically and in practice)  than computing 
              the true degrees.  Although this method uses upper bounds, the  ordering
              quality  for both the unsymmetric (Markowitz cost) and symmetric (minimum 
              degree)  algorithms does not suffer.  The investigator and his colleagues 
              develop parallel factorization and  ordering algorithms based on these
              approaches.  They also develop  parallel memory allocators (a fast-fits
              algorithm), a dynamic  task graph  (dynamic, since the pivot ordering
              determines the task dag), the  development of  both pessimistic and optimistic
              synchronization methods for  frontal matrix  ``collision'' in the combined
              uni/multifrontal approach, and  other distributed  data structures (such as a
              distributed priority queue for finding  pivots of  low approximate degree)
              required for these algorithms.  The  algorithms and  data structures they
              develop are applied to semiconductor device  and process simulation.  This is a
              challenging application,  placing a burden  not only on the numerical
              factorization, but on the symbolic  ``overhead'' as  well.   The problems in
              this domain are based on irregular,  adaptive grids  (both 2D and 3D).  Both
              direct methods and iterative methods are  used.  The  iterative method used is
              a preconditioned biconjugate gradient  algorithm, with  an incomplete LU
              factorization as the preconditioner.  The  investigators develop and  employ an
              incomplete multifrontal factorization algorithm, and a  multifrontal-based
              approach for computing the sparse inverse for  use as a prec onditioner.    The
              parallel methods the investigators develop are widely  applicable to many 
              computationally intensive problems, in particular the modeling of  complex
              physical phenomena:  structural stress and fluid-flow in  and around the  space
              shuttle, thunderstorms and tornados, circuits and  semiconductor devices,  the
              mixing and combustion of complex turbulent reacting flows,  the flow of oil  in
              a reservoir, the optimal distillation of gas and petroleum  products, and so 
              on.  Parallel sparse matrix algorithms and the data structures  they require
              can  help to solve these problems.  Where will a tornado hit?  How  fast can
              you  make a CPU chip run?  How can automobile emissions be reduced and  gas 
              efficiency be increased at the same time?  How do we get more gas  out of the 
              same amount of crude oil, and how do we get more crude oil out of  an oil 
              reservoir?  Answering these questions accurately requires a great  deal of 
              computation - and much of that computation involves large, sparse  matrices. 
              High-speed computation is required - it does no good to predict  where a 
              tornado will hit after it has already passed by and done its  destruction. 
              Thus the need for parallel algorithms and data structures.  The  methods  the
              investigators develop are made widely available to  researchers in these and
              other  areas.  To ensure that the methods are in fact useful for ``real 
              world''  problems, they are incorporated into a widely-used semiconductor 
              simulation  package, the Florida Object-Oriented Device/Process Simulator 
              (FLOODS/FLOOPS).  FLOODS/FLOOPS is in use in dozens of companies and
              universities,  and its  methods form the basis of many commercial semiconductor
               simulation packages.
