Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topological Quantum Field Theories and Related Invariants
               in 3- and 4-Manifold Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1997     
File        : a9504423

Award Number: 9504423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116700             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Yetter dyetter@math.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Crane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504423  Yetter       This project deals with topological quantum field theories
              in  dimensions 3 and 4, primarily from the point of view of their  construction
              and study by algebraic and combinatorial means.  In  particular, the
              investigators are engaged in the completion of  computational details and the
              construction of examples of the  "Tornado Formula" of Crane and Frenkel, a
              construction of 4D TQFT's  from initial data given by a "Hopf category," and
              the examination  of a fully bicategorical generalization of the Crane/Yetter 
              invariant.  The investigators have already shown that any 3D (resp.  4D) TQFT
              with physically reasonable factorization properties (which  should be satisfied
              by the "full  Donaldson/Floer and  Seiberg/Witten theories) has an associated
              monoidal category and  (internal) Hopf algebra (resp. monoidal bicategory) and
              formal Hopf  category object therein) and are studying how general this 
              phenomenon is.  It is the investigators' hope that  algebraic/combinatorial
              constructions for invariants sensitive to  PL (equiv. smooth) structure on
              4-manifolds may be found in the  course of the project.  Several related lines
              of research--  constructions of "quantum" invariants of 2-knots and Seifert 
              surfaces, and the study of the HOMFLY and Kauffman skein categories  with a
              view to finding new initial data for the construction of  TQFT's--are also
              being pursued.        Topological quantum field theories are a lively new area
              of  research into the structure of spaces of dimensions 3 and 4.  So  named
              because of their topological nature and their structural  properties, which fit
              into Dirac's formalism for quantum mechanics,  their study has revealed
              surprising connections between the  structure of manifolds, classical algebraic
              structures, and  statistical and quantum physics.  This project will contribute
              to  the unfolding of the rich algebraic structures implicit in spaces  of the
              dimension(s) in which we live.  Although the investigators'  techniques are
              primarily algebraic in fl avor and foreign to most  physicists, some noted
              relativists have expressed the belief that  constructions of the sort studied
              in this project hold the key to  finding and understanding the much sought
              quantum theory of  gravity.  ***
