Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Weighted Empiricals in Regression with Survival Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9504918

Award Number: 9504918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Song Yang yang@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Proposal:  DMS 9504918   PI:  Song Yang  Institution:  Texas A&M  Title: 
              Weighted Empiricals in Regression with Survival Data     Abstract:      This
              research involves various semiparametric regression models,   with right,
              double or interval censoring. These models include   the commonly used
              multiplicative hazard model and the log   transform of accelerated life model,
              the relatively new frailty   model, and the rarely studied multiplicative odds
              ratio model. In   all these models, the covariates are allowed  to be  
              time-dependent.  The weighted Nelson-Aalen hazard function and   Kaplan-Meier
              survival function are defined via weighted   empirical processes and some self
              consistency equations.   Various estimating equations and estimating functions
              are   established using these weighted functions. Some classes of the  
              regression estimators, including the rank, minimum distance and   M-estimators,
              are then  obtained and analyzed.         The  efficiency and robustness of the
              estimators   and some goodness-of-fit tests of the models is studies, as well
              as the   practical issues on computing these estimators.     The models and
              related statistical problems studied in this   research have applications in
              areas such as medical follow-up   studies and industrial reliability tests. In
              situations involved   in those areas, the available data are often incomplete
              due to   various censoring.  The censoring is attributed to  the conditions  
              of the patients or machine operating systems and is  influenced by   factors
              such as treatment, age, stress, and  load. These influences can   be formulated
              by some of the models in this research. Through studies   of these models and
              related statistical problems, the conditions of the   patients or operating
              systems can be better understood,   predicted, and controlled.  Compared with
              the existing research  literature, the new methods in this research  will
              require   different or more sophisticated computing algorithms.  
              Implementations of these methods provide  a background to, and are  
              facilitated by, efficient coding and high performance computing.
