Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1996      
File        : a9504620

Award Number: 9504620
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Vanden Bout   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MN Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              10        Physical Sciences                       
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. David A. Vanden Bout  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research  
              Fellowship in Chemistry.  Dr. Vanden Bout received his doctoral degree   from
              the University of Texas at Austin under the supervision of Professor   Mark
              Berg.  Dr. Vanden Bout will continue research at the University of   Minnesota
              under the sponsorship of Professor Paul Barbara.  His   postdoctoral research
              will target the study of energy transport in dye   aggregates using near-field
              scanning optical microspectroscopy (NSOM).    Experiments will combine
              nanometer spatial resolution with femtosecond   time resolution.  New
              techniques to be developed for the NSOM apparatus   include spatial/spectral
              holeburning, time-resolved lifetime   measurements, spatially resolved
              pump-probe spectroscopies, and   temperature dependant studies.  Such forefront
              spectroscopic techniques   advance our understanding of the electronic and
              optical properties of   novel materials.  The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships
              in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important infrastructural program
              designed to broaden the knowledge   and experience of new Ph. D.s and attract
              them into meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical research and teaching. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
