Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Estimation Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9504485

Award Number: 9504485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frits H. Ruymgaart ruymg@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9504485  PI:  Frits Ruymgaart  Institution:  Texas Tech  Title:
              Inverse Estimation Problems    Abstract:      Inverse estimation is concerned
              with indirect curve estimation:  the  curve of interest is to be recovered from
              observations, subject to  random blur, on a transformation of the curve.  This
              class of problems  is very broad and formally contains ordinary, direct, curve 
              estimation as a special case.  Many interesting examples come from  physics,
              signal processing, statistics, and applied mathematics.  The  estimation
              problem can essentially be solved by inverting the  transformation involved. 
              Since this inverse is not in general  continuous, the problem is typically
              ill-posed and regularization of  the inverse  is required.  Two important
              questions are how  restriction, due to limitations in time or space, of the 
              transformation relate to the unrestricted transformation, and how  recovery of
              irregular curves can be modified so as to avoid the Gibbs  phenomenon.  Along
              with a comprehensive study of deconvolution on  locally compact Abelian groups,
              this research addresses these  questions.  Also, the study of some examples of 
              practical interest are explored.    Inverse estimation arises when an object,
              e.g.,     part of the human brain, can only be indirectly observed,  and
              recovery of information about the object  is required from the indirect
              measurements.      Indirect measurement techniques, such as those used  in
              medical imagery, are attractive  because they are noninvasive.  Perfect
              reconstruction of the image would, in  principle, be possible if an unlimited
              number of uncorrupted  measurements were available.  In practice, however, one
              can only  obtain finitely many data that, moreover, are corrupted by 
              measurement errors.  Here statistical considerations and techniques  play a
              role in the image reconstruction process.  Aspects  addressed in this  research
              include how the reconstruction  depends on the specific way in which   the
              indirect data are collected, and al so how it should be tuned to prior 
              information about the object to be recovered.
