Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9504804

Award Number: 9504804
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Tokmakoff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IL Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, IL  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Andrei Tokmakoff  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Tokmakoff received his doctoral degree from   Stanford
              University under the supervision of Professor Michael Fayer.    Dr. Tokmakoff 
              will continue research at the University of Chicago under   the sponsorship of
              Professor Graham Fleming.  His postdoctoral research   will target the study of
              solvent modes in water, aqueous solutions, and   other complex liquids. 
              Femtosecond visible pulses will be used to   understand low frequency modes and
              structural evolution of liquids with   5th and 7th order nonlinear Raman
              spectroscopy and linear Raman-induced   Kerr effect experiments.  Theoretical
              advances will be made in the   description of high-order nonlinear experiments,
              particularly in the   description of the influence of orientational motion on
              coherence   experiments.  The research will contribute to our understanding of
              the   concepts and techniques of ultrafast spectroscopy of condensed phase  
              chemical systems.  The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program
              is viewed as   an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the
              knowledge   and experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful
              careers in   contemporary chemical research and teaching.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
