Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Rapid Change and the Production of
               Inequality in East Kwaio, Solomon Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9504555

Award Number: 9504555
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12745              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Akin user1n8x@umichum.bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0315000   Social Data & Comm Development          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,5964,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504555  Akin      This award is under the International Junior Investigator 
              and Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S.  scientists and engineers
              to conduct three to twenty-four  months of research abroad. The program's
              awards provide  opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or 
              complementary facilities, expertise and experimental  conditions abroad.
              Financial support for this award is from  the East Asia Pacific Program.   
              This award will partially support a fifteen month  postdoctoral research visit
              by David W. Akin to work with  John Laete'esafi, Organizer of the Kwaio
              Cultural Centre in  East Kwaio, Malaita, Solomon Islands.    This research is
              an anthropological study of how genderbased  inequality is being created and
              perpetuated in a situation  of rapid social change.  The PI will examine the 
              relationship between gender relations and change in belief  among the people of
              Kwaio in the Solomon Islands.  The  mountain Kwaio are the last major
              non-Christian group in the  Solomon Islands, and they continue to worship
              spirits of  their ancestors, that enforce a strict code of behavior.  However,
              the Kwaio have been steadily reinterpreting and  reshaping their beliefs to
              make them compatible with  changing social conditions.  Akin will test and
              refine a  hypothesis as to how particular aspects of this chanee are  taking
              place.  This is a study of the role of human agency  in processes of social
              transformation.  He will investigate  how incremental adjustments in belief and
              practice may, over  time, produce significant socio-structural change. ***
