Title       : Acquisition of a Network Analyzer for Characterization of Ceramic Materials for
               Wireless Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1996  
File        : a9504015

Award Number: 9504015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pradeep P. Phule phule@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9504015  Phule  Personal communication services (PCS) represent a burgeoning and
               revolutionary family of microwave based technologies (400 MHz to  30 GHz). 
              Familiar examples include cellular telephones, wireless  cable, direct
              broadcast, and interactive television. To store,  transfer, and filter
              electromagnetic waves, components based on  ceramic materials are
              indispensable.  New and better ceramics for  wireless communications (CWC),
              characterized by exceptionally  high quality factors, a relatively high
              dielectric constant, and  adequate temperature stability will be highly
              desirable for  further miniaturization and enhanced performance of certain 
              microwave components.  The major goal of this program is to  conduct a
              systematic investigation of the synthesis and  processing of potentially novel
              ceramic materials for microwave  applications.  Our research is being conducted
              so as to gain  deeper insights into the fundamental relationships between the 
              atomic level defects, heterogeneous interfaces, and the microwave  dielectric
              properties of ceramic materials.  %%%  For achieving the central goal of our
              research, it is critical to  measure the dielectric properties of materials, in
              the microwave  frequency range (400 MHz to 40 GHz).  Using a microwave network 
              analyzer is the only direct way to characterize such microwave  properties. 
              This award provides funds to acquire such a network  analyzer.  Presently, this
              unit is not available at the  University of Pittsburgh.  This instrument will
              enhance the  quality of the research program.  Using the network analyzer, we 
              will be able to experimentally determine the microwave properties  in relation
              to the composition and microstructure of sintered,  polycrystalline ceramics in
              the tantalum oxide-zirconia, niobium  oxidezirconia, and other systems.  We
              plan to investigate the  influence of composition, and micorstructural features
              (such as  grain size, porosity, and grain boundary microchemistry) of  samples
              processed using different sintering  time-temperature  profiles.  We also seek
              to understand the influence of controlled  levels of different dopants and
              impurities on the microwave  dielectric constant and quality factor of
              different compositions.  These properties will be measured at different
              temperatures (100-  500 K) so as to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms that 
              influence microwave properties.  ***
