Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1996       
File        : a9504697

Award Number: 9504697
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IL Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, IL  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Charles H. Martin  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research  
              Fellowship in Chemistry.  Dr. Martin received his doctoral degree from   the
              Universityof Chicago under the supervision of Professor Karl Freed.    Dr.
              Martin will continue research at the University of Illinois at  
              Urbana/Champaign under the sponsorship of Professor Klaus Schulten.  His  
              postdoctoral research will target theoretical biophysics utilizing high  
              performance computers and quantum mechanical methods using improved  
              semiempirical model Hamiltonians to model biological processes.  His   research
              will couple the correlated, effective valence shell Hamiltonian   electronic
              structure method with simulation techniques and computer   programming to
              understand the experimental absorption spectrum of retinal   embedded in
              transmembrane protein bacteriorhodopsin and to facilitate   future quantum
              mechanical/molecular dynamics studies of this system.  The   research will
              increase our understanding of the quantum mechanical   aspects of the
              retinal-bacteriorhodopsin interactions and lay the   foundation for dynamical
              simulations of retinal photoisomerization and   proton pump processes.  The
              Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an
              important infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge   and
              experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in  
              contemporary chemical research and teaching.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
