Title       : Collaborative Research: A Molecular Isotope Perspective on the Processes of
               Organic Matter Preservation in Fossils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9504618

Award Number: 9504618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137514             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Engel AB1635@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504618  Engel     Interpretations of the stable isotope record of residual
              organic matter in fossils requires a fundamental appreciation of the formation
              and transformation of the elemental pools of carbon and nitrogen during
              biosynthesis, diagenesis and preservation.  A series of experiments are
              proposed to elucidate the effects of biosynthesis and diagenesis on the
              molecular and stable isotope composition of organic matter in biogenic minerals
              and sediments.  Growth studies involving two species of planktonic foraminifera
              (Orbulina universa and Globigerina bulloides) will be conducted in
              collaboration with Dr. Howard Spero to compare the stable carbon and nitrogen
              isotope compositions of amino acid constituents of the shell protein to those
              of the diet.  In addition to potentially identifying essential amino acids, the
              magnitude of isotope fractionations associated with trophic interactions will
              be assessed.   A realistic assessment of biogenic signals from fossils requires
              an appraisal of the limits of isotope fractionation that can occur during
              diagenesis and the development of unambiguous criteria for evaluating the
              possible exchange of components with the preserving matrix.  Simulation
              experiments are planned to evaluate the effects of diagenesis on the stable
              isotope composition of organic matter in fossils and sediments.  Specifically,
              attempts will be made to assess the magnitudes of stable carbon and nitrogen
              isotope fractionations resulting from hydrolysis and humification.   With
              respect to preservation, a major concern continues to be the ability to
              distinguish indigenous organic compounds from exogenous overprints.  The
              further development of gas chromatography/combustion/isotope ratio mass
              spectrometry (GC/C/IRMS) for stable nitrogen isotope analysis of amino acid
              enantiomers in fossils will provide an independent method for verifying the
              stable carbon isotope analysis of amino acid enantiomers, the development of
              GC/C/IRMS for stable nitrogen isotope analysis is dependent upon e stablishing
              isotopically reproducible combustion techniques capable of oxidation and
              reduction of halogenated derivatives of amino acids.   An important test of
              this method involves molecular stable carbon and nitrogen isotope analysis of
              D- and L- enantiomers of individual amino acids in Cretaceous age samples,
              which will include dinosaur eggs and associated embryonic skeletal components. 
              These rare samples are being provided from sites in North America and China by
              Dr. Dale Russell and Dr. Jack Horner.  If the isotopic signals verify
              indigeneity, it may be possible to use molecular stable isotopes to establish
              the identities and trophic levels of the adults that produced the eggs.  This
              study will also provide, to the best of our knowledge, the first direct
              comparison of the distribution and stable isotope composition of amino acid
              constituents of shell and bone from the same fossil organisms.  An additional
              sample set of Cretaceous age dinosaurs from the western Sahara is also being
              provided by Dale Russell for a detailed investigation of organic matter
              preservation and paleoecology.
