Title       : U.S.-Germany Program: Dissertation Research in Mechanical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1995     
File        : a9504905

Award Number: 9504905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig A. Rogers rogersc@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1038,5936,9148,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Eric Flint, a graduate student of Professor Craig A. Rogers
              in the Center for Intelligent Material Systems and Structures, Virginia
              Polytechnic Institute and State University, to spend five months carrying out
              research at the German Aerospace Research Establishment (DLR) in Braunschweig,
              Germany.  His host for this period of dissertation-related research is Jorg
              Melcher, Deputy Head of the Division of Adaptive Structural Systems of the
              Institute of Structural Mechanics of DLR. This Institute is possibly the
              strongest in Europe in the area of adaptive structural vibration control. 
              Research at CIMMS is focused on characterizing the electrical and mechanical
              behavior of `smart` actuators as part of complex structures.  Mr. Flint is
              working on intelligent design of such smart system technology.  Research in the
              German institute has concentrated on building structurally integrated actuators
              and designing control algorithms to isolate vibration and control aeroelastic
              effects..  Mr. Flint's dissertation research visit will provide an active link
              between the U.S. and German research groups, giving CIMSS access to the large
              test structures and other types of stack actuators available at DLR.  The
              control of undesirable vibration and other behavior in truss-like structures by
              passive design improvement is reaching its technical limit.   Active control
              offers a way to further improve the performance range of structures. Adding a
              method of putting force into the structure creates force paths which can be
              used to control and eliminate excess vibration.  A promising approach is
              multi-layered stack actuators, which consist of thin layers of active materials
              that are mechanically in serial and electrically in parallel.  This area of
              control-structure interaction is of widespread interest in the U.S. because of 
              its potential to significantly improve the efficiency and performance of a wide
              variety of structural systems, from airplanes to communication antennae, as
              well as suppressing vibration in heavy machinery, bridges and certain types of
              buildings.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
