Title       : Modular Multiprogramming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1996   
File        : a9504190

Award Number: 9504190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayadev Misra misra@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 Two major goals in multiprogramming research are: (1) to design  and
              understand the modules (e.g., processes or data objects) of a  program in 
              isolation, without considerations of interference by  the other modules, and
              (2)  to implement the modules on separate  processors with a fine grain of 
              interleaving so that no processor  is ever locked out of accessing common data 
              for long periods of  time. Further, it is essential to devise a model in which 
              the  distinction between computation and communication is removed; in 
              particular, the methods for designing and reasoning about the  interfaces
              should  be no different from those employed for the  computations at the nodes
              of the  network.    The project is based on the hypothesis that many of the 
              programming  concepts developed for databases, object-oriented  programming and
              designs of  reactive systems can be unified into a  compact model of
              distributed programs  that meets the desired  goals. In the past, much effort
              has gone into limiting  interference among the modules by employing a variety
              of  synchronization  mechanisms: locks or semaphores, critical  regions,
              monitors and communication.  In this project, no specific  communication or
              synchronization mechanism, except  procedure  call, is built into the model. 
              Yet, the traditional schemes for  communication using bounded or unbounded
              channels, semaphores,  and accesses to  shared memory can be encoded as
              modules. This  project uses two distinct kinds  of procedures, to model 
              sequential and concurrent aspects of programming. The  programming  model
              allows for disciplined interactions between these two types  of procedures.   
              The research seeks to: (1) develop the model, in particular for  dynamic
              creations of modules (2) implement the model on top of an  existing  language,
              and (3) develop the appropriate formalism to  specify and verify the 
              properties of  programs.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
