Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Construction of Wavelets on Finite Domans and
               Applications to Boundary Integral Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9504780

Award Number: 9504780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuesheng Xu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Micchelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Constructions of Wavelets on Finite Domains and Applications to  Boundary
              Integral Equations Proposed by Charles A. Micchelli and  Yuesheng Xu Abstract: 
               It is proposed to construct wavelets on  finite domains and use them to solve
              boundary integral equations  which are reformulations of boundary value
              problems of partial  differential equations in the plane or space.  Traditional
               methods employed to solve the boundary integral  equations are  Galerkin
              methods, collocation methods, and product integration  methods by using a
              standard basis of piecewise polynomials,  B-splines or trigonometric
              polynomials. These methods usually  lead to full matrices for the discrete
              equations, which are   computationally expensive. Wavelet bases provide an
              alternative  approach for  the possibility of improving these methods. They 
              often form better bases in  the space of piecewise polynomials or  other
              function classes in the sense that the coefficient matrices  of the linear or
              nonlinear systems obtained from these bases are  sparse and well-conditioned.
              This leads to numerically fast    algorithms that preserve the nice features
              that the traditional  methods  possess and at the same time improve upon them.
              The  proposed projects include constructing orthogonal wavelets,  pre-wavelets
              and  biorthogonal wavelets on finite domains in  multidimensional spaces using
              the matrix refinement equations,  designing decomposition and reconstruction
              algorithms in terms of  the matrices in the refinement equations, and
              developing   numerically fast algorithms for the boundary integral equations 
              using the wavelet bases constructed.     Partial differential  equations have
              long been used to mathematically model a  wide  variety of physical phenomena
              that occur in fluid flows,  electro-chemistry, stress analysis in materials and
              a host of  similar practical problems.  Transforming these partial 
              differential equations into boundary integral  equations gives  rise to
              problems that can be analyzed both  theoretically and  nu merically. Since the
              nonlinear equations arising are difficult  if not impossible to completely
              solve theoretically, a numerical  method to these problems is necessary.
              Wavelet bases provide an  alternative approach to classical methods and result
              in  mathematical problems for which numerically fast algorithms can  be
              obtained. This alternative wavelet method preserves most nice  features of
              traditional methods and in many instances gives  substantial improvements.
