Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Construction and Analysis of Algorithms for Degenerate
               Variational and Parabolic Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9504492

Award Number: 9504492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel J. Walkington noelw@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9161,9216,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Walkington       The investigator studies physical problems involving phase 
              changes and their numerical approximation.  In general these  problems exhibit
              one of two distinct traits; either the solutions  take on the character of a
              free boundary problem where the unknown  boundary separates the phases, or the
              phases are finely  interspersed.  The former are modeled by degenerate
              parabolic  equations.  While the theory for these equations is well developed, 
              this is not the case with the discrete theory for their numerical 
              approximation.  For example, the investigator in collaboration with  J. Rulla
              has only recently established optimal rates of  convergence of the classical
              Stefan problem in a dual Sobolev  space; however, rates of convergence of the
              energy in the space of  integrable functions is still an open question.  Even
              less is known  about approximations of the mean curvature equation that arises,
               for example, when the interface between the phases has more  structure.  The
              investigator also studies the approximation of  problems that exhibit fine
              phase mixtures.  Because these problems  involve structures that are much finer
              than any feasible mesh, the  investigator utilizes the recent theory of Young
              measures to  characterize the fine scale behavior.  This theory shows that the 
              fine scale behavior is far from random and in many cases can be  characterized
              by a the (macroscopic) Young measure.  The  investigator studies and analyzes
              algorithms that approximate the  Young measure.       In this project, the
              investigator develops efficient ways to  computationally model problems arising
              in the environmental and  material sciences.  One interesting feature of these
              problems is  that they often exhibit interfaces where different materials meet.
               For example, when modeling the spread of pollutants, the single  most
              important quantity is the location and motion of the  interface between the
              pollutant and the clean environment.  Problems in the material sciences often
              involve very fine scal e  phenomena involving interfaces between different
              phases of the  same material.  This phenomenon is ubiquitous, being observable,
               for example, in most metals.  However, the fine scales also present  many
              obstacles when analyzing such materials.  The investigator  develops the
              computational tools to circumvent these problems,  providing another step
              towards the automation of the design and  development of modern (and
              traditional) materials.
