Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Large Scale Properties of Interacting Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9504791

Award Number: 9504791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy Quastel quastel@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504791 Quastel  Abstract    The investigator is studying the large scale
              behavior of interacting particle systems. In these models large systems of
              particles evolve statistically according to a simple local rule for which there
              are certain conserved quantities.  The goal is to show that on a macroscopic
              scale the conserved quantities evolve according to  deterministic conservation
              laws which usually take the form of nonlinear partial differential equations. 
              Of particular interest are the transport coefficients and how they arise from
              the microscopic dynamics, in particular in the nongradient models where there
              is a net effect of fluctuations.  Several types of nongradient models will be
              studied:  Models of disordered systems,  models of surfaces and interfaces, and
              lattice gas models for the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation.    A
              fundamental, and still largely open, problem is to understand how large systems
              of microscopic particles organize themselves to produce the collective
              macroscopic behavior we see in the world around us.  The investigator is
              pursuing this goal on models in which the microscopic dynamics has some degree
              of randomness.  The research includes models of transport in disordered media
              which come from condensed matter physics, models of surfaces and interfaces,
              and lattice gas models for incompressible fluid flow.  Besides providing a
              rigorous justification for the macroscopic conservation laws, other important
              consequences of these investigations are intrinsic formulas for transport
              coeffiaients, and precise estimates of the deviations of these microscopic
              systems from their macroscopic limits.
