Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic K-Theory of Group Rings and Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9504789

Award Number: 9504789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunnar E. Carlsson gunnar@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504789  Carlsson       This project will pursue two directions within algebraic
               K-theory.  The first attempts to resolve problems within high  dimensional
              geometric topology by studying the algebraic K-theory  of group rings,
              generally the group rings of fundamental groups of  the manifolds involved. 
              K-theory turns out to be useful in  studying the homeomorphism classification
              within a given homotopy  type.  The second will use an analogue of the
              techniques used in  these geometric problems to study the algebraic K-theory of
              fields,  specifically the descent problem for fields with topologically  cyclic
              absolute Galois group.       Topology concerns itself with properties of spaces
              (curves,  surfaces, and higher dimensional analogues) which do not change 
              under deformations.  Informally, one thinks of stretching or  shrinking part or
              all of the space.  For instance, if one thinks of  the capital letter "A" as a
              space, one could print it with  different fonts, and although the results would
              change (the size,  as well as the slant of the character, or the height of the 
              horizontal line within the character), it would not change  topologically,
              since the one figure could be stretched or bent into  the other.  Humans are
              able to recognize visually the fact that  these figures are topologically the
              same, since we are easily able  to read text written in either font.  This
              notion of equivalence is  referred to as "homeomorphism."  There is an even
              stronger notion  of equivalence referred to as "homotopy equivalence," which,
              for  instance, allows arcs not only to be stretched but to be compressed  into
              points.  Thus the capital letter "H" is homotopy equivalent  but not
              homeomorphic to the capital letter "X," since one can  obtain "X" from "H" by
              compressing the horizontal line to a point.   However, capital "O" is not
              homotopy equivalent to "I," since the  "O" contains a loop while the "I" does
              not.  Homotopy equivalence  is typically an easier relation to determine than
              homeomorphism.   This proje ct concerns itself with the problem of classifying
              up to  homeomorphism spaces which are already homotopy equivalent, for a 
              certain family of "homotopy types."  Surprisingly, although this  problem seems
              entirely geometric, the techniques required use  heavily abstract algebra. 
              This interplay between algebra and  geometry is one of the most exciting areas
              in mathematics today.  ***
