Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9504630

Award Number: 9504630
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Patrick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. David L. Patrick  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Patrick received his doctoral degree from   the University
              of Utah under the supervision of Professor Thomas Beebe,   Jr.  Dr. Patrick
              will continue research at Cambridge University in   Cambridge, England, under
              the sponsorship of Professor Ian McDonald and   additionally Professor Ruth
              Lynden-Bell of Queen's University in Belfast.    His postdoctoral research will
              target modelling of chemically-specific   atomic force microscopy
              investigations of monolayer films.  The research   involves a set of
              computer-based simulation studies designed to improve   our understanding of
              the interactions of a chemically-modified probe tip   with adsorbed molecules. 
              The goal is to understand, using molecular   dynamics simulations, the
              respective roles of adsorbate chemical   functionality, solvent type, and the
              chemical structure of a probe tip on   the forces measured in atomic force
              microscopy experiments.  The   theoretical studies will be augmented by
              collaboration with   experimentalists conducting atomic force microscopy-based
              studies on   mixed monolayer systems.  The Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in
              Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important infrastructural program designed
              to broaden the knowledge   and experience of new Ph. D.s and attract them into
              meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical research and teaching.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
