Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multivariate Analysis, Rank Data andMultivariate Ranks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9504525

Award Number: 9504525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John I. Marden marden@stat.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Proposal:  DMS 9504525  PI:  John Marden  Institution:  University of Illinois 
              Title:  Multivariate Analysis, Rank Data and Multivariate Ranks        
              ABSTRACT    This research explores several areas of multivariate statistical
              analysis  and the modeling and analysis of rank data.   In rank data, several  
              judges rank a set of objects from best to worse.  Research in the analysis and
              modeling of such data includes   evaluating distances between rank vectors by
              looking at the set of  distances as a convex cone;  extending unidimensional
              unfolding models to  several dimensions by using orthogonal ``contrasts" of
              objects, each contrast  being a collection of groups of objects; and using
              quotient groups  of the group of permutations with respect to  particular
              subgroups to represent contrasts and/or patterns of ties  in rank data. Related
              to rank data is rank-based nonparametric  analysis of variance, wherein the the
              cells in  the design are the objects.   Main and interaction effects are
              defined nonparametrically  in multiway layouts, rank-based procedures for
              hypothesis testing of  these models are developed, and invariance and
              likelihood  principles are used to find universally efficient rank-based test
              procedures.  Finally, an approach to extending univariate rank procedures to
              multivariate  procedures, including multivariate analogs  of popular univariate
              statistics (Wilcoxon/Mann-Whitney,  Kruskal-Wallis, Jonckheere-Terpstra,
              Kendall tau, Spearman rho, etc.)  and tests of symmetry hypotheses on
              covariance matrices, is detailed relying   on a particular definition of
              multivariate rank.  Iteration of the rank function may provide  an approach to
              defining multivariate   probability functions and inverse functions, with
              applications to generating random   vectors and multivariate QQ-plots.    The
              main focus of this research is to analyze and extend a number of popular  
              statistical procedures. Rank data, in which a number of judges ranks a  number
              of objects from best to worse, arise in many are as, including  political
              science, sociology, education, psychology, and consumer preferences.   Such 
              data typically show a high degree of complexity, often due to the presence  of
              distinct camps among the judges, natural groupings of the objects,  or a
              continuum of possible preferences of the judges (along, e.g., a 
              liberal/conservative continuum). New statistical models based on groupings of
              objects  are able to capture such complexities in many cases.  This research
              extends the  scope of these models by considering multiple groupings or
              continuums.  (There may be separate liberal/conservative continuums for social 
              issues and for economic issues.) Related research is applicable to  many
              fields, including agriculture, biology, economics, and environmental sciences 
              as well as the social sciences. Most statistical studies are directed towards 
              comparing individuals or treatments (e.g., fertilizers, drugs,  educational
              methods) based on one or more measurement, or finding   relationships between
              different measurements (e.g., diet and health).  The basic methods depend on
              fairly restrictive assumptions, assumptions  which often do not apply in real
              scientific situations. Consequently,  a great amount of work has been dedicated
              to developing procedures which  work well even when the assumptions are
              violated to a certain extent.   It is particularly important that the
              procedures not fail in  the presence of a few unusual values. When comparisons
              are based on only  one attribute, rank-based procedures are easily applied  and
              understood, and valid under reasonably mild conditions. These methods are 
              applied by taking the data (on, e.g., cholesterol level) and replacing  them
              with their ranks (i.e., the lowest level becomes ``1",   the next ``2", etc.)
              It is very common to wish to   make comparisons based on more than one
              attribute, e.g.,   cholesterol level and blood pressure. In such cases, 
              ranking individuals is more problematic since their order with respect to 
              cholesterol may not be the same as  that with respect to blood pressure.  A
              major component of this research uses a particular approach  to ranking
              individuals on several attributes simultaneously.   Procedures are developed
              based on these rankings that parallel those for   single attributes. These
              methods are easy to use and widely valid, being   especially resistant to
              unusual observations.
