Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Multiscale Processes and Stochastic Dynamics in
               Geosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9504557

Award Number: 9504557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rabindra N. Bhattacharya bhattach@ucs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504557 Bhattacharya  Abstract    Probabilistic methods are proposed for the
              analysis of three broad classes of problems in hydrology, climatic prediction
              and global change phenomena.  All these phenomena are governed by nonlinear
              dynamics with a hierarchy of scales in space and time, which make their
              analysis and prediction complex and challenging.  Of the three broad topics
              considered here, Topic 1 is devoted to the problem of contaminant transport in
              natural media such as aquifers.  The class of Fokker-Planck equations which
              govern this transport involve multiple spatial scales of heterogeneity. Topic 2
               concerns the fine scale structure of a class of random measures which arise in
              the statistical theories of turbulence and rainfall.  The mathematical theory
              to be employed for such highly singular phenomena is that of random cascades.
              Topic 3  is concerned with climatic changes and global change phenomena over
              much larger scales of time than envisaged under Topic 2.  Here the aim is to
              analyze interannual climatic events using randomly perturbed dynamical systems.
                 The main objective of the proposal is the development of nonlinear
              stochastic dynamical theories for (1) the prediction of the spread of
              pollutants in the environment with time, (2) making improvements in short-term
              weather forecasting, and (3) the understanding and eventual prediction of
              long-term climatic and global change phenomena.  An important example under
              Topic 1 is the problem of the spread of chemical and other pollutants in
              natural underground water systems.  Since even slightly different velocity
              fields of water in these systems often lead to dramatically different rates of
              spread of the pollution in the long run, careful and precise modeling and
              analysis are required and proposed here.  With regard to Topic 2, different
              techniques are needed for the study of the space-time distribution of
              thunderstorms and rainfall.  These are expected to provide better inputs into
              the numerical models which are generally used for we ather forecasts, thus
              improving their predictability. Although scientists have been somewhat
              successful in such short-term weather forecasting, they have had little success
              in the understanding and prediction of long-term climatic phenomena.  Since it
              is impossible to provide an adequate deterministic model for the latter, the
              main aim under Topic 3 is the analysis of these long-term phenomena using
              models with random perturbations.  An example considered is the prediction of
              the advent and intensity of the El Nino--a warming of the Tropical Pacific
              causing extensive rainfall and flooding--and its  opposite the dry La Nina. 
              Realistic nonlinear stochastic models are sought here and their analysis is
              proposed.
