Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology of Complex Hyperplane Arrangements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9504833

Award Number: 9504833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandru I. Suciu alexsuciu@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504833  Suciu       The principal investigator, Alexandru I. Suciu, will study 
              topological invariants of the complement of an arrangement of  hyperplanes in
              complex n-space, and their relationship to  combinatorial invariants of the
              intersection lattice of the  arrangement.  This project, continuing work with
              Daniel C. Cohen,  draws on a variety of techniques from algebraic topology,
              group  theory, algebraic geometry, computational algebra (Groebner basis),  and
              combinatorics (oriented matroids).  The starting point of the  investigation is
              a presentation of the fundamental group that  closely reflects the topology of
              the complement.  From this  presentation, computable algebraic objects are
              derived: Chen  groups, Alexander invariants, characteristic varieties, etc. 
              Some  of these topological invariants can be computed directly from the 
              lattice, but some probably require more subtle information, to be  extracted
              from the underlying matroid.  Under certain hypotheses,  this approach permits
              the computation of the cohomology of the  complement, with coefficients in a
              local system determined by a  linear representation of the fundamental group. 
              Such computations  have applications in the theory of singularities (Milnor
              fibrations  of non-isolated singularities, monodromies of complex plane 
              curves), theory of braids (generalized Burau and Gassner  representations),
              differential equations (Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov  equations, hypergeometric
              functions), and low-dimensional topology.       In its simplest manifestation,
              an arrangement is merely a  collection of lines in the plane.  These lines cut
              the real plane  into pieces, and understanding the topology of the complement
              is an  elementary exercise, which amounts to counting those pieces.  In  the
              case of lines in the complex plane (or, for that matter,  hyperplanes in
              complex n-space), the complement is of one piece.   But, unlike a disk, for
              example, this does not mean that it can be  drawn back over itself until it
              shrinks down to a single poi nt: An  algebraic invariant that measures this
              failure is the fundamental  group, which, roughly speaking, consists of those
              loops that can  not be shrunk in the complement.  A particularly important
              example  is the braid arrangement of "diagonal" hyperplanes in complex 
              n-space.  In that case, loops in the complement can be viewed as  braids
              (strings of wire weaving around each other, without backing  up), and the
              fundamental group can be identified with the (pure)  braid group.  For
              arbitrary arrangements, the identification of the  fundamental group is more
              complicated, but it can be done in an  algorithmic way, using the theory of
              braids.  This theory, in turn,  is intricately connected with the theory of
              knots and links in  3-space, with its wealth of algebraic and combinatorial
              invariants,  and its varied applications to biology, chemistry, and physics. 
              ***
