Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Homotopy Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1997  
File        : a9504530

Award Number: 9504530
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83900              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. McClure   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504530  McClure       The principal investigator is working on a variety of 
              questions in homotopy theory.  He is continuing his work on  topological
              Andre-Quillen homology and its relation to unstable  homotopy theory.  He is
              also investigating the properties of a  construction on A-infinity ring spectra
              that is analogous to the  center of a ring in algebra; this seems likely to
              have applications  to a question posed by Mahowald, Ravenel and Shick in their
              work on  the telescope conjecture.  He intends to do some calculations with 
              cyclotomic homology (a construction that was defined by Bokstedt,  Goodwillie,
              Hsiang and Madsen, which has important applications in  algebraic K-theory). 
              He is investigating the question of whether  the wedge of the even suspensions
              of a complex-oriented E-infinity  ring is again an E-infinity ring, and some
              consequences that this  property would have.  He intends to work on several
              problems which  relate homotopy theory to C*-algebras.  He is investigating
              some  old questions posed by Adams-Wilkerson and Atiyah involving the 
              relationship between Adams operations and Steenrod operations in  the
              Atiyah-Hirzebruch spectral sequence.  He is seeking a better  understanding of
              the Morava K-theory of extended powers.       Topology is the study of certain
              properties that shapes can  have that do not depend on detailed measurement
              (the well-known  example is that a doughnut and a coffee cup are the same to a 
              topologist, because one can be stretched to look exactly like the  other). 
              Algebraic topology is a method for describing shapes by  means of certain kinds
              of calculation.  For example, the surfaces  of the doughnut and the coffee cup
              could be divided into  non-overlapping triangles, and one could then calculate
              the number  of triangles plus the number of vertices minus the number of edges;
               the result would be the same in both cases, and this fact shows (by  means of
              a nontrivial theorem) that one shape can be stretched into  the other.  In
              order to get more info rmation from these  calculations, one incorporates them
              into the framework of abstract  algebra by relating them to groups or rings. 
              One of the most  interesting trends in the subject in the last decade has been
              to  bring in abstract algebra at an earlier stage of the process by  relating
              the shapes themselves to groups or rings; that is what the  phrase "A-infinity
              ring spectrum" refers to.  The main purpose of  this project is to continue the
              development of this idea.  ***
