Title       : Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Radial Basis Function Neural Networks for
               Process Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9504451

Award Number: 9504451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. De Veaux deveaux@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Radial basis function neural networks provide an attractive model  for high 
              dimensional nonparametric estimation, particularly for  model-based process 
              control.  They are faster to train than conventional feedforward  networks 
              with sigmoidal activation functions , and provide a model  structure better 
              suited for adaptive control.   Radial basis function neural  networks can be 
              viewed as a mixture model where the number of components is  chosen 
              adaptively.  This view allows for statistical analysis and the  extension of
              current  radial basis function networks.  In particular,  this research  will 
              develop    models using combinations of local linear models,  invert the 
              models for  calibration, estimate the local prediction errors,  identify 
              outliers or  novel data points, adaptively choose the number of basis 
              functions and  derive algorithms that learn incrementally.     The research
              extends and improves a certain class of artificial  neural  networks, the
              radial basis function networks,  for applications  to  (chemical) process
              control.  Algorithms developed  will  be written so  they can be efficiently
              updated for use in on-line  process  control applications.   This is a
              coordinated project between two  investigators, a statistician and a chemical
              engineer.      A major chemical company, DuPont,  has expressed strong 
              interest in using these methods and they have supplied data to  test the 
              methodology of this research .
