Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Polynomial Invariants in the Theory of Knots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9504471

Award Number: 9504471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis H. Kauffman kauffman@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504471  Kauffman       This project investigates invariants of knots,
              3-manifolds and  higher dimensional manifolds that arise from state summation 
              models, quantum groups and topological quantum field theory.  This  includes
              work on the structure of the Jones polynomial, on  Vassiliev invariants, and on
              connections with quantum field theory  and molecular biology, as well as
              techniques and conjectures about  the use of functional integration in
              topology.       In the last decade, knot theory has encountered an awakening 
              through the infusion of a remarkable collection of techniques from 
              mathematical physics and a series of interrelationships with  molecular
              biology, chemistry, and theoretical physics.  The  principal investigator is
              one of the key figures in the inception  of this relationship with physics
              (statistical mechanics) via his  introduction of the use of state summation
              models for polynomial  invariants of knots and links.  In a state summation
              model the knot  is regarded as a miniature physical system, and topological 
              properties of the knot are seen as averages of physical  interactions.  These
              models have grown to encompass techniques from  quantum field theory and have
              been useful in topology and its  applications to the study of molecular
              interactions in biology and  chemistry.  In topology these techniques apply to
              the structure of  three- and four-dimensional spaces as well as to knots.  This
              means  that these techniques are essential to the architecture of three- 
              dimensional structures - from molecules to networks of  communication, from
              atoms to galaxies.  All fields of science are  based on the structure of space.
               What is particular to this  project's topological study is that it articulates
              the topological  components in large networks of which knots are the principal 
              example.  Such networks are the basis of significant structures  such as RNA
              and DNA, where topology is the key to interaction.       In fact, the
              introduction of topology in these subjects is,  from the  viewpoint of this
              principal investigator, just the  beginning of a larger interplay, where
              topology is seen as the  basis for studying the recursive and circular
              architectures of  complex systems.  A galaxy, a society, an organism and a
              physical  system all have in common the stability that arises through closed 
              systems of circular interactions.  Such interactions have  traditionally been
              treated via cybernetics and computer modeling.   These topological
              investigations add a new dimension to cybernetics  and complex systems,
              providing new questions and a host of new  problems.  All these issues are
              treated in the new book "Knots and  Applications," edited and contributed to by
              the principal  investigator.  ***
