Title       : A Database System for Neuronal Pattern Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1997       
File        : a9504842

Award Number: 9504842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Gabriel mgabriel@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert S. Feng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Clayton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rhanor Gillette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Anastasio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              0510401   Nerve Growth                            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9184,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this award is to develop an information handling  system that will
              make routine the storage, organization,  retrieval, analysis and sharing of
              experimental and simulated  neuronal data. Much current knowledge about brain
              function is  based on analysis of firing patterns of individual neurons. 
              Neural modeling generates massive simulated data sets that need  to be
              processed, analyzed and compared with experimental data.  The ultimate aim is
              to develop a set of tools, techniques and  standards that can be disseminated
              to help meet the needs of a  large community of neuroscientists who work with
              neuronal data.  An information system for neuronal time-series data involves 
              several interrelated components.  The first is a database  component for
              organized storage of large data sets, and efficient  search and retrieval of
              data meeting specific criteria of  interest.  A second component is the
              establishment of conventions  for data representation and transfer so that
              time-series records  can be processed independently of the format in which they
              are  stored.  The third component is a suite of tools for data  analysis and
              visualization that provides a flexible and intuitive  means of processing the
              data. To achieve full operational status  several steps are required:  a)
              activation to full on-line status  of the currently participating pilot
              laboratories; b) enhancement  of the database search and query functionality;
              c) specification  and implementation of the time-series data protocol (TSDP);
              d)  development of TSDP-compatible analysis and visualization tools.  Finally,
              these steps must be carried out within an ongoing cycle  of performance
              testing, evaluation and improvement.
