Title       : Evolution of Persistent Abstract Data Types
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1998  
File        : a9504170

Award Number: 9504170
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Lerner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Persistent programming languages provide a simple mechanism to  make data
              persistent without the impedance mismatch that occurs  when storing  data in a
              database.  As a result, persistent  programming languages greatly  facilitate
              the development of  software that uses persistent data. A serious  problem
              exists when  maintaining programs written in persistent programming  languages.
               The storage format for persistent data is derived from the  structural
              representation of the data's type as defined in the  program. When  the
              representation is changed, the software is no  longer able to access  existing
              persistent data.    This research addresses the problems of type  evolution . 
              It is  developing algorithms to recognize complex type changes, to  assist the
              software  engineer in assuring that persistent data  conform to modified
              semantics of the  software, and to assist in  identifying and updating code
              affected by structural  changes to a  type. The approach relies on persistent
              types defined as abstract  data types. Type changes are identified by comparing
              the  interfaces to the  types, the structural representations of the  types,
              and constraints attached to  the types. The algorithms are  being incorporated
              into a tool that provides  computer-aided type  evolution support. The primary
              goal of the tool is to  manage the  complexity of type evolution and provide
              assurance that evolution  issues are addressed by the software engineer while
              not  restricting the ways in  which the software engineer modifies  type
              definitions.  A secondary goal is to  automate data evolution  for a collection
              of well-understood type changes. The  combination  of flexibility, automation,
              and concern with semantic issues  is expected to provide advances over existing
              type evolution support  systems.  Experimentation is using histories collected
              from the  development of real  systems to evaluate the effectiveness of the
              algorithms.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
