Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "Statistical Computation and Computational Geometry"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9504242

Award Number: 9504242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Q. Naiman daniel.naiman@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Geometric tools are developed that will provide   key  developments in
              computational statistical theory and   methodology. The research direction  is
              to develop and study   probability bounds for the probability content of convex
                polyhedra with special structure via the "abstract tube   method." Accounting
              for this geometric structure can lead, in   some cases, to explicit and easy to
              calculate bounds for error   probabilities, and in other cases to greater
              efficiency in the   Monte-Carlo evaluation of error probabilities. This
              research   which is at the interface between computational statistics and  
              computational geometry, will produce an expanded collection   of tools for
              constructing practical and sharp probability   bounds for a vast   array of
              applications. Particular focus is   given to obtaining new   bounds for the
              probability content of   bodies in higher dimensions using methods that arise
              from   the study of lower dimensional problems with similar   structure.       
                 There is an abundance of real world applications in which   stochastic
              models are utilized to make critical decisions based   on probability
              calculations. For example,   probability   calculations are used to determine
              how likely a modeled   system is to fail.  This applies to systems such as a
              bridge, an   ecosystem, a human body, or a manufacturing method.  The  
              research explores ways in which special model structure for   situations such
              as these can be exploited to produce more   efficient and precise probability
              calculations.  This new   methodology should be directly applicable to
              manufacturing     and quality control, structural and system reliability,    
              environmental regulation, and a host of other areas.
