Title       : Inorganic and Organic Nitrogen Uptake Dynamics in the Equatorial Pacific during
               the Second Mesoscale Iron Enrichment Experiment (Iron Ex II)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9504301

Award Number: 9504301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Cochlan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504301  Cochlan      This study will investigate the nitrogen dynamics of a 
              natural planktonic community in response to iron enrichment.  The stable
              isotope 15N will be used to quantify nitrate,  ammonium and urea uptake in the
              equatorial Pacific Ocean, a  high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll (HNLC) area, during
              the next  mesoscale iron enrichment experiment (Iron Ex II) scheduled  for
              May-June, 1995.  The study will obtain accurate and  quantitative data of the
              nitrogenous nutrition of the  natural assemblage that will determination
              whether or not  iron fertilization enhances new production.  The size- 
              spectrum of nitrogen utilization will be determined by using  different
              pore-sized filters to collect particulate material  after short-term
              incubations, since cell size is thought to  be a major factor controlling the
              sinking flux of material  from the surface waters (i.e.  export production,
              which is  related to new production).  All nitrogen uptake rates of  total and
              size- fractionated samples will be corrected for  the effects of
              isotopic-dilution which may occur during the  experimental incubation periods,
              a condition which otherwise  could result in serious underestimation of
              calculated  nitrogen uptake rates of urea and ammonium.  The  heterotrophic
              contribution to total community nitrogen  uptake will be determined by
              utilizing size-fractionation  techniques and specific metabolic inhibitors to
              distinguish  between heterotrophic bacteria and autotrophic  phytoplankton. 
              Additionally, the radioactive isotope 3H  will be used to determine the changes
              in heterotrophic  bacterial production as a result of iron fertilization, and 
              these data, together with estimates of bacterial abundance,  will provide an
              estimate of growth rate for the  heterotrophic assemblage.  The nitrogen uptake
              rates  determined for autotrophs and heterotrophs, together with 
              quantification of dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) released  during normal
              15N-tracer incubations and its effect on  traditional measures of uptake,  will
              allow for accurate  estimations of new and regenerated production in the 
              experimental ecosystem.  The experiments in this proposed  nitrogenous
              nutrition study are a key component in the next  mesoscale iron enrichment
              study, and their results will be  critical for a comprehensive understanding of
              the ecosystem  response to iron enrichment during Iron Ex II.
