Title       : NSF-CGP Science and Engineering Fellows Program: Bluff Body Aerodynamics,
               Turbulent Wakes, and Boundary Layers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1996   
File        : a9504284

Award Number: 9504284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58341              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hiroshi Higuchi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. Hiroshi Higuchi of the
              Department of Mechanical, Aerospace, and Manufacturing Engineering at Syracuse
              University and Professor Motoki Hinada of the Research Division for Space
              Systems Engineering at the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS).
               Project funding will enable Dr. Higuchi to spend four months in Japan,
              resident at ISAS, in order to study the flow-bluff-body interaction problem
              related to space recovery systems. The project has the potential to have an
              important influence on the infrastructure of aerodynamics through the sharing
              of information and joint technological advances arising from the close
              cooperation with the research group in Japan.  This proposal brings together
              research engineers from two countries working in the area of fluid dynamics.
              The U.S. engineer will have the opportunity to become familiar with research
              techniques, data, equipment, and facilities at ISAS while contributing to the
              overall research effort. Additionally, the extended visit by Higuchi will help
              him to establish a personal and pr ofessional link with a leading researcher in
              Japan.  It is also hoped that this visit will initiate a long term cooperative
              agreement for exchange of scholars and students between Syracuse University and
              ISAS.  Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its
              exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international
              collaboration.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
