Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Resampling Methods in Model Selection and Sample Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9504425

Award Number: 9504425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Shao shao@stat.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS9504425  PI:  Jun Shao  Institution:  Univ. of Wisconsin - Madison
               Title:  Resampling Methods in Model Selection and Sample Surveys     
              Abstract:    This research involves the following areas of investigation.  (1)
              The investigator studies the theoretical properties of various   data-resample
              model selection methods in linear and nonlinear regression,   generalized
              linear models, time series and multivariate analysis.  New and advanced methods
              will be developed in problems where the  existing methods lead to
              unsatisfactory results. (2) Data-resample  methods that can be applied to
              complex survey data with imputed   missing values will be developed. This
              includes modification and   adaptation of the existing data-resample methods
              which are not suitable   for complex survey data. (3) The investigator's study
              of the  theoretical properties of the data-resample methods include
              investigations   of the asymptotic (large sample) properties and the fixed
              (small)   sample performances of the data-resample methods. The relative  
              performances of different methods will be assessed. The results   will be given
              in a form which can be easily adopted as a guide for   practical applications.
              (4) The data-resample methods usually require   repeated computations of some
              given statistics. In model selection and   sample survey problems the size of
              the data set is usually large so   that the computation required by some
              data-resample methods may be cumbersome.  The investigator studies some
              efficient methods for computations.    Statistical analysis is usually based on
              a data set that is a sample  from a population which is a collection of values
              of some variable of  interest. Since the sample is only a part of the
              population, conclusions   drawn based on the sample are subject to certain
              statistical errors.  A method for assessing statistical errors, called the
              data-resample method,  takes many sub-samples from the sample by treating the
              sample as  the population, and makes inference by applying th e analogous
              relationships   between the sample and the population  to  the sub-samples and
              the  sample. This method has caught on very rapidly in recent years because  
              (1) the existence of inexpensive and fast computing facilities ensures   that
              this computer-intensive method can be implemented; (2) this   method sometimes
              provides more accurate and/or stable solutions than the   traditional methods
              that are commonly used; (3) the theoretical derivations   required in applying
              the traditional methods are very difficult when the  problem under
              consideration is complex. Although there are many developments   in using this
              method over the last two decades, the recency of this   technique has left many
              questions unanswered which are relevant to practical   application. The aims of
              this research are in the area of development,   evaluation, and application of
              many types of data-resample methods in   various complex statistical problems.
