Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Modeling in Continuous Time, Delayed
               Autoregressive Processes, and Chaos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9504798

Award Number: 9504798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kung-Sik Chan kchan@stat.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Osnat Stramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9504798  PI(s):  Kung-Sik Chan and Osnat Stramer  Institution: 
              University of Iowa  Title:  Nonlinear Modeling in Continous Time, Delayed
              Autoregressive    Processes, and Chaos       Abstract:    In analyzing 
              nonlinear time series data sampled irregularly, it  is natural to consider
              non-linear continuous-time models for the  (unobserved) underlying
              continuous-time process.  Owing to  the intractability of the likelihood
              function for such kind of nonlinear  models, the existing estimation methods in
              the literature  are somewhat ad hoc. This research contributes to the
              statistical  inference for non-linear continuous-time modeling based on
              (possibly  irregularly sampled) discrete-time observations. This research
              consists of four parts.  In part I, the investigators  study  maximum
              likelihood estimation for the general class of  nonlinear  continuous-time 
              autoregressive process, abbreviated by NLCAR(p).  The investigators derive a
              new expression  for the likelihood function   which can be evaluated via
              simulation.  The investigators   implement the simulation-based maximum
              likelihood estimation  procedure for some classes of NLCAR(p) models.  The
              investigators then study the sampling properties of the maximum   likelihood
              estimator so obtained. In part II,  the investigators    apply the Lagrange
              Multiplier tests for detecting     non-linearity and also those for other
              diagnostic purposes, and   study their large sample properties.  In part III,
              the investigators   extend an approach relating ergodicity and stability  to
              continuous-time models.  In part IV, the investigators study delayed
              continuous-time non-linear  autoregressive processes whose state space is an
              infinite-dimensional Hilbert space.  They also study the  recurrence
              (stationarity) properties  and the   statistical inference for the delayed
              non-linear autoregressive   processes.      In this research,  the
              investigators study new statistical methods useful   for analyzing data which
              are taken over possibly unequal ti me intervals.    Such kind of data is known
              as irregularly sampled  time series, and occurs frequently in diverse areas
              including   business forecasting, environmental statistics, medical statistics,
              physical  and engineering science. The investigators study computer-intensive  
              methods which provide the  relevant tools for studying   and testing   for  the
              nonlinear structure of irregularly sampled time series data.   The
              investigators also develop some mathematical statistics and  probability theory
              fundamental to the understanding of the new methods.           LEVEL OF EFFORT
              STATEMENT    At the recommended level of support, the PI will make every
              attempt to   meet the original scope and level of effort of the project.
