Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Low-Dimensional Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9504438

Award Number: 9504438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin G. Scharlemann mgscharl@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darren Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daryl Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9504438  Scharlemann       Cooper, Long and Scharlemann focus on 3-manifolds. 
              One of  Cooper's projects is to utilize the relationship between finite 
              foliations and geometrically finite surfaces in hyperbolic  3-manifolds. 
              Another is to continue developing the properties of  the A-polynomial for knots
              that arise from representation theory.  A third involves the theory of
              buildings applied to representations  of the braid group.  Long's specific
              projects concern the study of  finite foliations and the resulting dynamical
              systems, as well as  the application of these ideas to hyperbolic 3-manifolds. 
              He also  is working on problems in algebraic geometry and the use of the 
              degree conjecture to prove Property P, and on the finite  dimensional linear
              representations of the braid groups.   Scharlemann's main interest is the
              stabilization problem for  Heegaard splittings.  Success would have important
              implications for  the general classification problem for 3-manifolds.  There
              are  connections to knot theory as well, via the notion of "tunnel  number" for
              a knot.       One of the most basic observations about the world around us, 
              apparent almost from our birth, is that it is 3-dimensional.  So it  is of
              interest to understand spaces with precisely this property:   anyone living in
              the space would see their world as 3-dimensional.   Such spaces are called
              "3-manifolds," and this project aims to  increase our understanding of them.  
              3-manifolds support  interesting phenomena.  One of these phenomena is
              "knotting," in  which an intrinsically simple object like a garden-hose (or a
              DNA  string) can be maneuvered so that its positioning in space is quite 
              complex.  More generally, objects like chemical molecules, usually  thought of
              abstractly as "graphs" (much like tinkertoy models), can  be put into a
              3-manifold in extraordinarily complex ways if one  thinks of the "sticks" as
              made of rubber which can be knotted and  interweaved.  Tools which are being
              developed to understand  3-manifolds help us und erstand knotting and,
              conversely,  understanding knotting (a second principal aim of the project) 
              helps us to understand 3-manifolds.  For example, the "Heegaard  splittings"
              mentioned above refer to a technique in which all the  complexity of a general
              3-manifold is absorbed into a thick graph.   Then information about the graph
              gives information about the  3-manifolds.  A more disciplined type of knotting,
              called braiding,  occurs, for example, in the trajectories of fluid or plasma
              flow in  a Tokomak-type torus.  Since this knotting is more disciplined,  more
              tools are available for understanding and classifying such  knotting.  Hence
              the interest in braid theory and its connections  to dynamical systems.  ***
