Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Biased Sampling, Bump Hunting and Confidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9504515

Award Number: 9504515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Woodroofe michael@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jiayang Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS 9504515  PI(s): Jiayang Sun and Michael Woodroofe  Institution: 
              Univ. of Michigan  Title:   Biased Sampling, Bump Hunting, and Confidence   
              Abstract:            The research will  include the development of confidence
              bands   for the    expected  response, viewed  as a   function  of the design  
              variables.   This will be  accomplished through combination of higher   order 
              asymptotic  analysis,  numerical calculation,  and simulation.   The 
              asymptotic  analysis  requires  finding  approximations  to  the  
              distributions of  maxima  of random  fields,  and even the asymptotic  
              formulas require some numerical  calculation.  The investigators will   also
              study maximum likelihood estimation  for biased sampling models,   including 
              models  in which   subjects  self-select,  and  tests  for   unimodality   
              versus  multimodality.   They    will  seek  efficient   algorithms, conditions
               for consistency, and asymptotic distributions   for  estimation    error  and 
               test   statistics.    Higher    order   approximations  to confidence  levels 
              for  parametric models   which   exhibit dependence are another major objective
              of the research.  Such   models  include   Markov chains,  semi-Markov  
              processes,  and  time   sequential models in sequential analysis.  A promising
              approach is to   use Stein's Identity on the signed  root transformation.  In
              addition,   the   investigators   will   study   non-parametric estimation   
              for   semi-Markov processes  and  expected    sample sizes and    operating  
              characteristics for time sequential models.           Determining the amount of
              confidence that may be attached to an   estimate or projection is a primary
              objective of the research.  To do   this   the investigators  will  place  
              probabilistic  bounds  on the   unobservable estimation  error.  They will 
              focus  their attention on   two novel  contexts both of which involve 
              measurements which are not   independent  but, rather,  are  related  in  a 
              complicated way.  For   example,    in  studies  of air   pollution,  
              measurements at  nearby   locations may  be related.  The research  also
              includes  the study of   inference from observational  studies, studies in
              which the inclusion   or  exclusion of subjects is  not entirely  under  the
              control of the   experimenter.   In such cases  inclusion may depend on other
              factors,   like the variables of interest.  For example, in animal studies it
              is   easier  to  find a large  group  of animals than  a   small one.  The  
              development   of methods for  correcting the  raw  data to form valid  
              estimates is a major objective of the research.
