Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9504626

Award Number: 9504626
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rose A. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, PA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Rose Ann Clark  has been awarded an NSF Postdoctoral Research   Fellowship
              in Chemistry.  Dr. Clark received her doctoral degree from   North Carolina
              State University under the supervision of Professor Edmond   Bowden.  Dr. Clark
              will continue research at Pennsylvania State   University under the sponsorship
              of Professor Andrew Ewing.  Her   postdoctoral research will target the
              development of electroanalytical   tools to probe the microenvironment of
              mammalian nerve cells.  The goal   is to utilize voltammetry and amperometry to
              monitor release at single   mammalian synapses in culture.  The research will
              involve construction   and utilization of microelectrodes of submicrometer
              dimensions.  Through   the monitoring of neurotransmitter release along axons,
              at single   synapses, or in artificial synapses, the research will contribute
              to our   understanding of the neurotransmission process.    The Postdoctoral
              Research Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as   an important
              infrastructural program designed to broaden the knowledge   and experience of
              new Ph. D.s and attract them into meaningful careers in   contemporary chemical
              research and teaching.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
