Title       : Mathematical Sciences: On the Relationship between conjectures about elliptic
               cohomology, and the cohomology theory E-sub-n
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1995     
File        : a9306938

Award Number: 9306938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Ando   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9306938  Ando       One of the principal tools of algebraic topology is the use 
              of algebraic invariants called homology theories to analyze  topological
              spaces.  In the course of his work on conformal field  theory, Edward Witten
              made several surprising observations about  the relationship between three
              important homology theories,  singular homology, K-theory, and elliptic
              cohomology.  The  general principal is that to understand the K-theory of a
              space,  one should understand as much as possible about the singular  homology
              of its free loop space, and similarly for elliptic  cohomology and K-theory. 
              At about the same time, Mike Hopkins  and various collaborators were showing
              the fundamental importance  to algebraic topology of a sequence of homology
              theories E-sub-n.   Their work involves a very profitable interaction between 
              algebraic topology and number theory.  It turns out that  E-sub-zero is close
              to singular homology, E-sub-one is close to  K-theory, and E-sub-two is close
              to elliptic homology.  Ando  outlines how certain conjectures of Witten and of
              Hopkins, et  al., might be closely related.  He intends to investigate these 
              relationships and make them more precise, in the hopes that the  advances in
              these two areas of research can inform each other  more directly and
              fruitfully.       The theme of this project, drawing connections between  deep
              algebraic and number theoretic theories on the one hand and  deep geometric
              (topological) theories on the other, is repeated  again and again in modern
              topology.  As the theories grow  increasingly intricate, it is only through
              such overall  principles of organization that mathematicians keep the structure
               manageable and within the grasp of human mental powers.  The  instant project
              bears on one of the most fruitful recent  developments of this nature.  ***
