Title       : Regulation of Protein Synthesis and Degradation During Invertebrate Quiescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1995   
File        : a9306652

Award Number: 9306652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Hand   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9169,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9306652  Hand    This work will investigate how certain cells and tissues are
              able  to survive long periods of time in dormant state, where energy 
              metabolism and development are shutdown. Shrimp embryos (Artemia 
              franciscana)are the focus of the outlined experiments, because  their
              remarkable capacity to survive dormancy for months and even  years is well
              known.    For any dormant state, there are two problems that must be solved  if
              an organisms is to tolerate bouts of quiescence. First, there  must be a
              coordinated suppression of both energy use and energy  production. Second, the
              integrity of macromolecules must be  preserved during this period when little
              energy is available for  their replacement or repair. Previous work with these
              embryos  suggests that one cellular signal may be involved in mediating  both
              of these phenomena.    The first goal of the work is to explain how an energy
              consuming  process like the synthesis of protein is indeed shutdown. The 
              relative effect of limiting the copies of message (i.e.,  messenger RNA) that
              direct the cell to synthesize proteins,  versus actually inhibiting the
              machinery itself (ribosomes) that  builds the proteins will be compared.
              Finally, since synthesis is  in some way suppressed during dormancy, then the
              rate of protein  degradation must also be arrested in order to avoid depletion
              of  macromolecules. Therefore, the second aim is to understand how  degradation
              of protein (a normal process in an active cell)is  reduced.    Explaining how
              proteins are preserved during dormancy (in effect,  placed into suspended
              animation) should provide insights that  will be useful for other biological
              systems where survival  depends on successful recovery from physical and
              chemical  insults. The mechanisms by which cells can withstand long bouts  of
              quiescence are apt to have important implications for numerous  cases where
              metabolism is unavoidably suppressed or disrupted--  organ tissue
              transplantation, acute blockage of blood flow to  tissues, and oxygen 
              deprivation.  ***
