Title       : LTREB: Long-term Dynamics of Moose Populations, Community Structure, and
               Ecosystem Properties on Isle Royale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9306368

Award Number: 9306368
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Pastor   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yosef Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Mladenoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9186,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this project is to determine the long-term                    
              dynamics of how moose affect plant species distribution,                       
              ecosystems, and landscapes at several different spatial and                    
              temporal scales.  This will allow integration individual behavior              
              with population and ecosystem ecology.  The previous work has                  
              demonstrated that selective browsing by moose on hardwoods                     
              increases dominance of spruce, which in turn depresses soil                    
              nitrogen availability because of poor litter quality.  It has also             
              been found that these effects are distributed non-randomly across              
              the landscape, and derive from the effects of browsing on plant                
              competition, seed rain and seed bank dynamics.  Through an                     
              explicitly spatial simulation model of a foraging moose it has                 
              been shown that: 1) browsing by individual moose imposes structure             
              on initially random landscapes; 2) that structure as well as the               
              energetic status of the moose depends greatly on the foraging                  
              strategy used (e.g. Markovian foraging vs. foraging according to               
              the marginal value theorem): and 3) the foraging strategy affects              
              the energetic status of the moose.  Three years of study have                  
              suggested that episodic, cyclic, and transitional processes                    
              determine the sequence of how ecosystems change in response to                 
              browsing and how foraging decisions are subsequently altered.                  
              These processes occur at very different time scales along a                    
              continuum from short-term to long-term.  Such processes, ranging               
              from short to long-term, include revisitation of browsed plants by             
              moose, cyclic patterns of seed rain depending on mast years,                   
              recruitment and mortality of plants determining the sequence of                
              invasion of browsed patches by unbrowsed plants, and changes in                
              soil N availability resulting from manuring and changes in                     
              litterfall.  The sequences of short-term events partially                      
              determine long-term trajectories.  Conversely, long-term trends                
              may be in opposite directions from that of some local short-term               
              events.  It is crucial that short-term results be placed in the                
              context of long-term trends.                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Research of this nature is fundamental to the better understanding             
              of complex ecological systems.  Such knowledge, as it is gained,               
              is almost immediately applicable to the management of living                   
              resources; more for sustainable hunting, timber resources, and                 
              water quality as well.
