Title       : Seed Water Content and Its Effect on Rodent Foraging Success
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1993      
File        : a9306369

Award Number: 9306369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Vander Wall sv@med.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306369 Vander Wall          This project examines the interactions between
              plants, animals, and the physical environment by fluctuations in seed water
              content and how they influence rodent foraging success.  Most seeds are
              hygroscopic, readily imbibing water whenever the soil becomes moistened.  If
              conditions are unsuitable for germination, the seeds gradually lose moisture as
              the soil dries out.  Consequently, seeds vary in water content over time as the
              weather changes.  Rodents readily find moistened seeds using their olfactory
              sense but often appear to have difficulty finding seeds when the seed s and the
              substrate are dry.  Despite the well known characteristics of hygroscopic seeds
              and the demonstrated inability of some rodents to find dry seeds, the detail of
              how deed/soil moisture influences an animal's ability to find seeds appears to
              be almost totally unknown.  Field & laboratory work focuses on the foraging
              success of three species of rodents searching for two types of seeds at various
              controlled or monitored moisture levels.  The response curves of rodent
              foraging success at various levels of seed water content will be determined
              under controlled conditions.  The water content of seeds and soil will be
              monitored in the field over several weeks and related to rodent foraging
              success. %%% Plant animal interactions play important roles in population &
              community ecology, but the role if the physical environment in mediating these
              int eractions has received little attention.  By focusing on caching behavior
              of rodents, this project contributes to understanding dynamic's of soil seed
              banks, plant populations & rodent foraging. ***                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
