Title       : Development of Parent-Offspring Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9306988

Award Number: 9306988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103436             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne B. Clark aclark@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306988  Clark    In many species of birds and some mammals, parents raise
              families of young that  differ in age, size and sex.  When providing food,
              parents face the problem of how  to distribute it among these young.  The young
              of many birds must signal their  hunger by begging behavior.  A number of very
              general theories predict how  parents should allocate care and how much effort
              offspring should make to get it.  However, there are few studies of exactly how
              parents might discriminate between  individual young to provide for their
              particular needs and, further, how younger or  smaller siblings compete
              successfully for care.  This study will address these  questions with field
              experiments and observations of red-winged blackbirds, a  species that has not
              only age differences within broods but also sex differences in  growth rate. 
              The behavioral differences among siblings due to age and sex will be 
              documented in controlled tests of those motor and visual abilities that would
              allow  them to beg effectively from their parents.  These tests will allow Dr.
              Clark to  identify critical periods when the differences in competitive
              abilities between older  and younger siblings are greatest.  Field experiments
              will be used to test parents'  ability to recognize and give appropriate care
              to young of different developmental  stages.  Both developmental testing and
              experiments will be used to assess  whether or not younger siblings can
              accelerate the development of some abilities  such as vision, a flexibility
              that might help them compete with their older siblings.    This study will
              contribute to our understanding of parent-offspring interactions in  several
              ways.  It will be the first to investigate exactly how a helpless nestling 
              bird's size, age, and sex compared to its siblings affect its interactions with
              its  parents.  It will thus help to provide a needed empirical base for
              theoretical  explanations of parent and offspring behavior in vertebrates. 
              Secondly, this study  may extend our animal mo dels for family-level
              interactions, a current research  focus in human psychology.  The central
              question addressed in this area is how  the presence and identity of siblings
              alters the family environment and changes  the interactions between a parent
              and each developing offspring.  Altricial bird  broods, unlike same-age litters
              of altricial mammals, make excellent analogs of  the age-staggered human
              family, albeit on a much shorter time scale.  Finally, the  study of visual
              development utilizes an unusual camera technique used for  studying myopia in
              human infants.  As a first study of visual accommodation in  passerine
              (perching) birds, the data on nestling blackbirds will add to our 
              understanding of the development of visual accommodation and its function in 
              vertebrates, including humans.
