Title       : RPG: Physiological and Behavioral Responses of Birds to Global Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9306571

Award Number: 9306571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen Zerba ezerba@center.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9221,
Abstract    :
              This research planning grant for women focuses on the examination              
              of the direct effects of climate change on the physiology and                  
              behavior of birds.  The specific aims are to delineate the limits,             
              functional ranges, and interrelationships of thermogenic and                   
              locomotor capacities of the house finch in relation to various                 
              climatic conditions.  The principal objectives of this research                
              are: 1) determination of the effects of wind and ambient                       
              temperature on energy metabolism, thermoregulation and locomotion              
              of the house finch, and 2) comparisons of the energy expenditure               
              for thermoregulation of sedentary and active birds under various               
              temperature and wind conditions.  House finches undergo dramatic               
              seasonal changes in thermogenic endurance.  Thus, the relationship             
              between regulatory thermogenesis and exercise-generated heat during            
              winter and summer seasons affords an interesting comparison.                   
                                                                                             
              This design and the testing of the hypotheses will define the                  
              limits and functional ranges of metabolic, thermoregulatory and                
              locomotor capacities of the house finch under more ecologically                
              significant temperature and convective conditions than previous                
              laboratory investigations.  This information is critical for 1)                
              determining how close these birds are operating to the limits of               
              their functional capacities in nature, 2) providing a mechanistic              
              link between shifts in activity patterns in response to changes in             
              thermal environments, and 3) predicting the survival potential of              
              these birds in different thermal environments.  The understanding              
              of the links between physical environments and individuals is of               
              great theoretical significance.  Such individual-based models can              
              be used to predict responses at the population and community level             
              of organization.  This is particularly relevant for assessing                  
              predictions concerning global climate change, which anticipate                 
              major shifts in abundance and distribution of animal populations.              
              Thus, individual-based models as used in this study can make                   
              significant contributions as initial steps toward an understanding             
              of the driving forces of larger-scale changes in population                    
              dynamics.
