Title       : RPG: Transgenic Mice as Metabolic Models for Studying Growth Hormone Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1993      
File        : a9306971

Award Number: 9306971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary M. McGrane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9221,
Abstract    :
                    9306971  McGrane  This research planning grant project uses transgenic
              mice to  investigate the molecular mechanism of growth hormone (GH) action  at
              the nuclear level.  The mice are transgenic for a chimeric  phosphoenolpyruvate
              carboxykinase (PEPCK)/bovine GH gene.  These  mice exhibit symptoms of altered
              glucose metabolism, manifest  primarily as insulin resistance.  We are seeking
              to explain this  observation by characterizing the key genes involved in 
              carbohydrate metabolism which are regulated by GH.  During the  research
              planning phase of this investigation we will measure the  GH-regulated
              expression of "early" response genes, c-fos and c-jun.   It is postulated that
              the altered expression of these transcription  factors will affect a second
              stage of expression, involving genes  important in carbohydrate metabolism.  In
              order to measure the  "early" response in transgenic mice with chronically
              elevated blood  GH, we will perform partial hepatectomies and measure c-fos and
              c-  jun expression in the regenerating liver.  Information from these  in vivo
              studies will be confirmed by experiments involving GH-  treatment of primary
              hepatocytes from transgenic mice.  It is  anticipated that these feasibility
              studies will allow us to measure  GH-induced early molecular responses in the
              whole animal.  This  will provide basic information of the mechanism of GH
              action, which  at the present time remains undefined.    We are using a unique
              animal model to study the way growth hormone  (GH) affects glucose metabolism
              in the whole animal.  In order to  do this, we have introduced a foreign GH
              gene into mice.  These  mice have significantly elevated levels of GH in the
              blood and we  can measure the effect of this overproduction.  In this project,
              we  are looking at GH regluation of gene expression.  The genes which  we are
              focusing uon are those which code for proteins important in  the processing of
              glucose in the liver.  For example, GH may have  biological effects in the
              nucleus of lever cell s and "turn on" or  "turn off" the transcription of given
              genes.  This may alter  metabolic pathways which are involved in utilizing
              glucose for  energy or storage in the liver.  At the present time, the
              mechanism  of GH action is poorly understood.  These studies should provide 
              basic information on the mechanism of GH action so that we can  begin to
              understand the way this hormone works.    ***
