Title       : Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Investigations of Low-Dimensional Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9306684

Award Number: 9306684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $736983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Lieber cml@cmliris.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9306684  Lieber    The relationship between local atomic structure,
              microstructure,  electronic states and physical properties in complex low- 
              dimensional solids will be investigated with an emphasis on high-  temperature
              copper oxide superconductors and transition metal  chalcogenide conductors. 
              Detailed physical measurements of the  structure, electronic states and
              transport properties will be made  using scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)
              and other techniques.   Measurements will be made as a function of systematic
              variations in  composition and processing to develop an understanding of 
              fundamental material properties and how these properties can be  rationally
              changed.  Investigations of the copper oxide  superconductors will focus on two
              general areas.  First, the  structural and electronic effects of
              metal-substitution and oxygen  doping in BiSrCaCuO single crystals will be
              characterized at the  atomic to nanometer scale using STM and scanning
              tunneling  spectroscopy (STS) and on a macroscopic scale using diffraction and 
              transport measurements.  These studies will provide data needed to  eleucidate
              the relationship between atomic structure,  microstructure, electronic states,
              and the observable parameters  such as Tc and the critical current density. 
              Secondly, the low-  energy excitations in the superconducting state of
              Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8  single crystals will be characterized using high-resolution 
              electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS) and STS.  HREELS and STS  will be
              used to characterize the magnitude of the energy gap as a  function of
              temperature and sample Tc in oxygen doped BiSrCaCuO  single crystals.  These
              HREELS and STS investigations will provide  new data essential for probing the
              mechanism of superconductivity.   In addition, STM and STS also will be used to
              characterize the  local atomic structure and electronic states in metal 
              dichalcogenide materials.  Results from these studies will address 
              systematically the problem of pining and disorder in two-  dimensional mate
              rials.  Overall, these investigations will provide  general insights into the
              relationship between atomic level  properties and macroscopic phenomena, and
              will develop further STM  and STS for probing complex materials problems.  ***
