Title       : Direct and Indirect Effects of Climate Change on Boreal Peatlands: A Mesocosm
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1994     
File        : a9306854

Award Number: 9306854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250868             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott D. Bridgham   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Pastor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan A. Janssens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Malterer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1577,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Terrestrial ecosystems may have significant feedbacks to                  
              global climate change, although the magnitude and direction of                 
              these feedbacks is largely unknown.  Boreal wetlands are of                    
              particular importance due to their large extent, production of                 
              anaerobic "greenhouse" gases, globally significant stores of                   
              carbon in peat, and potential feedbacks with increased                         
              temperatures.  We propose to manipulate water-table levels and                 
              soil temperatures in bog and fen mesocosms to determine the                    
              direct and indirect feedbacks between climate change and southern              
              boreal peatlands.  Intact blocks of peat, with the accompanying                
              shrub, moss, and graminoid vegetation layers will be used.  Also,              
              the regional groundwater flow in natural fens will be simulated.               
              A full array of community and ecosystem responses will be                      
              measured, including trace gas fluxes, nutrient mineralization and              
              availability, net changes in carbon and nutrient pools, changes                
              in soil substrate quality over time, pore water chemistry, plant               
              community composition, plant nutrient uptake, plant and microbial              
              biomass, and primary productivity.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Our central hypothesis is:  Temperature and aeration status                    
              directly control the rates and partitioning of trace gas fluxes                
              and soil nutrient availability in peatlands, but this climate -                
              soil link is constrained by soil substrate quality.  Soil                      
              nutrient availability in turn controls plant dynamics, which will              
              feedback on soil substrate quality.  The previous research of                  
              the investigators has shown that the three primary controlling                 
              variables (substrate quality, temperature, aeration status)                    
              interact in nonlinear, nonintuitive ways.  Direct experimentation              
              will unravel the hierarchy of controlling factors in boreal                    
              peatlands and allow us to make robust predictions of responses to              
              future climate change.
