Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships of the Ranunculidae and Basal Hamamelidae:
               Implications for the Early Evolution of Non-magnoliid Dicotyledons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1993      
File        : a9306533

Award Number: 9306533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara B. Hoot   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306533 Hoot          The earliest lineages of flowering plants are known only
              as fragmentary fossils from Cretaceous strata, against which we can compare
              today's living descendants in order to reconstruct the likely course of
              evolution of angiosperms.  With living plants, systematists analyze and compare
              morphological features of flowers, fruits, leaves, stems, and roots in order to
              build hypotheses about the likely direction of change, character by character,
              and then search for consistency in patterns of change across these and other
              sources of evidence (pollen, chromosome composition, secondary plant
              compounds).  Modern methods of DNA analysis bring new data to bear on the
              problem, and Dr. Sara Hoot at the Field Museum of Natural History is analyzing
              three plant genes in groups of flowering plants hypothesized to be early
              angiosperms.  Two of these are chloroplast genes and one is nuclear, thereby
              providing an internal control on patterns of phylogenetic divergence between
              the two plant cell genomes; sequences for the chloroplast    atp   B gene will
              be a novel and potentially powerful source of data. %%%          New DNA
              sequence data will be obtained from numerous species of Ranunculidae and basal
              Hamamelidae, angiosperms thought to be among the earliest dicot lineages of the
              flowering plants.  Patterns of phylogenetic divergence will be analyzed from
              the molecular data and compared with current views based on morphological
              features of  extant and fossil plants.  Areas of agreement between the two
              sources of evidence will allow study of the evolution of floral form in early
              angiosperms; areas of disagreement will highlight weaknesses in our
              understanding of rates of gene evolution or of homology of anatomical
              characters.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
