Title       : Adaptation of Poaceae to Iron-Limiting Calcareous Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1996   
File        : a9306531

Award Number: 9306531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155120             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Crowley crowley@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
              9306531  Crowley    The composition of natural plant communities is typically 
              characterized in relation to factors such as temperature, annual  rainfall, and
              soil acidity.  However, surprisingly little is  known about specific
              adaptations of plant species to specific  soil factors, including limited
              availability of essential mineral  nutrients.  In the U.S., soils west of the
              Mississippi River are  predominantly alkaline (high pH), and often have very
              low levels  of plant-available iron (Fe).  Iron deficiencies are common in 
              many agricultural crops, including a number of important members  of the grass
              family such as corn, wheat, and barley.  Moreover,  one can speculate that
              limited iron availability in these soils  may be an important factor
              controlling the species composition of  the extensive western grasslands, which
              are highly significant to  agricultural production (i.e., grazing of livestock)
              and as  natural habitats and ecosystems.  To date, no detailed research  has
              been conducted to examine how native (and in some cases  introduced) grasses
              are able to thrive in soils that pose severe  iron-deficiency problems for
              agricultural crop species.  This  research by Dr. Crowley will, for the first
              time, comparatively  examine the specific processes that occur at the root-soil
               interface of both adapted and nonadapted grass species.    In response to iron
              deficiency, both grasses (but not other  families of plants) and soil
              microorganisms secrete specialized  organic compounds call "siderophores" into
              the soil.  These  compounds have a very high affinity for iron, thus
              solubilizing  unavailable soil iron into forms that can be utilized by the 
              plant or microorganism.  The root surface of grasses support an  elevated
              population of microorganisms relative to the bulk soil,  and it is likely that
              there is intense competition between the  plant root and microorganisms for the
              limited amount of soluble  iron present.  Hypotheses to be tested in our
              research include  (1) grass species that are pa rticularly well-adapted to Fe- 
              limited soils excrete larger quantities of Fe-scavenging  siderophores than do
              nonadapted species, and (II) adapted species  are better able to capitalize on
              the Fe solubilized by  siderophores secreted by soil microorganisms.  The data
              he  obtains will be integrated into a conceptual model of the 
              interrelationships between roots, microbes and soil as they  contribute to the
              adaptation of certain grasses to iron-limited  soils.  ***
