Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Nonlinear Demographic Dynamics: Mathematical Models,
               Biological Experiments, Data Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1995    
File        : a9306271

Award Number: 9306271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J M. Cushing cushing@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Dennis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Costantino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1305,9169,9263,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9306271  Cushing       The investigators conduct an interdisciplinary research 
              program to test nonlinear population theory: they construct and  analyze
              mathematical models, design and implement biological  experiments, develop and
              apply statistical techniques for the  analysis of data.  For the biological
              experiments an organism is  used that is easy to culture, has a short
              generation time (i.e.  yields long time series data) and allows an accurate
              census of  animal numbers: flour beetles of the genus Tribolium.  In the first 
              part of the study the objectives are model identification and  parameter
              estimation.  In the second part, the concern is to  document transitions in the
              qualitative behavior of the  demographic dynamics.  Rates of reproduction and
              adult mortality  are manipulated in order to cross boundaries in parameter
              space  from stable equilibria, to periodic cycles, to chaos.  In phase  three
              the objectives are to test hypotheses concerning the  existence of these
              unusual demographic dynamics and develop  methods for identifying these
              phenomena in experimental data.  A  major contribution of this project is an
              unequivocal example of  experimentally manipulated transitions between
              qualitatively  different dynamical behaviors of a biological population as 
              predicted by a mathematical model.       In the last ten years or so, the
              recognition that simple  equations can generate complex dynamics has led to an
              outpouring  of fascinating theoretical possibilities for the explanation of 
              population time series data.  Understanding the observed  fluctuations in
              animal population numbers is a central question in  population biology; it has
              far-reaching applications in areas  ranging from food production and pest
              control, to the management  of renewable resources, to the conservation of
              species diversity.  The hypothesis that fluctuations are the result of
              nonlinear  dynamic forces has proved to be elusive to test due to the 
              difficulties of gathering adequate ecological data, of  experimentall y
              manipulating ecological systems, and of evaluating  complex mathematical models
              with ecological data.  In this research  project the investigators' approach to
              testing nonlinear  population theory is to connect mathematical models
              rigorously  with experimental biological data by means of newly developed 
              statistical methods for nonlinear time series.  The project is  unique in its
              interdisciplinary approach because it involves both  theory and experimentation
              and utilizes the talents of the  biologist, statistician, and mathematician. 
              It is unusual in the  field of population biology to have an interdisciplinary
              effort in  which investigators from all of these disciplines are involved in 
              all aspects of the project, from experimental design and  implementation,
              through theoretical modeling and analysis, to  statistical testing and
              verification.  The ultimate goal is to  demonstrate the usefulness and
              importance of nonlinear mathematics  in gaining a rigorous understanding of the
              dynamics of animal  populations and in particular of fluctuations in population
               numbers, be these fluctations regular or "chaotic."
