Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Model Theory for Analytic Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9306150

Award Number: 9306150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78009              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Marker marker@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will continue his research on the model                  
              theory of structures related to real and complex numbers.  In                  
              particular, he will focus on definability questions in expansions              
              with extra analytic structure.  Most of his work over the past                 
              five years has been concentrated in this area.  He will attempt                
              to prove further results of the following character.  (1) Marker,              
              Macintyre, and van den Dries have shown that the structure of the              
              real numbers with exponentiation and restricted analytic                       
              functions is O-minimal and admits elimination of quantifiers.                  
              O-minimality implies that there is a rich structure theory for                 
              the definable sets.  (2) Marker and Pillay have shown that any                 
              non-trivial reduct of an algebraically closed field that contains              
              addition is strong enough to recover the full field structure.                 
              (3) Marker has shown that if any non-trivial real structure is                 
              added to the complex numbers, then the real numbers are                        
              definable.  These latter two results can be thought of as                      
              attempts to examine the boundary of algebraic geometry.  The                   
              first says that weakening algebraic geometry leads to little more              
              than linear geometry.  The second says that extending algebraic                
              geometry leads to the full complications of real algebraic                     
              geometry.                                                                      
                   While "definability" is a logical notion, often it turns out              
              that the definable sets are ones which arise naturally and are of              
              great importance.  Model theoretic methods provide a new tool for              
              their study.  For example, the sets definable in the structure of              
              the real numbers with exponentiation and restricted analytic                   
              functions arise naturally in studying analytic geometry,                       
              dynamical systems, statistics, and control theory.
