Title       : Structure and Chemistry of Gas Phase Atomic Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9306900

Award Number: 9306900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $457100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin F. Jarrold mfj@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9198,AMPP,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the                       
              Chemistry Division, Prof. M. Jarrold of Northwestern University                
              will study the structure and chemistry of gas phase atomic                     
              clusters.  Geometric structures, structural isomers, and                       
              structural transitions will be determined with an improved                     
              ion-chromatography technique.  Additionally, information will                  
              be obtained on previously inaccessible features such as cluster                
              annealing and the temperature at which clusters isomerize and                  
              undergo a phase transition.  Thermal desorption measurements on                
              clusters will be used to unravel the chemistry that occurs on                  
              the nano-surfaces of atomic clusters, and to determine accurate                
              dissociation energies and ligand binding energies.  Specific                   
              cluster systems to be studied will include large fullerene-type                
              carbon clusters composed of more than 100 carbon atoms and                     
              semiconductor clusters.                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Clusters of atoms (and molecules) constitute a form of                         
              aggregated matter that bridges the traditional conceptual                      
              boundary between the condensed (solid or liquid) and gaseous                   
              states of aggregation.  Because the physical and chemical                      
              properties of clusters differ from those of the condensed or                   
              gaseous phases of the concerned material, the study of cluster                 
              properties is of fundamental interest.  In addition to the                     
              exploration of cluster properties for their intrinsic interest,                
              there is strong coupling to the technological applications of                  
              clusters.  Fullerenes, or buckyballs, are clusters in which the                
              constituent atoms arrange themselves to form three dimensional                 
              geodesic structures.  The appellation fullerene (or buckyball)                 
              is given to this type of cluster in recognition of Buckminster                 
              Fuller who is known for his designs of geodesic domes.                         
              Fullerenes are now recognized to constitute a new, third form                  
              of carbon in addition to the well known forms graphite and                     
              diamond.  Their physical and chemical properties                               
              are intensively investigated to increase our knowledge about                   
              them and to exploit it for technological applications.
