Title       : Dissertationn Research: Fish Exploitation of the Indus Valley Civilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1993       
File        : a9306645

Award Number: 9306645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5038               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan M. Kenoyer kenoyer@macc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Jonathan Kenoyer, Mr. William Belcher               
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will both                  
              conduct an ethnographic study in Pakistan and apply the results to             
              the analysis and interpretation of fish remains recovered from                 
              Indus Valley archaeological sites. The Harappan civilization                   
              developed and flourished in the Indus Valley from ca 2,600 to 1,900            
              B.C. It represents one of the great achievements of the late                   
              prehistoric world. Developments there rank the region with ancient             
              Egypt and the Near East as well as New World states such as the                
              Inca and Aztec empires. However much less is known about the                   
              Harappans than their counterparts. Archaeological data shows that              
              this civilization had a strong riverine component and that fish                
              constituted a major part of the diet. However such faunal remains              
              are difficult to interpret and Mr. Belcher hopes to develop                    
              approaches which will aid in this goal. To this end, he will study             
              modern fishing practices in the same region. He will interview                 
              fisherman and watch them at work to determine when in the yearly               
              cycle, how, and in what environments particular species are caught.            
              He will also observe how they are butchered, preserved, transported            
              and consumed. After they are discarded such faunal remains may                 
              undergo a number of destructive practices such as damage by                    
              domestic animals and Mr. Belcher will examine these as well.                   
              Finally he will apply the interpretative techniques he develops to             
              a series of Harappan archaeological remains.                                   
                                                                                             
              Mr. Belcher's primary interest lies not in fish per se, but rather             
              in the social and economic organization of the Harappan state. By              
              examining this one class of data, he hopes to reconstruct the                  
              economic system through which they moved. Trade routes will be                 
              reconstructed and the degree of economic centralization determined.            
              It may also be possible to examine such issues as status difference            
              between and within sites.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              our understanding of how one of the great early civilizations of               
              the Old World emerged. It will help to develop techniques of faunal            
              analysis which will be useful in many archaeological contexts.                 
              Finally it will assist in the training of a promising young                    
              scientist.
