Title       : Mathematical Sciences:Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9306088

Award Number: 9306088
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Brussel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, CA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9179,
Abstract    :
                   The Mathematical Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships               
              are awards to recent recipients of doctoral degrees in the                     
              mathematical sciences.  These awards are a means of contributing to            
              the future vitality of the scientific effort of the nation.  As                
              researchers in the mathematical sciences expand their interactions             
              with other disciplines, and as the interplay increases between the             
              various areas of mathematics itself, opportunities for postdoctoral            
              research and training are becoming increasingly important.  The                
              fellowships are designed to permit awardees to choose research                 
              environments that will have maximal impact on their future                     
              scientific development.  The fellowship is designed to provide 24              
              months of support divided into 18 academic-year months and 3                   
              periods of two summer months.  The recipient may choose (1) the                
              Research Fellowship option which allows for full-time support for              
              any 18 academic-year months in a three-year period, in intervals               
              not shorter than 3 consecutive months or (2) the Research                      
              Instructorship option which allows the 18 months of academic year              
              support to be taken as 9 months of full-time support and 18 months             
              of half-time support.  Not more than two months of summer support              
              from this Fellowship may be received in any calendar year.                     
                   Eric Brussel will receive his doctoral degree from the                    
              University of California, Los Angeles, and will pursue research                
              under the guidance of Barry Mazur and David Saltman at Harvard                 
              University and the University of Texas at Austin, respectively,.               
              The research will be conducted in the area of division algebras.               
              This area interacts strongly with field theory, forms the crux of              
              the study of semisimple algebras of finite length, and imports                 
              itself to the representation theory of finite groups.
