Title       : Mechanics of In Vivo Muscle Function During Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1993  
File        : a9306793

Award Number: 9306793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Biewener   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306793  Biewener         The main objective of this research is to record
              directly  how limb muscles function during the locomotion of animals.  Despite
              the considerable interest and extensive research that has  been carried out on
              the physiology, biochemistry and  mechanical  properties of vertebrate skeletal
              muscles, little direct data  exist concerning the in vivo mechanics of muscle
              of  function  during normal locomotor activity. In particular, studies of human
               limb muscles necessarily rely on the indirect assessments of  muscle force and
              lengthening . By making direct in vivo  measurements of the forces exerted by
              select muscles and length  changes that they undergone different animal
              species, we can  better understand how muscles function dynamically to support
              and  power the movement of an animal. Measurements of muscle force  will be
              made by using either implanted tendon force tranducers or  by making
              force-calibrated in vivo skeletal strain recordings  at  the muscle's
              attachment site on the bone. In vivo measurements of  muscle fiber length
              change will be made using ultrasound emitting  sonomicrometry electrodes
              implanted within the muscle. In this  proposal, we will examine the in vivo
              performance of muscles in  two terrestrial and two flying species.       In
              studies of ankle extensor muscles of wallabies, these  measurements will enable
              us to explore how requirements for  elastic energy storage in muscle-tendon
              'springs' to conserve  energy expenditure affect how the nervous system
              activates these  muscles to power hopping versus the animal's need to
              accelerate  and change direction. In studies of the medial(MG) and  lateral(LG)
              gastrocnemius muscles in white leghorn chickens, we  will study the recruitment
              of muscle force generation in relation  to shortening during walking and
              running. The differing fiber  characteristics of these two muscles (LG: mainly
              fast and MG:  mainly slow), combined with independent recordings of force 
              output, provides a unique opportunity to study recr uitment within  a single
              muscle. I  a third set of experiments we will obtain  direct measurements of
              force generation and fiber shortening in  the pectoralis muscle of pigeons and
              crows during flight. These  measurements will provide the first direct
              measurement of muscle  mechanical power, as well as whole animal power, during 
              locomotion in a vertebrate species. These studies will extend our  previous
              work, which developed the skeletal strain approach to  measure in vivo force
              generation directly by the pectoralis  during flight i starlings and pigeons.  
                  In summary, most studies of skeletal muscle mechanics have  relied either
              on experimentally controlled simulations of  shortening and force development
              isolated whole muscles or muscle  fiber bundles under quasi-static conditions
              that are unlikely to  apply to muscles performing normal movements. The results
               obtained from the proposed studies, therefore, will provide  valuable
              information concerning the dynamic force-velocity  properties of muscles under
              normal functional conditions. The  results obtained from these studies will
              help to better establish  general principles underlying muscle function in
              animal  locomotion, as well as have relevance for motor control and  robotics
              research.  ***
