Title       : Friction Coefficients and Roughness of Coral Reef Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1993      
File        : a9306381

Award Number: 9306381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17662              (Estimated)
Investigator: Florence I. Thomas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              9306381  THOMAS    This project addresses the question of how coral reef
              communities  maintain high productivity in regions of nutrient depleted waters.
               Work by Atkinson has demonstrated that by assuming phosphate (P)  uptake is
              mass transfer limited, productivity can be predicted from  physical parameters
              (i.e. P concentration, water velocity, water  depth, and bottom roughness). To
              make these predictions, Atkinson  has developed a model that uses correlations
              of mass transfer to  engineering type surfaces from engineering literature. A
              scaling  parameter is used to adjust these correlations for the biologically 
              rough surfaces of coral reef communities. The value for this  scaling factor
              (6.4) is based on measurements of nutrient uptake to  coral reef communities.
              Without this scaling factor, engineering  correlations do not accurately
              predict rates of mass transport of  nutrients into coral reef communities. The
              difference between the  rates of mass transfer predicted by engineering
              correlations and  those empirically measured are likely due to the differences 
              between the types of surfaces used in the experiments. Engineering  data have
              been obtained for surfaces that are rough on a single  spatial scale while the
              roughness of biological surfaces can occur  at multiple scales. Rates of mass
              transfer into rough surfaces are  a function of both roughness and the friction
              coefficient of the  community. To accurately quantify the relationship between
              mass  transfer of nutrients and productivity in coral reef communities,  it is
              essential that we be able to measure both of these parameters  for coral reef
              communities.        The primary goal of this research project is to develop 
              techniques to measure the surface roughness of coral reef  communities and to
              determine how this roughness affects their  friction coefficients. These
              measurements in combination with  measurements of nutrient transport within
              experimental reef  communities will provide the data necessary to develop a
              larger  proposal  for a theoretical model that links mass transfer with 
              productivity in coral reef communities. The objectives of this  project are: 1)
              to empirically measure friction coefficients for  coral reef communities that
              vary in their degree of roughness; 2)  to develop a biologically relevant
              measurement of community  roughness; 3) to correlate these roughness
              measurements with the  measured friction coefficients; and 4) to determine the 
              relationships between the measured friction coefficients, roughness 
              parameters, and enhancement of mass transfer.   ***
