Title       : Mapping Ligand/Receptor Interactions on the C5a Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1993       
File        : a9306501

Award Number: 9306501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia A. Ember   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              The complement activation fragment anaphylatoxin C5a is the most               
              potent plasma-derived chemotactic factor known.  This humoral                  
              factor induces leukocyte activation at low nonamolar                           
              concentrations.  Investigating the molecular requirements for the              
              interaction of C5a with its cellular receptor, present on                      
              polymorphonuclear granulocytes (PMNs) and monocytes, has been a                
              long time interest of the P.I.  While modelling studies up to now              
              focused mainly on the ligand, i.e. C5a molecule, recent cloning of             
              the PMN C5a-receptor (C5aR) and publication of the amino-acid                  
              sequence makes it possible to investigate the receptor-ligand                  
              binding interactions and receptor triggering events at the                     
              molecular level.  Analyses of ligand binding site of this                      
              membrane-spanning receptor, and molecular arrangement of the seven             
              transmembrane domains can also be explored.                                    
              The goals of this study are to collect preliminary data and show               
              feasibility for developing a program to investigate C5a-C5aR                   
              interaction, using site-specific receptor peptides and poly- and               
              monoclonal antibodies.  Selective blocking of ligand binding by                
              polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies will identify and map                     
              molecular regions on the receptor that participate in C5a binding.             
              Identifying these local sites on the receptor will not only                    
              facilitate an understanding of the molecular requirements for                  
              ligand-receptor interactions, but provide a model for receptor-                
              ligand interactions as well.  This work will also identify regions             
              of special interest for site-specific mutagenesis studies.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              C5a is a principal mediator in eliciting both local and systemic               
              inflammatory responses.  It interacts with a membrane bound                    
              receptor, C5aR, which has recently been cloned.  Understanding                 
              these receptor-ligand interactions and receptor triggering events              
              at the molecular level will provide a model for receptor-ligand                
              interactions in general; and in addition might generate potential              
              inhibitors of C5aR-mediated cell activation.
