Title       : Cladistics of the Aleiodes Lineage of the Subfamily Rogadinae (Hymenoptera:
               Braconidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9306314

Award Number: 9306314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61809              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Shaw braconid@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306314 Shaw          Parasitoid wasps of the genus    Aleoides    are among the
              most commonly encountered rogadine Braconidae (Insecta: Hymenoptera),
              particularly in temperate parts of the Holarctic region.  These wasps are
              remarkable in that the host caterpillar remains mummified, thus naturally
              preserved for study.  Since a wide variety of caterpillars are attacked, the
              tribe is a particularly promising study group for analysis of patterns of host
              utilization by parasitoid wasps.  The purpose of this research is to complete a
              cladistic analysis of world species of    Aleoides   , which can be used to
              interpret patterns of host utilization by these wasps.  The requested funds
              will be used to support a graduate student who will assist the PI with specimen
              preparation, handling, data gathering, data entry, and scanning electron
              microscopy.  Additional funds are requested for scanning electron microscope
              (SEM) studies and supplies.  This research will result in a phylogenetic
              classification, which will provide the framework for an examination of patterns
              of host utilization.  It additionally will render the Rogadini more accessible
              to continued research in parasitoid ecology, behavior, physiology and
              biological control. %%%          This project will examine the relationships of
              species in a large genus of wasps that are parasitic as immatures, feeding on a
              variety of caterpillars many of which are pests of forests and crops.  The
              study should result in a sound, modern classification of these beneficial
              wasps.  Such a classification will be of use for further studies in the
              behavior, ecology, and host utilization of these wasps and should aid applied
              efforts to use the se wasps as biological control agents of various pests,
              thereby diminishing use of noxious chemicals for insect control. ***           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
