Title       : Mating Patterns and Inbreeding Depression in Dimorphic Populations of Eichhornia
               paniculata (Pontederiaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1993    
File        : a9306473

Award Number: 9306473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua R. Kohn jkohn@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306473  Kohn       Natural populations of the emergent-aquatic annual 
              Eichhornia paniculata often contain two readily identifiable  genetic morphs
              whose rates of self fertilization average 0.8 and  0.2, respectively.  We will
              take advantage of these populations  to evaluate several recent theoretical
              predications of critical  importance for understanding the evolutionary 
              dynamics of  inbreeding depression and mating system change.  We will measure 
              morph-specific levels of self fertilization and male outcrossing  success to
              obtain complete information on morph-specific gamete  transmission in these
              natural populations.  This will provide  some of the first information on how a
              floral morphology that  increases the selfing rate affects other aspects of
              gamete  transmission.  We will evaluate morph-specific inbreeding  depression
              to see if genes that control the mating system are in  disequilibrium with
              fitness alleles responsible for inbreeding  depression.  Such associations are
              expected under many recent  theoretical models and can alter expectations based
              on population  mean levels of inbreeding depression.  However, associations 
              between mating and fitness alleles have not as yet been  demonstrated in any
              natural population of hermaphroditic plants.   We will resample morph
              frequencies in populations first examined  over 10 years ago to gain
              information on the stability of morph  ratios over time.  Previous measures of
              transmission in these  populations provided an expectation of rapid decline in
              the  frequency of the morph with the lower selfing rate.  If morph  frequencies
               have not changed, our measures of transmission and  viability should shed
              light on factors maintaining mating system  polymorphism.  If the morph with
              the lower selfing rate is in  decline, we will gain an unusually
              well-documented example of  evolution by natural selection over a human time
              scale.  The  results will provide useful insights into factors promoting 
              stability or instability of mixed mating systems and t he dynamics  of
              inbreeding depression in natural populations.***
