Title       : A Workshop to Explore the Feasibility, Protocols and Costs of an "All-Taxa
               Biodiversity Inventory;" University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA; April
               16-18, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1994  
File        : a9306296

Award Number: 9306296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel H. Janzen djanzen@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This workshop will consider one of the ultimate issues of                      
              biodiversity research: is an all-taxa biotic inventory at a single             
              site feasible? If so, what are the, strategies, protocols,                     
              resources and time required to carry it off?  The 3-day workshop at            
              the Univ. of Pennsylvania will involve 42 scientists whose                     
              expertise will encompass biotic sampling, survey and inventory,                
              ecology, systematic studies, curatorial matters and                            
              computerization/networking of the data for most terrestrial                    
              organisms.  The PI, a leader in biodiversity research and                      
              conservation, followed up on a recent international biodiversity               
              conference by developing this workshop and attracting its                      
              participants. He will produce a workshop document which could be               
              the initial blueprint for planning such an all-taxa survey.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              This workshop is a first bold step toward tackling one of the great            
              issues in biodiversity research, management and conservation: is an            
              inventory of all species of organisms at one geographic site                   
              feasible?  If so, how can it be accomplished and what are the                  
              necessary resources?  If successful, the long-term effect of the               
              workshop on the infrastructure of science will be substantial and              
              broad.  Three immediate major benefits of the workshop will be:                
              bringing together of multidisciplinary workers; development of data            
              management techniques for taxonomic and ecological information;                
              answers to principle scientific questions concerning biodiversity.             
              The potential benefits of an all-species inventory would  initially            
              be to society in demonstrating that sustainable use of biodiversity            
              through discovery and use of genetic and other resources is                    
              economically worthwhile.
