Title       : RUI: Comparison of Seismic Communication in Four Species ofDesert Rodents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9306688

Award Number: 9306688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70799              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet A. Randall jrandall@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9178,9229,
Abstract    :
              9306688  Randall    Striking the hind feet on the ground to create mechanical
              vibrations has evolved  independently in several rodent families around the
              world.  Although foot-drumming behavior  is common in desert rodents from North
              and South Africa, Middle East, Central Russia,  Asia, and North America, it has
              been studied in detail only in the Southwestern United States  in the
              banner-tailed kangaroo rat.  Dr. Randall has found that foot-drumming by the 
              banner-tails is part of a communication system:  the rats create individually
              distinct foot-  drumming signatures that are used to identify neighbors during
              territorial defense.  She now  seeks to understand the evolution of
              foot-drumming as communication through comparing the  banner-tails with three
              species of kangaroo rat from different locations and habitats.  The new 
              species include the giant kangaroo rat, a federally listed endangered species
              that lives in open  grassland, the desert kangaroo rat, which lives in sand
              dunes, and the Heerman's kangaroo  rat from rocky slopes.  Of primary interest
              will be between-species comparisons by age, sex,  and individual of the
              foot-drumming signal in the contexts of territorial defense, competition  for
              resources and mates, and in predator defense.  Playback experiments will test
              for species,  sex and individual recognition of identified foot-drumming
              signals.    This is the first comparative study of foot-drumming in closely
              related species, and as such  will contribute to a general understanding of how
              this unique communication system evolved.   Results of this study can help us
              understand why so many rodents in the world's deserts have  evolved
              foot-drumming behavior.  This research should also provide valuable information
               about desert communities and assist in development of recovery plans for
              endangered species  of kangaroo rats.
