Title       : Peptides That Influence Aspects of Mosquito Diuresis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9306490

Award Number: 9306490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Hayes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9306490  Hayes    This project represents basic research into how small hormonal
               and neurotransmitter molecules called peptides are used as  messengers between
              cells and tissues. Dr. Hayes is attempting to  discover how information is
              written on the structure of these  small molecules and read by the target
              tissues. What are the  rules of the peptide molecular language? This type of
              basic  information has potential for future application indirectly to  the
              development of  new pharmaceuticals and  to applications in  agriculture.
              Utilizing mosquitoes as subjects, he can  economically obtain millions of
              insect subjects for his  experiments. Also, by using mosquito subjects, he can
              direct the  results of the research toward the development of a new  generation
              of potential, specific insecticides that have  potential for not having harmful
              effects on humans, beneficial  insect, and the environment. Specifically, the
              project is  designed to isolate and determine the structure of peptides that 
              effect a physiological process critical to mosquito survival,  water and salt
              elimination. The structures of these naturally  occurring peptides will allow
              synthetic versions of the native  peptides to be prepared for the generation of
              antibodies and for  receptor investigations. The antibodies will be  used  to
              locate  sites of storage and release of the peptides within the mosquito.  This
              should help determine if each peptide is a neurohormone, a  neurotransmitter or
              an extraneuronal peptide. Synthetic analogs  of the native peptides will be
              designed to probe the receptor(s)  tissue location, molecular structure, and
              binding site surface.  The interaction between receptors and peptides are a
              critical and  perhaps the most important single form of intercellular 
              communication that integrates a collection of cells into an  organism.  ***
