Title       : LTREB: Oak Mast as a Keystone Resource in Forest Community Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1994      
File        : a9306641

Award Number: 9306641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50164              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry O. Wolff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306641  Wolff    Results from a 13-year study conducted at the Mountain Lake 
              Biological Station in the southern Appalachian Mountains suggests  a dynamic
              interaction between mast production and primary and  secondary consumers. 
              Episodic mast production has resulted in  population fluctuations of mice,
              chipmunks, and other mast  consumers.  Carnivores, primarily barred owls,
              exhibit a numerical  response to rodent densities.  Seed survival and
              germination  occurs only during peak mast production years and seedling 
              mortality is associated with deer browsing activity.  Chipmunks  appear to be
              the major predators on ground nesting birds, and  their densities are inversely
              correlated with junco fledgling  success.  This project will continue the
              monitoring of the major  players in these trophic levels for two years to
              determine the  direct and indirect effects of episodic mast production on 
              selected primary and secondary consumers, seed survival and forest 
              regeneration, and community stability in a southern Appalachian  deciduous
              forest community.  Specifically the project will (1)  determine the role of
              mast production in regulating population  densities of three seed-eating rodent
              species, white-footed mice,  deer mice, and chipmunks, (2) determine if and how
              fluctuating  rodent densities affect seed survival and germination rates, and 
              fledgling success of ground nesting birds, primarily juncos, (3)  test the
              predator-satiation hypothesis for seed masting in  deciduous oaks, (4)
              determine the role of deer browsing on  survival and growth of understory
              vegetation, and (5) provide  baseline data on these aspects of the community
              structure and  dynamics prior to the anticipated invasion of gypsy moths.  %%% 
              Research projects of this type are especially important to the  understanding
              of the complex interactions of populations comprised  by the forest ecosystem. 
              Results from the work should yield  fundamental insights on species
              interactions as well s provided  information applicable to the be tter
              management of forest  resources.  ***
