Title       : Foraging for Brain Stimulation: The Dynamics of Matching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9306283

Award Number: 9306283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Gallistel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306283  Gallistel    Understanding the processes that mediate choice in the
              face of uncertainty is fundamental to  understanding foraging behavior in
              animals and economic behavior in humans.  It has long  been known that rats and
              humans tend to allot time or invest in a given course of action in  proportion
              to the relative amount of reward they experience from it--the matching law.  If
               one alternative yields twice as much reward as another, they spend twice as
              much time with  that alternative.  Dr. Gallistel has discovered that rats can
              assess the relative rates of reward  based on the most recent one or two
              intervals between rewards.  He now will explore how  both the most recent and
              more long-range experience determines their choice statistics,  primarily the
              statistics describing how long they stay with an alternative once they've
              chosen  it.  The rats are rewarded by direct electrical stimulation of a
              pathway in the brain.  This  artificial reward does not produce satiation (loss
              of motivation to respond), so animals may be  given many rewards for long
              periods every day, generating the voluminous data required for  analyzing the
              statistical laws that govern their choice behavior.    Understanding the
              preverbal (animal) process for coping with choice in the face of  uncertainty
              is relevant to estimating the role of language in mediating these same choices
              in  humans.  Because these experiments provide reward by direct electrical
              stimulation of neural  tissue, they also open up the prospect of investigating
              the neurophysiological basis of this  ubiquitous and important behavioral
              process.  Thus, the study of matching behavior in self-  stimulating rats may
              enrich our understanding of human-decision making on the one hand and  open an
              avenue to the experimental study of the neurobiology of elementary
              decision-making  on the other.
