Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Program in Computational and Applied Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9306488

Award Number: 9306488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russel E. Caflisch caflisch@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9179,9217,9218,9263,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9306720  Caflisch       Vortical and convective fluid flows are important for a
              wide  range of phenomena, such as fluid mixing, flow around airfoils  and
              obstacles, and turbulence.  In this project the investigator  undertakes
              research in three related topics: (1) Dynamics,  instabilities and singularity
              formation for axisymmetric,  swirling vortex sheets are studied through
              bifurcation analysis  and numerical computation, with applications to vortex
              breakdown.  (2) The effective diffusion rate for a convective flow is studied 
              for flows with randomness and time-dependence. (3) Singularities  are
              investigated for systems of PDE's through a combination of  PDE theory,
              algebraic geometry (catastrophe theory), symbolic  computation, and numerical
              simulation.       The research in this proposal is for analysis and  numerical
              computation of complex fluid flows, such as occur in  many problems of
              scientific and technological importance.   Effective understanding and
              application of these flows requires a  description of both their microscopic
              and their macroscopic  features.  This investigation first focuses on
              singularities as a  fine-scale phenomena in idealized flows.  A macroscopic 
              description of flows is also developed through homogenization of  the
              microscopic variations.  The results from this study will be  important in
              assessing the qualitative features of complex  flows,as well as in the
              development of effective computational  methods.  ***  9306720  Caflisch      
              Vortical and convective fluid flows are important for a wide  range of
              phenomena, such as fluid mixing, flow around airfoils  and obstacles, and
              turbulence.  In this project the investigator  undertakes research in three
              related topics: (1) Dynamics,  instabilities and singularity formation for
              axisymmetric,  swirling vortex sheets are studied through bifurcation analysis 
              and numerical computation, with applications to vortex breakdown.  (2) The
              effective diffusion rate for a convective flow is studied  for flows with
              randomness  and time-dependence. (3) Singularities  are investigated for
              systems of PDE's through a combination of  PDE theory, algebraic geometry
              (catastrophe theory), symbolic  computation, and numerical simulation.      
              The research in this proposal is for analysis and numerical  computation of
              complex fluid flows, such as occur in many  problems of scientific and
              technological importance.  Effective  understanding and application of these
              flows requires a  description of both their microscopic and their macroscopic 
              features.  This investigation first focuses on singularities as a  fine-scale
              phenomena in idealized flows.  A macroscopic  description of flows is also
              developed through homogenization of  the microscopic variations.  The results
              from this study will be  important in assessing the qualitative features of
              complex flows,  as well as in the development of effective computational
              methods.  ***
