Title       : Collaborative Research: Relative Effects of Hostplant Chemistry and Insect
               Predators on Herbivorous Insects and their Hostplants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1995     
File        : a9306795

Award Number: 9306795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Stamp nstamp@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306795 Stamp          The relative importance of hostplant chemistry and
              predation in determining foraging patterns of insect herbivores and the degree
              to which these factors interact are largely unknown.  This project will include
              two series of field experiments, with the expression of hostplant defensive
              chemistry (iridoid glycosides and phenylpropanoid glycosides in    Plantago    
                lanceolata   ) manipulated by using cloned genotypes.  the first set of
              experiments will assess the relative effects of chemical variation in hostplant
              genotypes versus insect predators on the foraging patterns, growth, defensive
              chemistry, fecundity and survivorship of insect herbivores, plus evaluate the
              consequences for the hostplant genotypes and insect predators.  It uses
              hostplant genotypes that vary considerably in their levels of defensive
              chemistry, four caterpillar species that differ in their ability to handle
              iridoid glycosides and two different kinds of insect predators (stinkbugs and
              wasps).  A second series of experiments will focus on the behavior, growth rate
              and survivorship of newly hatched specialist caterpillars determine when they
              induce defensive chemistry in hostplants. %%% Most work on plant herbivore
              relationship has focused either on hostplant chemistry or on the role of
              natural enemies in isolation.  The current project examines the interactions of
              these factors.  This is important because it elucidates mechanisms that control
              potential pests of crop or forest plants as well as processes that maintain
              biological diversity of these systems.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
