Title       : RPG: Effect of Cytokine Proteins on Steroidogenic Function in the Hen Ovary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1993       
File        : a9306770

Award Number: 9306770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith M. Grizzle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9221,
Abstract    :
              In this research planning grant for women, experiments are being               
              conducted that will test the effect of immune system proteins,                 
              interleukin 1 (IL-1) and tissue necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha)              
              on steroidogenic secretion and follicular health in two genetic                
              lines of laying chickens selected for either a high (HA) or low                
              (LA) antibody response to sheep erythrocytes.  IL-1 isolated from              
              the chicken macrophage HD 11 cell line and human recombinant TNF               
              alpha will be used to ascertain in vitro granulosa and thecal cell             
              androstenedione and progesterone secretion as affected by an immune            
              protein.  Further, follicles will be examined for morphological                
              appearance and the presence of surface hemorrhages prior to cell               
              culture as an indicator of atresia.  Ethidium bromide agarose gels             
              of DNA isolated from these same follicles will be used to further              
              substantiate follicular health as determined by the presence or                
              absence of 185 base pair fragments, an indicator of cellular                   
              apoptosis.  Additional experiments will test the in vivo response              
              of laying hens to a strong immune challenge induced by an                      
              intraperitoneal injection of sephadex particles.  Follicles will be            
              isolated and examined for morphological appearance as described                
              before.  Gonadal cells will be grown in cell culture for the                   
              assessment of steroid secretion, followed by the isolation of DNA              
              for an assessment of apoptosis.  It is anticipated that isolation              
              of IL-1 from the HD 11 cell line will lead to the determination of             
              the amino acid sequence of the protein.  Once this information is              
              obtained, future studies will be developed to clone the gene for               
              IL-1, and use this as a means of assessing immune system proteins              
              as regulators of reproduction in avian species.                                
                                                                                             
              These experiments will be used to assess the role of the immune                
              system as a regulator of reproductive efficiency.  In order to                 
              complete these experiments, laying chickens will be used as the                
              research model since follicles destined for ovulation can be                   
              predicted precisely as well as those follicles most likely to be               
              excluded from future development.  Two experiments will be                     
              conducted that will: (1) assess the role of specific immune system             
              proteins, interleukin 1 and tissue necrosis factor alpha, on the               
              secretion of gonadal hormones from cells isolated from ovarian                 
              tissue, and (2) measure the secretion of gonadal hormones from                 
              ovarian tissues after hens are exposed to a laboratory induced                 
              immunological challenge.  The effect of immune proteins or an                  
              immune challenge on follicular health will be determined by                    
              measuring the presence or absence of cellular genetic material                 
              (DNA) which has been degraded after the exposure to either of the              
              two treatments.  It is hoped that results from these experiments               
              will lead to the isolation of the protein, interleukin 1, from                 
              chicken immune system cells.  It is further anticipated that future            
              experiments will be planned to determine not only the role of the              
              immune system on reproduction, but how this system and its                     
              secretory proteins are controlled.
