Title       : Evolution of Bacterial Copper Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9306559

Award Number: 9306559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Cooksey Cooksey@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1167,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9306559 Cooksey This project is to investigate how plant associated bacteria
              adapt to toxic levels of copper in the environment.  Copper is an important
              bactericide used frequently for disease control on agricultural plants.  The
              development of copper resistance in plant pathogenic bacteria may pose a threat
              to the future use of copper in plant disease control, and a better
              understanding of how this resistance develops will be important for evaluating
              this threat.  The recognition of copper resistance has already led to attempts
              to develop new copper formulations that may circumvent resistance mechanisms,
              and a greater understanding of the physiological and regulatory mechanisms of
              resistance could enhance that effort. %%% Microbial resistance to nonessential
              toxic metals, such as mercury, has been studied extensively, but resistance to
              copper has receives much less attention.  Unlike the other metals. copper is
              required by loving organisms as a component of certain enzymes; at low levels
              it is beneficial, but at high levels it is toxic.  The evolution of copper
              resistance in microbial populations therefore involves a complex balance in
              copper uptake and exclusion mechanisms.  The genes determining copper
              resistance were cloned and characterized, and they were found to be related to
              a set of chromosomal genes found in copper sensitive bacteria.  We have shown
              that the resistance can evolve through modifications of these chromosomal
              genes, and the present project is to define further these modifications.  Since
              copper is required by microorganisms as a trace element, the resistance
              mechanism, which prevents uptake of copper, must be under tight regulatory
              control so that copper is not  excluded under normal growth conditions.  We
              have evidence that modifications in the level in gene expression in this
              system.  The copper binding capacity of other proteins produced by the
              bacterium is important in the copper exclusion mechanism, and we will study how
              copper binding sites of these proteins have been modified during the evolution
              of resistance.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
