Title       : Molecular Phylogenetics and Host Transfer Among Genera and Species in the
               Leafhopper Tribe Deltocephalini
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9306436

Award Number: 9306436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1993  
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Black IV wcb4@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Whitcomb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9306436  Black       Leafhoppers are insects that extract nutrients from plants 
              through piercing and sucking mouthparts.  Leafhoppers occur on a  wide variety
              of trees, shrubs, herbaceous plants and grasses and  can transmit a number of
              important plant diseases.  It is  believed that leafhopper species arose
              through changes in host  plant specialization.  A species that feeds on several
              closely  related plant species may have come to specialize on one or a 
              leafhopper that fed on one plant species may have broadened its  range.  Shifts
              in host plant specialization are believed to have  occurred among leafhoppers
              in the tribe Deltocephalini.  Some  genera in this tribe have a worldwide
              distribution and occur on  trees and shrubs or alternate between woody and
              herbaceous  plants.  Other genera are largely associated with herbaceous 
              plants.  One group inhabits primarily grasses in North, Central  and South
              America.  From these arose a group that are almost  entirely limited to grasses
              in North America and Mexico.  This  suggests a progression from widely
              distributed species that occur  on many families of woody and herbaceous plants
              towards North  American and Mexican species that occur exclusively on grasses. 
               The importance of host plant transfer in the origin of leafhopper  species is
              poorly understood because leafhoppers have only a few  morphological characters
              that can be used to separate species and  determine the genetic relationships
              among them.  The research of  this project will use DNA sequences to estimate
              genetic  relationships among leafhopper species.  The goal is to develop  an
              objective phylogeny for leafhoppers that will test the  hypothesis that new
              species arise through host transfer and  specialization.  %%%       The
              leafhoppers are a group of insects that have economic  importance because
              several members transmit plant diseases to  crops, trees, shrubs, etc.. 
              Developing a better understanding of  relationships among these insects will
              serve to explain changes  in host pl ant associations which may have potential
              implications  for disease control.  The results of this project will also serve
               as a general model for other insect groups where host plant  transfer and
              specialization is suspected.  ***
