Title       : Semisynthetic Selenoenzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1995     
File        : a9306267

Award Number: 9306267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Hilvert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work of Dr. Donald  
              Hilvert at the Scripps Research Institute to study physicochemical and  
              structural characterization of selenosubtilisin with particular emphasis on  
              understanding and optimizing its peptide ligase and peroxidase activities.  
              Subtilisin variants containing site-specific changes in addition to Ser221Sec  
              will be prepared to address mechanistic questions and to improve the chemical  
              efficiency of the first-generation catalysts.  The specific targets are (a) to 
               prepare a family of artificial selenoenzymes based on subtilisin and explore  
              the intrinsic reactivity of its selenium prosthetic group, (b) to characterize 
               these selenocysteine-containing proteins and deduce the relative importance of
                steric and electronic factors in catalysis, (c) to apply them to peptide  
              ligation, (d) to characterize and optimize their redox properties to both  
              mimic the action of the natural redox enzyme glutathione peroxidase and  
              catalyze the stereospecific oxidation of substrates other than thiols, and (e) 
               to extend these studies to other protein templates.  In this project Dr.  
              Hilvert will elaborate structural, mechanistic and synthetic aspects of  
              selenoenzymes prepared by modifying naturally occurring enzymes, where the  
              modification entails a replacement of sulfur (or oxygen) by selenium.  The work
                concerns the preparation and characterization of selenosubtilisin and
              variants   thereof, peptide ligation, redox chemistry, and expansion of
              selenium   substitution in other enzymes.  The rational design of these abzymes
              may have a   profound impact on medicinal and industrial applications.
