Title       : Consequences of Larval Interactions to Mayfly Survival, Fecundity and Population
               Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1995   
File        : a9306842

Award Number: 9306842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Peckarsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,5912,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9306842  Peckarsky   The objectives of the proposed research are to (1)
              determine how much of the death rate of the stream-dwelling larval mayfly,
              Baetis bicaudatus, is due to stonefly and trout predation, and to parasitism by
              nematode worms, (2) measure the consequences of reduced feeding by mayflies
              while avoiding competitors, predatory stoneflies and trout in terms of female
              egg production and size-related male mating success, and (3) using methods to
              estimate mayfly population growth, determine the relative impacts of predators,
              parasites and competitors on the mayflys' ability to sustain populations over
              the long term.  Meathods proposed to meet those objectives include: (a)
              experiments conducted in small (25cm) and large (1.5m) enclosures to measure
              the effects of stonefly and trout predation on mayfly death rate, (b)
              behavioral experiments to determine the risk of trout predation to mayflies
              that have entered the water column to escape stonefly predation, (c)
              dissections of mayfly larvae and adults to estimate stages and sexes of
              infection, sterilization and death cause by nematode worms, and (d) experiments
              conducted in small and large enclosures to measure the effects of predator on
              mayfly growth rates, sizes of adults and egg production, (e) field experiments
              will determine whether  larger male mayflies have greater mating success, and
              (f) sizes and egg production and mayflies that completed their larval stage in
              sites or streams with different densities of predators competitors.  These data
              will illustrate whether any effects of predator avoidance observed at a smaller
              scale (in enclosures) can be detected a t larger scales in natural streams.  
              Data from these experiments will be used to compare mayfly population growth in
              the face of stonefly and trout predators, parasites and competitors.  Filed
              estimates of mayfly population growth will be obtained as a "reality check" on
              experimentally derived population growth rates.  The key contribution of this
              research is a unique investigation of connections between factors affecting
              larval morality and behavior and adult reproductive success.  No previous
              studies have compared the consequences of a suite of selection pressures such
              as predation, parasitism and competition on one stage of a natural population,
              and interpreted these impacts on population growth in context of the complete
              life cycle.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        $    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              !         !         !8        !              F                 
                                                                         (    Times New Roman
                 Symbol  & Arial                             *   "             h      k   k  
                                     7        Crystal Blackshear Crystal Blackshear          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
