Title       : Unique Ascorbic Acid Recyling Proteins in Mammaliam Tissue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9306526

Award Number: 9306526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Bode   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Ascorbic acid is maintained in some mammalian tissue cells at                  
              concentrations almost 20-fold higher than in plasma.  In the                   
              mammalian system, ascorbate exists in either of two states;                    
              ascorbic acid, the reduced form, which may autooxidize to produce              
              dehydroascorbic acid (DHAA).  DHAA is toxic, and when it is taken              
              up by cells, it is stored intracellularly in the reduced form.  The            
              mechanism of DHAA reduction to ascorbic acid inside cells is not               
              clear. DHAA may be reduced nonenzymatically by a variety of -SH                
              containing compounds, such as reduced glutathione, glutathione                 
              together with NADPH, or NADPH alone. In some cells, however, the               
              rate of DHAA reduction to ascorbic acid is 2-5 times above the rate            
              of the glutathione-dependent chemical reduction reaction.  This                
              suggests that a specific DHAA-ascorbic acid reduction system may be            
              at work in some cells.  In this laboratory, unique reducing                    
              activities have been detected in at least one type of tissue.                  
              Preliminary data indicate that DHAA-reduction activities are                   
              attributable to at least two separate proteins; one protein appears            
              in the cytosol and the other is membrane associated.  In the                   
              present proposal we will attempt to isolate and characterize the               
              action and synthetic regulation these presumptive DHAA-reduction               
              proteins and determine their role in normal cell function.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Ascorbic acid is as important compound in animal cells.  However,              
              on the way to the cells, ascorbic acid may react with oxygen and               
              form a toxic derivative called dehydroascorbic acid (DHAA).  To                
              protect themselves, when the cells take up DHAA, it is converted to            
              ascorbic acid.  The question arises whether ascorbic acid is formed            
              from DHAA by a chemical reaction inside cells, or whether there is             
              a specific enzyme system the causes the reaction to occur.  The                
              latter case may be correct, because some cells can convert DHAA at             
              a faster rate than can be explained by just an ordinary chemical               
              reaction.  Preliminary results in this laboratory suggest that two             
              proteins do exist in certain cells, which may form a system to                 
              change DHAA to ascorbic acid.  One protein exists in the cell                  
              cytoplasm and the other one seems to be bound to cell membrane                 
              material.  We will try to purify these two proteins and determine              
              how they operated to change DHAA into ascorbic acid.  We will also             
              try to determine what causes the cell to form these proteins and               
              whether they are important for the cell to have.
