Title       : RPG: Microbial Virulence Induction Enhancement by Plant CellWall
               Oligiosaccharides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9306507

Award Number: 9306507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann L. T. Powell alpowell@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              This is a research planning grant for women.  To be able to                    
              understand functions in pathogens and plants so that plant diseases            
              can be controlled and cellular mechanisms for signal recognition               
              between organisms can be deciphered, we will investigate                       
              enhancement of bacterial virulence functions by oligosaccharides.              
              This enhancement will serve as a model system supporting further               
              pursuit of virulence functions in fungi.  Previous work has shown              
              that plant cell walls contain a polygalacturonase inhibitor protein            
              (PGIP) that recognizes and inhibits fungal polygalacturonases (PG)             
              and that the association of PG and PGIP results in reduced                     
              breakdown of pectin so that oligosaccharides three to twenty units             
              long are formed.  These oligosaccharides have been shown to be                 
              inducers of defense responses in the plant cells and in                        
              Agrobacteria similar oligosaccharides have been suggested to be                
              potent enhancers of virulence induction by plant phenolics.  This              
              research assesses the inhibition of bacterial PGs by pear and                  
              tomato PGIPs and determines the susceptibility to Agrobacteria                 
              infection of transgenic tomato plants expressing elevated amounts              
              of PGIP.  Furthermore, oligosaccharides optional for the                       
              enhancement of bacterialvirulence gene expression will be                      
              identified.  The results from the studies outlined in this grant               
              will provide the basis for the search in fungi for homologues to               
              bacterial genes responsible for the regulation of virulence                    
              induction and enhancement.                                                     
                                                                                             
              To be able to understand the signals that are exchanged between a              
              microbial pathogen and a plant cell during infection, we will                  
              analyze the effect that sugar polymers have on the functions in a              
              bacteria that allow it to infect the plant cells.  These sugar                 
              polymers are known to be formed when a protein in the wall of the              
              plant cell, PGIP, encounters an enzyme, PG, that fungi deploy in               
              order to reach the interior of the plant cell being infected.  The             
              sugar polymers are known to trigger responses in plant cells that              
              can slow the infection process, but they also have been suggested              
              to enhance the infection functions in bacterial plant pathogens.               
              Since little is known about the control of functions that fungal               
              plant pathogenes need in order to infect plants, we will first                 
              describe the effects of the sugar polymers in the infection process            
              by bacterial pathogens and then look for similar functions in the              
              more complex fungal infections.  We need to understand functions in            
              both types of pathogens and in the plants in order to exercise                 
              control over plant diseases caused by these pathogens and in order             
              to decipher basic mechanisms of communication between organisms.
