Title       : Mitochondrial mRNA Processing in Trypanosoma Brucei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9306735

Award Number: 9306735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna Koslowsky koslowsk@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9221,
Abstract    :
              RNA processing is known to control key steps in the growth and                 
              differentiation of organisms.  In mammals and yeasts, regulation of            
              alternative mRNA 3' end processing can generate structurally                   
              transcripts that produce different polypeptide isoforms.                       
              Polyadenylation appears to be a determinant of mRNA stability and              
              specific changes in poly(A) tail length have been correlated with              
              translational efficiency.  In T.brucei mitochondria, transcript                
              levels, polyadenylation and RNA editing are all differentially                 
              regulated, indicating the important role RNA processing plays in               
              the biogenesis of this organelle.  However, very little is known               
              about the mechanisms which control these processes or how they                 
              interact in the ultimate regulation of gene expression.  With the              
              development of a system to investigate precursor and cleavage, the             
              dissection of these mechanisms and the understanding of how RNA                
              processing can regulate mitochondrial biogenesis can be greatly                
              expanded.                                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Kinetoplasted protozoa have provided amazingly fertile ground for              
              the study of novel molecular phenomena such as trans-splicing, bent            
              DNA and de novo circular gene amplifications.  Probably the most               
              surprising discovery, however, is the phenomena of RNA editing                 
              which occurs in the mitochondria of these organisms.  If as has                
              been suggested, RNA editing reflects an old mechanism and is a                 
              direct descendent of RNA replication, understanding how this system            
              interacts with other RNA processing machineries in its regulation              
              may give us a much broader understanding of basic genetic                      
              regulatory processes.
