Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Subelliptic Partial Differential Equations and Harmonic
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9306833

Award Number: 9306833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Michael Christ   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Work on this project will address several questions                       
              concerning subelliptic partial differential equations, especially              
              aspects of analytic hypoellipticity.  Related work on the                      
              representations of nilpotent Lie groups and harmonic analysis                  
              will also be carried out.  A differential operator is said to be               
              hypoelliptic if the smoothness of a solution of the corresponding              
              inhomogeneous equation is related to that of the inhomgeneous                  
              term (often referred to simply as the right-hand-side of the                   
              equation).  By analytic, one means that analytic solutions are                 
              guaranteed when the inhomogeneous term is analytic.  A few cases               
              where analytic hypoellipticity for elliptic operators occurs are               
              known and a few where it fails are also known.  The vast middle                
              ground is untouched and represents the main theme of this                      
              research.  Additionally, in those cases where hypoellipticity                  
              fails, it remains to determine exactly what order of smoothness                
              one can expect to possess and to relate it to underlying                       
              geometric invariants of the domain on which the operator is                    
              defined.  The work begins in three-dimensional Euclidean space,                
              but has natural extensions to similar question on nilpotent                    
              groups like the Heisenberg group, as well as to compact manifolds              
              with boundary.                                                                 
                   This research has many deep connections with the foundations              
              of partial differential equations.  On the surface it appears                  
              highly abstract and distant from the physical world.  In                       
              practice, the fundamental results derive from the study of                     
              specific examples which occur in various applications.  To give,               
              a priori, information about the solution of a complex partial                  
              differential equation can be of immense value to any user of                   
              mathematics.
