Title       : RPG: Temporal Stressors and Immunocompetence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9306919

Award Number: 9306919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debora R. Baldwin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              9306919  Baldwin  Stress is a subject of interest shrouded in ambiguity. 
              Confusion  reigns concerning the concept of stress in general and the effect 
              of such a phenomenon on the neuroimmunological system in  particular.  The
              ambiguity may be attributed, in part, to the  limited number of parametric
              studies which actually test stress  models.  Furthermore, there is evidence to
              indicate that the  specific characteristics of the stressful event (e.g., type
              of  stressor, duration of stressor, predictability of the stressor) can 
              produce immunosuppression or immunoenhancement.  The overall aim of  this
              Research Planning Grant is to examine one aspect of the  stressful event,
              stressor type (physical vs psychological), on a  panel of immunological and
              neuroendocrine parameteres.  The  physical stressor being examined in this
              study is voluntary  running, and the psychological stressor will be
              immobilization.   The experiments address the following questions: 1) What are
              the  similarities and differences between physical and psychological  stress
              events on immunocompetence?  What are the plausible  biochemical pathways
              through which stress-induced immunomodulation  occurs?  2) What is the
              relationship between onset of changes in  neuroendocrine markers
              (catecholamine, corticosteroid, glucose) and  immunity?  Will the effect differ
              with respect to stressor type and  gender?     Both physical and psychological
              stress have been shown to produce  immune effects.  Stressful events may differ
              with regard to  specific physiological outcomes, while sharing the same
              underlying  physiological mechanism.  The overall expected results are as 
              follows:  1) psychological stress alone (immobilization) will  produce the
              greatest compromise of immune functioning compared to  the physical stress of
              voluntary running, and 2) immunosuppression  will be associated with a
              heightened neuroendocrine response to  stress.   ***
