Title       : Computer Simulation of Reactors for Chemical Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9306425

Award Number: 9306425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234719             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kailash C. Karki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Innovative Research Inc
	      2520 Broadway St NE, Suite 200
	      Minneapolis, MN  55413    612/378-0320

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is an important process in the                 
              manufacture of microelectronic and optical devices.  It is                     
              used to deposit layers of epitaxial semiconductors, compound                   
              semiconductors, conductors, and insulators.  Although the                      
              thickness of the deposited film varies according to the                        
              application, the films must be produced with controllable                      
              properties (purity, composition, texture, thickness, etc.).                    
              The tolerance limits on the properties are very stringent in                   
              electronic and optical material processing.  As the devices                    
              become smaller in size, the requirements become even more                      
              stringent.  In particular, the uniformity of film thickness is                 
              critical in maintaining the same performance characteristics                   
              across each substrate and from sample to sample.  Because the                  
              film uniformity is governed by the access of the precursor                     
              gases to the substrate, a clear understanding of the governing                 
              transport processes is essential to achieve uniformity of the                  
              deposition thickness and composition over large areas.                         
                                                                                             
              The currently available three-dimensional computational models                 
              for CVD reactors are based on simplifications with regard to                   
              the transport processes and chemical kinetics and are of                       
              limited use.  The objective of this research is to develop a                   
              complete model based on the full three-dimensional unsteady                    
              form of the governing equations for CVD reactor flows.  Due to                 
              the use of efficient and accurate numerical procedures, the                    
              model will require only a few minutes to run a workstation.                    
              Therefore, the model can be used in a routine manner for                       
              design, research and optimization.  It will lead to better                     
              understanding of the transport phenomena and reactions in CVD                  
              processes and will aid in the design of reactors capable of                    
              producing uniform film thickness and composition over large                    
              areas.
