Title       : Structure and Function of Na+ Channel B Subunits in Adrenal Chromaffin Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1993       
File        : a9306878

Award Number: 9306878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori L. Isom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Voltage-sensitive sodium channels are responsible for the rising               
              phase of the action potential in excitable cells, including central            
              and peripheral neurons, heart, skeletal muscle and neuroendocrine              
              cells.  Sodium channels in brain are heterotrimeric complexes                  
              composed of alpha, beta-1 and beta-2 subunits, while sodium                    
              channels in heart and skeletal muscle are heterodimeric, composed              
              of alpha and beta-1-like subunits.  The structure of sodium c                  
              channels in neuroendocrine cells has not been identified.  Previous            
              work by this investigator has resulted in the molecular cloning and            
              functional expression of the beta-1 subunit of the rat brain sodium            
              channel.  Co-expression of cloned beta-1 subunits with alpha                   
              subunits in Xenopus oocytes results in increased peak current,                 
              acceleration of inactivation, and a shift in the voltage dependence            
              of inactivation to more negative membrane potentials.  It is                   
              hypothesized that the level of expression and functional properties            
              of sodium channels in excitable cells depends not only on the                  
              expression and properties of alpha subunits but also on the                    
              expression and functional interaction with beta subunits.  The goal            
              of these studies is to identify the sodium channel alpha and beta              
              subunits that are expressed in adrenal medullary chromaffin cells              
              by hybridization to known alpha and beta subunits, determine the               
              structure of chromaffin cell beta subunits by molecular cloning and            
              assess the role of beta subunits in chromaffin cell sodium channel             
              functional expression, including stimulus-secretion coupling .                 
              Methods to be employed include:  1) molecular cloning of chromaffin            
              cell sodium channel beta subunits, 2) identification of chromaffin             
              cell sodium channel alpha subunits by hybridization studies, 3)                
              blockade of chromaffin cell sodium channel beta subunit expression             
              in vitro through the use of antisense RNA or antisense                         
              oligonucleotides and in vivo through the use of gene disruption                
              experiments, and 4) overexpression of chromaffin cell sodium                   
              channel beta subunits by transfection in vitro and by transgenic               
              expression in vivo.                                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              Voltage-sensitive sodium channels are an important component of the            
              mechanism  by which excitable cells respond to and transmit                    
              signals.  Examples of excitable cells include nerve cells, muscle              
              cells and neuroendocrine cells.  Sodium channels are composed of               
              subunits.  The subunit composition of sodium channels differs in               
              different cell types.  The subunit structure of sodium channels in             
              neuroendocrine cells, such as chromaffin cells of the adrenal                  
              medulla, has not been determined.  These studies will use                      
              techniques of molecular biology to identify the sodium channel                 
              subunits that are expressed in adrenal medullary chromaffin cells              
              and assess their role in chromaffin cell function.
