Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Set Theory and Large Cardinals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1993       
File        : a9306286

Award Number: 9306286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80400              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Mitchell mitchell@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will continue to study several topics in set                 
              theory, primarily concerning the core model and its applications.              
              The most important aim of this research will be to extend core                 
              model theory so that one can prove the existence of a core model               
              in the presence of a Woodin cardinal.  The probable structure of               
              this core model is already known; the main problem seems to be to              
              develop techniques which can be used to prove an extender is a                 
              member of the core model.  Other areas of study concern                        
              applications of the core model under the assumption that there is              
              no model with a Woodin cardinal. These potential applications                  
              include questions related to absoluteness, to the singular                     
              cardinal hypothesis, and to Jonson and Ramsey cardinals.                       
                   The ultimate aim of this research is to chararcterize the                 
              structure of well-founded models of set theory.  As their name                 
              suggests, the 'core' of a universe of set theory, if it exists,                
              provides a skeleton with a relatively well-defined structure and               
              thus gives a good deal of information about the form of the full               
              model.  Since set theory lies at the very foundation of                        
              mathematics, this enterprise has important consequences for the                
              soundness of many accepted mathematical practices, although it is              
              customary for most working mathematicians to take this on faith.
