Title       : Applications of Diffusing Light Spectroscopies to the Study of Dense Random
               Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1995      
File        : a9306814

Award Number: 9306814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arjun G. Yodh yodh@dept.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9306814  Yodh    This is an experimental program to develop and apply diffusing-
               light probes to the study of the structure and dynamics of turbid  materials. 
              Experiments are planned to (1) investigate the  transport and fluctuation of
              light in colloidal crystals,  especially the effects of defects and structural
              correlations; (2)  apply these new spectroscopies to study the evolution more
              complex  turbid material such as slurries, sand piles, gels, microemulsions, 
              and foams; (3) explore the fundamental aspects of traveling waves  of light
              energy density that are produce when amplitude modulated  light sources are
              introduced into a turbid medium; and (4) continue  our studies of the dynamical
              and structural correlations in dense  colloidal suspensions of particles.  The
              knowledge gained by these  studies will improve our fundamental understanding
              of new kinds of  materials, will extend our knowledge of the properties of
              diffusing  light, and will lead to new techniques for imaging opaque materials 
              with diffusing light.  The project involves active collaboration  with
              scientists at Exxon Research and Engineering Corporation,  Annandale, New
              Jersey.  %%%  Diffuse light emerging from granular media can be analyzed to
              gain  information about the structure and dynamics of the particles  making up
              the scattering medium.  For example scattered light is  beginning to be used in
              mammography and other non-destructive  analytical techniques.  This project
              will develop and apply  diffusing-light probes to the study of the structure
              and dynamics  of a range of turbid materials.  Among these are slurries, sand 
              piles, gels, microemulsions, and foams.  The knowledge gained by  these studies
              will improve our fundamental understanding of new  kinds of materials, will
              extend our knowledge of the properties of  diffusing light, and will lead to
              new techniques for imaging opaque  materials with diffusing light.  The project
              involves active  collaboration with scientists at Exxon Research and
              Engineering  Corpor ation, Annandale, New Jersey.  ***
