Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Analysis of the Regulation of Redscale by the
               Parasitoid Aphytis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9306354

Award Number: 9306354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Murdoch murdoch@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger M. Nisbet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510600   Integrated Pest Management              
              0510601   Biology of Pest Organisms               
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigators propose to continue an experimental and                 
              theoretical study of the interaction between redscale, an insect               
              pest of citrus, and Aphytis, an insect parasite that has been                  
              introduced and keeps redscale under economically satisfactory                  
              control in many areas in the world. The population abundance of                
              redscale is not only kept far below the levels at which it is a                
              pest, the populations are also remarkably stable. The central                  
              hypothesis of the proposed research is that the parasite achieves              
              these ends through the flexible responses exhibited by Aphytis                 
              individuals as they encounter scale insects. These individual                  
              responses, in turn, lead to changes in the scale and parasite                  
              populations, and hence in the future death rate imposed by the                 
              parasite. This study is aimed at: analyzing the factors that                   
              determine these decisions, determining their consequences for                  
              population dynamics by incorporating the description into                      
              mathematical models, and testing by field experiment whether                   
              the models in fact have correctly described the underlying                     
              processes.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              This research should produce rarely-obtained insight into the                  
              processes by which field populations are regulated, and especially             
              into the role of individual parasite behavior in achieving this                
              end. It will add to a general theory of parasite-host and                      
              predator-prey dynamics for systems in which the dynamics are                   
              more or less continuous throughout the year and there are                      
              overlapping generations. Most particularly, it represents one of               
              the few attempts to test detailed hypotheses about the mechanisms              
              underlying population dynamics of a particular system in the field.            
              The research should also provide insight that will be useful in                
              solving insect pest problems in the future.
