Title       : Molecular Characterization of the 12 Desaturase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9306820

Award Number: 9306820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte Borgeson borgeson@med.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              We have discovered a novel delta-12 desaturase and have begun the              
              biochemical characterization of this enzyme that places the second             
              double bond in the essential fatty acid linoleic acid.  Vertebrates            
              require the 18:2(n-6) acid in their diet, where it becomes a                   
              structural component of membranes and is a precursor for                       
              eicosanoids.  Until recently, all animals, including insects, were             
              considered unable to synthesize linoleic acid.  Only plants,                   
              protozoa and some fungi readily synthesize the fatty acid.  Studies            
              in our laboratory demonstrated, however, that a number of insect               
              species do possess a delta-12 desaturase and are able to produce               
              linoleic acid.  The discovery of the desaturase in insects presents            
              an opportunity to examine the evolution of a key enzyme in the                 
              lipid biosynthetic pathway.  One of the long term goals of our                 
              research is to examine the delta-12 desaturase in different                    
              species, and to determine if the process of delta-12 desaturation              
              is a primitive metabolic activity, subsequently lost by most                   
              animals, or whether possession of this enzyme reflects an example              
              of convergent evolution.  A second goal is to examine the                      
              regulation of desaturase expression at the transcriptional and                 
              translational level.  Studies are described in the present proposal            
              to clone the enzyme from two representative insect species.  Once              
              the gene coding for the enzyme in insects is isolated, future                  
              experiments designed to answer fundamental questions about the                 
              evolution and regulation of this key enzyme can begin.                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Linoleic acid is a type of lipid, or fat, that is required in the              
              walls of animal cells.  The lipid molecule is also required in                 
              animals for the synthesis of eicosanoids, which operate in                     
              intracellular communication.  Originally it was believed that                  
              linoleic acid was only synthesized by plants, protozoa and certain             
              fungi, and that animals had to ingest the lipid molecule in their              
              diet.  However, a key enzyme in the synthesis of linoleic acid, the            
              delta-12 desaturase, was recently found by this laboratory in                  
              insects.  This discovery provides an opportunity to learn more                 
              about the evolutionary history of the linoleic acid synthetic                  
              pathway.  Could it be an ancient pathway lost during the evolution             
              of the animal cell, or is it a property that has been acquired more            
              recently by the insects.  Experiments will be undertaken, first to             
              clone and sequence the insect delta-12 desaturase gene(s), and then            
              to study the synthetic regulation of the protein.
