Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Likelihood Functions for Estimating Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9306738

Award Number: 9306738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bing Li bing@stat.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   My research focuses on the construction  of  likelihood                   
              functions for estimating equations.  The need for such functions               
              arises when the estimating equations do not integrate to                       
              potential functions.  The likelihood functions can be either                   
              obtained from the projection of the true score function  onto a                
              class of  conservative estimating equations or from the                        
              projection of a pair of centered likelihood ratios.   The                      
              projections are developed for the quasi-likelihood method, and                 
              for the generalized estimating equations, as well as some other                
              classes of estimating equations.  They can be applied to both                  
              independent and dependent situations.  These functions will be                 
              used to construct invariant confidence intervals, to distinguish               
              between consistent and inconsistent solutions to estimating                    
              equations, and to test statistical hypotheses.  I also have                    
              introduced a notion of the information contained in a testing                  
              function,  and will use it to study some commonly used testing                 
              functions. In relation to this, a property of the first order                  
              ancillarity is obtained.                                                       
                   The  key issue in statistics is to establish a relation                   
              between the truth and the data, and to use the relation to make                
              inference about the truth  based  on the  data.  This  is  often               
              achieved by what we call the likelihood methods.  Sometimes the                
              traditional likelihood method faces difficulties:  it may need to              
              make assumptions that are difficult to satisfy; it may be                      
              computationally difficult to realize; it may not be rich enough                
              to accommodate certain applications. Meeting these challenges,                 
              the theories and methods of quasi-likelihood and estimating                    
              equations have been developed and widely used during recent                    
              years.  Extending  and  enriching the likelihood method, the new               
              methods can be applied under more realistic assumptions, more                  
              conveniently, and in wider situations.   My research is on                     
              certain aspects of  quasi-likelihood  and estimating equations,                
              and in particular the construction of  likelihood functions for                
              estimating equations and their use in statistical inference.
