Title       : RUI: Control Mechanisms in Sperm Motility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9220910

Award Number: 9220910
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $458223             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Lindemann lindeman@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    313/377-2100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9108,9161,9178,9181,9229,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 Flagella and cilia of eukaryotic cells are based on the axoneme,            
              an internal arrangement of nine doublets and a central pair of                 
              microtubules.  This highly conserved structure is widely utilized              
              for producing movement in both plants and animals.  The goal of                
              this project is to understand how elements of the flagellar axoneme            
              interact to produce the flagellar beat.  Bull, rat and mouse sperm             
              will be used to study flagellar beating and axonemal function.                 
              Experiments to observe and compare microtubule activation in all               
              three species will be performed on sperm flagella treated (by one              
              of four previously developed methods) to permit disintegration by              
              microtubule sliding.  The extent and rate of microtubule sliding               
              will independently be determined in actively swimming, detergent-              
              extracted sperm models by videotape recording and computer-assisted            
              analysis of the flagellar motion.  Agents with known effects on                
              flagellar motility, such as nickel, calcium or cadmium ions,                   
              vanadate, and cyclic AMP, will be tested for their selective                   
              effects on microtubule sliding in both disintegrating and intact               
              (motile) flagella.  Additionally, genetically dysfunctional mouse              
              sperm will be examined for abnormalities in axonemal function.                 
              Sperm from M. domesticus carrying two different haplotypes of the              
              T-complex, and sperm from M. domesticus carrying one haplotype plus            
              DNA from M. spretus at the homologous T locus will be examined, to             
              attempt to link specific axonemal functions to genetic loci.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Flagella are slender extensions of the cell which "beat", i.e.,                
              wave back and forth in a specific and characteristic way.  They                
              represent a highly conserved mechanism for either propelling a cell            
              through its environment or moving the environment in the vicinity              
              of the cell.  Examples of such motility include the swimming of                
              sperm in the uterus or of protozoans in ponds, the movement of                 
              mucus and inhaled particles in the trachea and bronchi of the                  
              lungs, and the intake of food particles by protozoans.  Flagella               
              consist of highly ordered arrays of microtubules, termed axonemes,             
              which run the full length of the cilium or flagellum.  Other                   
              microtubule-associated proteins, notably dynein, are involved in               
              the transduction of biochemical energy (ATP) to mechanical energy              
              (movement).  The axonemal beat is the result of certain of the                 
              microtubules sliding longitudinally past others, within the                    
              membrane-bound constraints of the flagellum, resulting in a bending            
              of the organelle.  The goal of this project is to understand how               
              the microtubular elements of the axoneme interact to produce the               
              flagellar beat.  The Principal Investigator has developed several              
              unique experimental methods to examine various aspects of these                
              interactions, which will be further exploited in the course of the             
              work.  The experimental results, together with a computer                      
              simulation of flagellar beating which has been developed by the                
              Principal Investigator, will lead to a working model of axonemal               
              function.  This work could have significant impact on the                      
              development of novel materials based on biological models.
