Title       : Coupling Between ATP Hydrolysis and H+ Transport by ATPases in the Plasma
               Membrane and Tonoplast of Plant Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1995   
File        : a9220260

Award Number: 9220260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger M. Spanswick rms6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
              99220260  Spanswick    This research is the continuation of a program designed
              with the  long term objective of understanding transport in plant cells in 
              terms of a chemiosmotic scheme for the transport of ions across  plant cell
              membranes.  The specific problem addressed in this  proposal is that raised by
              the observation that the coupling  between ATP hydrolysis and proton transport
              by ATPases from both  the plasma membrane and the tonoplast appears to be
              variable  depending, for example, upon the concentration of anions present in 
              the membrane vesicle suspension.  Hypotheses involving intrinsic u  coupling
              between transport and ATPase activity ("slip") or  electrically driven passive
              proton fluxes ("leak") will be tested  by a variety of methods to account for
              the apparent discrepancy  between anion stimulation of ATPase-mediated proton
              fluxes and of  ATPase activity.  %%%  A proper distribution of salts between
              the inside and outside of a  cell and the inside and outside of individual
              cellular compartments  is critical for the normal function of all cells.  The
              long term  goal of this research is to understand the transport mechanisms for 
              ions such as protons, potassium, and sodium (the components of  salts) across
              the membranes of plant cells to maintain their normal  distributions.  This
              requires understanding the properties of the  individual ion transport systems.
               A useful overall hypothesis for  the mechanism of ion transport is based on a
              scheme in which the  primary active transport systems are enzymes that
              transport protons  (hydrogen ions) across cell membranes against an
              electrochemical  gradient, using energy from hydrolysis of the energy-rich
              molecule,  ATP.  According to this scheme, other ions are transported by way 
              of secondary systems that derive their energy from the  electrochemical
              gradient of protons.  (Transport of calcium ions  across the plasma membrane is
              an exception.)  The specific goal of  this project is to study in some detail
              the relation between ATP  hydro lysis and proton transport across the plant
              cell outer  membrane and the membrane of an intracellular compartment, the 
              tonoplast.  The results of this research should provide a  fundamental piece of
              the puzzle that in the long run will result in  a complete understanding of how
              plants maintain their salt balance.  ***
