Title       : The Nutritional Ecology of the Web of Nephila Clavipes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9220934

Award Number: 9220934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Rankin rankin@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Just as humans generally have to live within a monetary budget, it             
              is reasonable to assume that other organisms must live within an               
              energy budget.  Particularly when resources are limiting, it must              
              be important to utilize resources as efficiently as possible.                  
              Those organisms that do so will presumably be at a competitive and             
              evolutionary advantage compared to others who may be less                      
              efficient.  These ideas seem sensible, but have been difficult to              
              test.  It is often not possible to classify behavioral activities.             
              For example, an animal may be simultaneously involved in several               
              activities including thermoregulating, guarding territory                      
              boundaries, and seeking a mate as well as food.  In addition, it               
              has been difficult to identify the appropriate resources to                    
              measure.  It is also not clear how investing energy in searching               
              for food affects growth rate, and size and age at maturity.                    
              Variation in development rates and pathways can have tremendous                
              impact on the evolution of a species, but few studies have                     
              addressed the nutritional causes that contribute to this variation.            
                                                                                             
              Orb-weaving spiders provide an excellent model system for the study            
              of resource partitioning and the developmental consequences of                 
              shifts in partitioning.  Spiders synthesize their web from                     
              physiologically important compounds such as proteins.  The activity            
              of spinning the orb web and the nutritional investment into the orb            
              can serve no other purpose than prey capture, the resources                    
              allocated to the orb web are unavailable for growth or reproduction            
              during that foraging bout, and all prey capture occurs on the orb              
              web; thus, the web must be maintained through periods of reduced               
              prey capture.  We will examine the nutritional ecology of foraging             
              in the large, widely distributed, orb-weaving spider Nephila                   
              clavipes.  Our experiments will involve NMR and gas chromatographic            
              analysis of orb chemistry using spiders from 3 separate                        
              populations.  The biology of this orb-weaving spider will allow us             
              to clearly distinguish foraging from other activities and to track             
              how different types or resources partitioned between foraging and              
              other activities.  We will also be able to identify resources that,            
              when limiting, necessitate trade-offs between foraging and other               
              activities.  In addition, we can quantify how the investment of                
              resources into foraging affects growth and development under a                 
              variety of environmental conditions, and we can distinguish                    
              patterns that are due to genetic differences from those due to                 
              environmental differences.  This study will address the long-held              
              assumptions of most classical foraging models (that shifts in                  
              foraging investment reflect shifts in resource partitioning and                
              that increased foraging efficiency increases relative fitness) and             
              it will finally allow quantification of resource partitioning                  
              between foraging and growth, permitting investigation of the                   
              precise relationships between variation in foraging investment and             
              variation in developmental programs.
