Title       : Phylogenetic Analysis of Reproductive Isolation in Cyprinid Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1993  
File        : a9220683

Award Number: 9220683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Dowling thomas.dowling.@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    Biodiversity is generated by the process of speciation and               
              maintained by factors preventing interbreeding of distinct species             
              (i.e. reproductive isolation). Reproductive isolation is most                  
              readily studied in situations like that involving the minnow                   
              species, Luxilus cornutus and Luxilus chrysocephalus, which                    
              interbreed                                                                     
              extensively in the eastern United States.  Dr. Thomas Dowling of               
              Arizona State University has been studying genetic interactions                
              between these two hybridizing species, and he has identified                   
              geographic variation in the effectiveness of factors maintaining               
              reproductive discontinuity.  This study expands upon Dr. Dowling's             
              previous research by examining eastern locations where the two                 
              species co-occur and adjacent areas to the west and south,                     
              providing complete characterization of geographic variation in                 
              reproductive isolation.  Sequence variation of the mitochondrial               
              DNA control region is being used to infer phylogenetic                         
              relationships of cornutus and chrysocephalus populations and                   
              identify the                                                                   
              importance of pre- and post-Pleistocene effects in structuring of              
              genetic variation within these species.  Comparisons of these                  
              relationships with the pattern of reproductive isolation will allow            
              for tests of the role of ancestry, dispersal, and geological                   
              history in geographic variation of reproductive isolation.                     
              Likewise, population phylogenies will allow for examination of the             
              role of hydrographic history and dispersal on the distribution of              
              genetic variation within each of these species, providing a test of            
              hypotheses concerning the origin of species diversity in the                   
              Central Highlands region, one of the most diverse faunas in North              
              America.
