Title       : The Integrative Aspects of Fluid and Electrolyte Balance in Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9220241

Award Number: 9220241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stacia A. Sower                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262693             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Dantzler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eldon J. Braun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9232,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed research is a study of the integrative aspects of                 
              fluid and electrolyte balance in birds.  Because of the lack of a              
              urinary bladder, the urine of birds enters the terminal portion of             
              the gastrointestinal tract, the cloaca.  The urine does not remain             
              here, but moves in an oral direction into the rectum where it comes            
              into contact with epithelial tissues capable of active transport.              
              Thus, conditions are created under which the composition of the                
              urine can be modified.  Because of this anatomical and functional              
              relationship, the kidneys of birds do not have sole control of                 
              fluid and electrolyte balance, as is the case for mammals.  In this            
              proposal, I plan to investigate several components of this system.             
              These are:  1) An investigation of the factors that control the                
              movement of urine from the cloaca into the intestine.  Does this               
              movement occur at all times, or does it vary with the composition              
              and volume of the urine?  If it does vary, what parameters are                 
              sensed and how are they detected?  2) An investigation of the                  
              concentrating mechanism of the bird kidney.  What limits the                   
              capacity of the bird kidney to concentrate the urine?  Typically,              
              the kidneys of birds do not concentrate the urine well when                    
              compared to those of mammals.  3) An investigation of binding of               
              uric acid to proteins in the urine of birds.  The concentration of             
              uric acid in the urine of birds greatly exceeds the solubility                 
              limits for this compound.  Crystal formation is prevented by the               
              binding of uric acid to a protein (glycoprotein).  Where does this             
              protein come from and how does it bind uric acid?  Domestic fowl               
              (Gallus domesticus) are to be used as experimental animals to                  
              generate data to test the hypothesis of this proposal.  Data                   
              generated by the proposed research will lead to a better                       
              understanding of the regulation of fluid and electrolyte balance               
              and should help to correct some of the misconceptions about avian              
              osmoregulation.//
