Title       : Genetics of Speciation in Nasonia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1994  
File        : a9220652

Award Number: 9220652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Werren werr@uhura.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   A fundamental question in biology is "How do new species                  
              arises?"  This project will investigate the genetic  basis of                  
              reproductive isolation in two species in the parasitic wasp genus              
              Nasonia.  Nasonia is a genetically tractable system with two                   
              important features, (a) symbiotic bacteria (Wolbachia) cause                   
              partial reproductive incompatibility between the species and (b)               
              genetic incompatibilities also occur between nuclear and                       
              cytoplasmic components, some of which show simple inheritance                  
              patterns.                                                                      
                   The role of bacterial symbionts in causing reproductive                   
              incompatibility is one of interest because bacteria could represent            
              a mechanism for rapid speciation in insects.  This research is                 
              designed to assess the potential role of bacteria in promoting                 
              and/or maintaining reproductive isolation between the species.  The            
              distribution and degree of incompatibility within and between                  
              species will be quantified.  Experiments will determine the                    
              probability of interspecies hybridization in the presence or                   
              absence of the bacteria.  Using molecular markers, Dr. Werren will             
              also determine whether few or  many genes are involved in the                  
              genetic and cytoplasmic incompatibility between the two species.               
                   Results of these studies will help reveal the genetic                     
              mechanisms by which species diverge from each other and whether                
              novel interactions, such as bacterial-insect associations, could               
              play a role in speciation.  Findings could have practical                      
              implications to conservation biology and preservation of biological            
              diversity.***
