Title       : The Antarctic Ice Edge Bloom: Its Importance to Intermediate Trophic Levels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1994      
File        : a9220493

Award Number: 9220493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Torres   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gabriel A. Vargo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Hopkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              The Antarctic ice edge as a frontal system has different                       
              implications for different trophic levels.  During summer,                     
              primary producers and microheterotrophs flourish in the meltwater              
              lens that is created in the euphotic zone at the retreating ice                
              edge.  In contrast, for longer-lived consumer species with                     
              generation times of a year or more, any enhanced standing stocks               
              at the ice edge must be the result of immigration to the ice edge              
              or production in place.  This research will test the hypothesis                
              that the summer ice edge bloom acts as a biological magnet to                  
              concentrate metazoan consumers and as a southward moving                       
              generator facilitating growth and reproduction in zooplankton                  
              species.  Research conducted in the Scotia-Weddell Sea region                  
              during the austral summer will focus on the distribution,                      
              abundance, and biological activity of zooplankton and micronekton              
              in the upper 1000m of the water column in the open water,                      
              marginal ice zone, and pack ice regions of the study area.  The                
              physical environment will be described; the extent and activity                
              of the ice edge phytoplankton bloom will be mapped using in vivo               
              fluourescence and estimates of primary production will be made.                
              Zooplankton/micronekton community structure will be characterized              
              using data from an optical plankton sampler, as well as nets and               
              trawls.  Biological activity of zooplankton will be evaluated                  
              through studies of metabolic rate, grazing rate, egg production                
              rate, diet, and metabolic enzyme activity.  The resultant data                 
              will describe zooplankton/micronekton community structure, major               
              trophic relationships, grazing impact, and patterns of energy                  
              utilization for species living in the study area, showing clearly              
              the impact of the ice edge bloom on the intermediate trophic                   
              levels.
