Title       : Envelope Components of Gliding Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1994  
File        : a9220647

Award Number: 9220647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Leadbetter   (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Godchaux, III  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Many bacteria are able to move over solid surfaces (often these              
              are biological polymers such as agar, cellulose, chitin, pectin, or            
              xylan) by a process termed gliding.  This is an important aspect of            
              these organisms' central role in the mineralization processes which            
              so many "higher" forms of life are unable to effect, but upon which            
              they are dependent.  The mechanism by which the gliding bacteria               
              accomplish this translocation remains a mystery; however, the                  
              sulfonolipids first isolated and described in this laboratory are              
              the first molecules to be recognized as necessary (in the                      
              cytophagas an flexibacters) for gliding motility.  A cell-surface              
              polysaccharide also plays an accessory role.  The current focus on             
              the features of the cell envelope that are important in cell                   
              translocation will include a peptidoglycan-associated protein and              
              other cell envelope features that change when a particular                     
              nongliding mutant regains, reversibly, the ability to glide.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              The question of how gliding bacteria glide has been one of the most            
              intractable problems in microbiology.  There are no morphological              
              clues to the mechanism of gliding.  A number of laboratories have              
              been working on the problem for many years, using both genetic and             
              biochemical approaches, with minimal success.  The Leadbetter                  
              laboratory made a breakthrough discovery when it was found that a              
              particular nongliding mutant of Cytophaga johnsonae had a defect in            
              the pathway of biosynthesis of a novel sulfonolipid, and that the              
              nongliding phenotype could be reversed by the addition of the                  
              appropriate metabolic precursor (cysteate) to the culture medium.              
              This project is a biochemical followup to that seminal discovery,              
              and holds the promise of actually deciphering the nature of the                
              bacterial molecule(s) involved in the gliding mechanism.
