Title       : Molecular analysis of Transcription Factors Regulating phyA Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1995   
File        : a9220161

Award Number: 9220161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles D. Liarakos                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259188             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Quail quail@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Phytochrome is a regulatory master switch that controls gene                   
              expression in response to light.  The long term goal of the                    
              proposed research is to define the molecular mechanism underlying              
              this regulation.  The rapid transcriptional repression that                    
              phytochrome imposes on its own phyA genes provides an excellent                
              model system for this purpose.  The specific objectives of this                
              proposal are: (a) to identify and isolate recombinant clones                   
              encoding DNA-binding proteins that recognize functionally defined              
              cis-acting elements in phyA promoters; (b) to delineate the                    
              functional domains of such cloned factors; (c) to determine the                
              molecular mechanism by which a recently identified repressor                   
              factor, RF1, disrupts phyA transcription in response to phytochrome            
              activation.  Experimental approaches will include: (a) screening               
              expression libraries with oligonucleotide probes representing                  
              functionally defined regulatory elements for isolation of cDNA                 
              clones encoding the cognate factors; (b) in vitro binding assays to            
              define the DNA-recognition domains of these factors; (c) gene                  
              transfer assays to delineate nuclear localization sequences; (d)               
              yeast transfection and in vitro transcription assays with chimeric             
              fusion proteins to define transcriptional activation or repression             
              domains in these factors.  The significance of this research is                
              that it will help define the mechanism by which a central                      
              regulatory molecule controls gene expression.  Because phytochrome             
              appears to have no molecular counterpart in other eukaryotes,                  
              elucidation of this mechanism will broaden our understanding of how            
              eukaryotic cells regulate gene expression in response to                       
              environmental stimuli.                                                         
              %%%%                                                                           
              Plant respond to light by turning on genes that are involved with              
              growth, photosynthesis, and other functions.  A key regulatory                 
              molecule in plant cells that is responsible for this effect is                 
              phytochrome.  This molecule interacts with proteins and genes to               
              activate genetic messages for growth, etc.  To understand the                  
              molecular mechanism it is necessary to identify the regions of the             
              gene which are affected, and the proteins which are involved in the            
              activation process.  These studies will lead to greater                        
              understanding of how to regulate plant growth.
