Title       : Selection on Integrated Physiological Traits and Growth in Annual Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1993   
File        : a9220873

Award Number: 9220873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. McGraw   (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith Garbutt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Plants from high resource levels are typically fast-growers               
              and rapid consumers of resources, while plants from low resource               
              levels are slow-growers with conservative, efficient use of                    
              resources.  In the proposed set of studies we will be determining              
              the degree to which this general pattern holds for resources                   
              ranging from nutrients and water (below ground resources for                   
              plants) to light (an above ground resource).  Our experiments will             
              attempt to resolve some knotty questions about the general pattern             
              of adaptation to low and high resources:  Are the relationships                
              described above caused by the environment, or is there a genetic               
              basis to them?  What genetic tradeoffs prevent simultaneous                    
              adaptation to both low and high resources?  (i.e., why shouldn't a             
              plant be both efficient and rapidly-growing?)  Finally, can we                 
              demonstrate that natural selection acts on traits relevant to                  
              resource use, resource acquisition and growth in natural                       
              environments?                                                                  
                   The results of this research will have direct relevance to the            
              impacts of humans on natural plant populations because the                     
              environmental perturbations caused by humans often directly or                 
              indirectly affect resource availability.  In addition, our research            
              is directed toward improving the mechanistic understanding of                  
              natural selection in wild plant populations, thus linking plant                
              physiological ecology to plant population biology, two fields which            
              have developed largely in isolation over the past three decades.//
