Title       : Plant Viral and Viroid Induced dsRNA-Dependent Kinase Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1995   
File        : a9220617

Award Number: 9220617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don A. Roth rothdon@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Plant viruses and viroids are minimal pathogens and depend upon                
              interaction with key host components during pathogenesis.  The                 
              temporal and spatial regulation off host factors during initial                
              host-pathogen interactions is conditioned by host recognition of               
              viral/viroid signals and the subsequent transduction of the signal             
              leading to metabolic alterations.  The processes by which these                
              agents manipulate host plant proteins are unknown.  Protein                    
              phosphorylation-dephosphorylation cascades are important post-                 
              translational processes which serve to rapidly amplify and                     
              transduce specific developmental and environmental signals and                 
              coordinate metabolic responses.  This laboratory has characterized             
              a plant-encoded protein kinase (p68) whose autophosphorylation is              
              induced in viral and viroid infected plants and in noninfected                 
              tissue extracts supplemented with viral dsRNA and artificial dsRNA.            
              The response is signal dependent and occurs in the initial phases              
              of pathogenesis.  Studies to date have emphasized biochemical and              
              immunological characterization of p68.  In order to better                     
              understand the role of p68 it is necessary to begin analysis at the            
              gene level.  The investigator has chosen to use both virus- and                
              viroid-host models.  Each has distinct attributes.  This project               
              will further characterize the significance of p68 activity in host-            
              pathogen interactions and in healthy plants by isolating,                      
              sequencing and studying the cDNA and genomic clones of p68.  The               
              functional significance also may be indicated by determining the               
              phosphorylation of p68 in tissues challenged with viroid mutants               
              which vary in both RNA stability and pathogenicity.  The role of               
              p68 may also be indicated by expression of sense and antisense                 
              constructs in transgenic plants.  p68 appears to be the only plant             
              protein thus far described that is associated with dsRNA dependent             
              protein kinase activity.  The viral/viroid-plant systems are                   
              excellent models to define the significance of phosphorylation in              
              host-pathogen interactions as well as to study the role of                     
              phosphorylation in healthy plants and how that function is altered             
              during infection.                                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              Addition or removal of phosphate groups (phosphorylation,                      
              dephosphorylation) from specific proteins plays an important role              
              in the recognition and amplification of environmental and                      
              biological signals in all organisms.  This process may also have a             
              central role in the way plants perceive and respond to signals                 
              generated during attack by pathogens or wounding.  The goal of this            
              research is to determine the role of protein phosphorylation in                
              virus-plant interactions.  It will focus on a specific protein,                
              "p68", that catalyzes the addition of phosphate to itself in the               
              presence of double stranded RNA from plant viruses.  The role of               
              p68 in normal plant physiology and during viral infection will be              
              studied.  The processes by which viruses manipulate normal proteins            
              after they infect plants are largely unknown.  The results of this             
              research should be an important contribution to basic understanding            
              of how plants respond to viruses.
