Title       : Synthesis of Photolabile Signalling Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9220082

Award Number: 9220082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery W. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1114      CELLULAR SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The overall objective of this project is to develop photosensitive             
              compounds that can be converted to important biological molecules              
              by irradiation with light.  Analysis of cellular processes is                  
              greatly facilitated by the ability to photo-release a specific                 
              biological molecule rapidly and uniformly within a cell.                       
              Diffusional delays are overcome, permitting time-resolved                      
              measurements, and the potential exists for good spatial resolution.            
              The emphasis will be to develop photo-release technology for                   
              biological molecules hypothesized to play a role in cell                       
              signalling.  This research will involve the synthesis,                         
              photochemical characterization, and biological characterization of             
              photolabile derivatives of inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphates,                
              diacylglycerols, and peptide inhibitors of calmodulin.  A long-term            
              goal is to elucidate the roles of these molecules in signal                    
              transduction cascades that control muscle contraction, although the            
              techniques should be applicable to a wide variety of cell types.               
              Chemical methods will also be developed for incorporation of                   
              phosphate compounds into intact cells.  Used in combination, the               
              photoactivation technique and methods for incorporation of charged             
              compounds into intact cells will permit controlled perturbation of             
              intracellular processes in living cells.  The research will provide            
              new insights into structure-function relationships in bio-                     
              molecules, the photochemistry of nitro-aromatic and related                    
              compounds, and ultimately, the dynamics of intracellular processes             
              that participate in cellular signalling.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              The overall goal of this project is to develop photosensitive                  
              compounds that can be converted to important biological molecules              
              by irradiation with light.  Analysis of cellular processes is                  
              greatly facilitated by the ability to photo-release a specific                 
              biological molecule rapidly and uniformly within a cell. The                   
              emphasis will be to develop photo-release technology for biological            
              molecules hypothesized to play a role in cell signalling. A longer-            
              term goal is to elucidate the roles of these molecules in signal               
              transduction cascades that control muscle contraction, although the            
              techniques should be applicable to a wide variety of cell types.               
              This research will provide new insights into structure-function                
              relationships in bio-molecules, the ultimately, into the dynamics              
              of intracellular processes that participate in cellular signalling.
