Title       : Lineage-specific Cell Communication During Sea Urchin Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9220242

Award Number: 9220242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Andrew Cameron acameron@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric H. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9118,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In the sea urchin embryo there are five territories of invariant               
              lineage - the prospective aboral ectoderm, the prospective oral                
              ectoderm the vegetal plate, the skeletogenic mesenchyme and the                
              small micromeres.  In addition to a unique pattern of gene                     
              expression, these territories are defined by individual cell                   
              lineage histories and generation of distinct cell types.  The                  
              lineages forming these territories are completely segregated from              
              each other by the 6th cleavage and spatially restricted gene                   
              expression begins one or two divisions later.  In all the                      
              territories except the skeletogenic mesenchyme, the founder cells              
              that are the progenitors of each territory achieve unique patterns             
              of gene expression by means of intracellular interactions with                 
              other cells.  The following studies are designed to determine the              
              lineage and fate of founder cells for specific cell types within               
              territories; to investigate the  specific functional significance              
              of interactions with neighboring cells in establishing certain of              
              the  territories; and to test the role of major signal transduction            
              systems in the specification of territories and cell types.  The               
              proposed experiments fall into the following categories:  1.                   
              Vegetal plate and neuronal lineage tracing with caged flourescein-             
              dextran.  2. Cell lineage and cell interaction studied by means of             
              cell ablation.  3. Molecular characterization of abnormal                      
              phenotypes derived from introduction of a foreign serotonin ligand-            
              receptor system.  4. Developmental consequences of ectopic                     
              stimulation of the PI signal transduction system in specific                   
              blastomeres of known lineage (using the serotonin receptor).  5.               
              The effects of elevated levels of second messengers in whole                   
              embryos and individual blastomeres.  6. Developmental effects of               
              the expression of foreign receptor kinases in whole embryos and                
              individual cells.
