Title       : PhosphorImager System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1993      
File        : a9220534

Award Number: 9220534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur D. Riggs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9126,
Abstract    :
              We wish to purchase a PhosphorImager instrument and                            
              establish a core facility to measure radioactivity with the                    
              greater sensitivity and resolution provided by storage                         
              phosphor technology.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Several investigators at the Beckman Research Institute of                     
              the City of Hope have been active in the development of a                      
              new technique called ligation-mediated PCR (LMPCR) which,                      
              without cloning, gives sequence-level information about DNA                    
              nicks and subtleties of DNA structure in specific genes in                     
              total mammalian DNA.  The procedure combines the use of                        
              nested oligonucleotides for specificity and exponential PCR                    
              for sensitivity.  At our institute LMPCR is already being                      
              used for a number of purposes, among which are: (i) Genomic                    
              sequencing: (ii) studies on in vivo chromatin structure,                       
              including the vivo location or proteins on DNA and the                         
              effect of these proteins on DNA structure: (iii) in vivo                       
              formation and repair of chemically induced DNA adducts; and                    
              (iv) in vivo formation and repair of UV and oxygen radical-                    
              induced DNA adducts.  The DNA adducts being studied are                        
              mutagenic and thus these studies are directly relevant to                      
              mutagenesis and cancer; the genomic sequencing studies are                     
              relevant to the Gerome Project; and the studies on protein                     
              footprints and chromatin structure are relevant to mammalian                   
              gene regulation and thus most disease.  All of the LMPCR                       
              studies are presently limited by difficulties in                               
              quantitation.  This is caused by the limited sensitivity and                   
              rage of responded of film. and by limitations in resolution                    
              between adjacent bands if alternatives to film are used.                       
              The requested equipment will enable the potential of LMPCR                     
              to be more fully reached.                                                      
                                                                                             
              In addition to these novel, specific projects, the storage                     
              phosphor technology used by the PhosphorImager allows a true                   
              multiuser facility to be set up which will enhance the                         
              sensitivity, resolution, and accuracy of a great many of the                   
              standard experimental techniques such as Southern blots that                   
              are now in wide in use in virtually every laboratory at out                    
              institute .  The rate  limiting step, exposure of the                          
              storage phosphor screen, is done in each user's laboratory,                    
              and scanning the screen, with capture of the digitized                         
              image, only takes a few minutes on the core facility                           
              instrument.   Thus, the bottleneck of current alternatives                     
              to film is eliminated and one instrument is able to service                    
              many users.
