Title       : Biogenesis of Natural Rubber in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1995      
File        : a9220417

Award Number: 9220417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph A. Backhaus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9108,9109,9161,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              World economies depend on the availability of natural rubber for               
              industrial purposes.  Despite its economic importance                          
              surprisingly little is known about rubber biogenesis in higher                 
              plants.  Rubber is produced in numerous species but mechanisms of              
              its synthesis are poorly understood.  The enzyme rubber                        
              transferase (RuT) (E.C. 2.5.1.20), a prenyltransferase, causes                 
              the unique cis-polymerization of isoprene responsible for rubber               
              accumulation in plants.  Our studies will protein (RPP), the most              
              abundant protein of guayule rubber particles.  The function of                 
              RPP in rubber biogenesis will be addressed because its abundance               
              suggests that it plays an important role either in biosynthesis                
              stabilization, solubilization or trafficking of rubber particles.              
              Prevailing evidence suggesting that RPP is guayule RuT must be                 
              confirmed with newly available molecular probes.  A cDNA clone                 
              for RPP, recently identified in the lab, will be used to                       
              elucidate its role in rubber biogenesis.  Full-length RPP clones               
              will be examined for the effect of their expression in various                 
              heterologous and homologous systems.  Biochemical analysis and                 
              enzymatic assays will compare RPP expression with putative RuT                 
              and prenyl transferase activity in those systems.  Partial clones              
              of RPP expressed as fusion proteins in E. Coli will be used to                 
              generate de-glycosylated RPP Suitable for antibody production.                 
              Antisera prepared against recombinant RPP will be used several                 
              fold; first, to measure inhibition of prenyltransferase activity               
              in in vitro assays; second, to detect for the presence of RPP-                 
              liked proteins in other rubber-producing  species and finally,                 
              for immunocytochemical studies in guayule and in transgenic                    
              plants.  If RPP proves to be RuT, then engineering of rubber                   
              synthesis may be possible in other systems.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The production of rubber results from chemical processing of the               
              sap from the rubber tree which cannot be grown in the USA.                     
              However another plant native to the USA, guayule, produces rubber              
              but it is difficult to extract the compound easily from the                    
              plant.  Rubber is an interesting chemical biomaterial and finding              
              and characterizing the enzyme responsible for its synthesis is                 
              the research which is funded here.  The isolation of the rubber                
              particle protein in the plant and its purification will lead to                
              molecular biological studies fundamental to producing rubber and               
              related compounds in greater yields and in other plants.
