Title       : Plant Protein Farnesyltransferase: Molecular and FunctionalAnalyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1993      
File        : a9220394

Award Number: 9220394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhenbiao Yang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carole L. Cramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Protein farnesyltransferase (FTase) is a heterodimeric enzyme that             
              post-translationally modifies proteins by attaching an isoprenyl               
              moiety to a C-terminal cysteine.  This modification, identified in             
              yeast and animals, is required for membrane association and in vivo            
              activities of many regulatory proteins involved in cell cycle                  
              control and differentiation.  The major focus of the proposed                  
              project is to elucidate the role(s) of FTase and protein                       
              prenylation in mediating plant developmental processes.  In recent             
              experiments, a cDNA clone encoding a pea FTase beta subunit has                
              been cloned and characterized, protein prenylation has been                    
              demonstrated in plant cells, and FTase transcript levels have been             
              analyzed in apical buds of pea seedlings and suspension-cultured               
              tomato cells.  In both experimental systems, a rapid, transient                
              increase in FTase mRNA was detected preceding the onset of active              
              cell division.  These results are consistent with the hypothesis               
              that FTase mediates the activity of critical components of the                 
              signal transduction pathways controlling cell division in plants,              
              analogous to its key role in cell cycle control in fungal and                  
              mammalian systems.  To test this hypothesis, a cDNA for the FTase              
              alpha subunit will be cloned from pea and biochemical and                      
              physiological properties of pea FTase will be delineated using both            
              in vitro assays and in vivo plant cells transiently expressing                 
              protein prenylation substrates.  Detailed analyses of the temporal             
              and spatial patterns of pea Ftase gene expression will be performed            
              to provide clues as to its functional significance in plant                    
              development.  Plant cells and stably transformed plants, inhibited             
              in Ftase expression by antisense RNAs or competitive peptide                   
              inhibitor, will be monitored for phenotypic, cellular, and                     
              molecular changes to directly assess the role of FTase in                      
              regulating plant cell division and differentiation.                            
              %%%                                                                            
              It has recently been discovered that certain proteins are modified,            
              under some physiological conditions, by covalent attachment of                 
              isoprenyl groups to a specific C-terminal amino acid.  Isoprenyl               
              groups are a type of organic molecule that tends to be more soluble            
              in fats or oils than in water.  This modification, then, has the               
              effect of allowing proteins that would otherwise remain dissolved              
              in the watery cytoplasm of a cell to attach to cellular membranes.             
              which are composed of fatty materials.  It is now becoming clear               
              that the association of particular proteins with membranes is a                
              critical event in a chain of biochemical events that regulate cell             
              division, membrane fusion, and a variety of other cell biological              
              processes.  This important regulatory mechanism has been described             
              and is actively being studied in mammalian cells and in yeast, but             
              until now nothing has been known of its possible existence or role             
              in higher plants.  This is the subject of this research.  These                
              investigators have identified the gene for one part of the enzyme              
              that carries out addition of isoprenyl groups to proteins in peas              
              and will use techniques of molecular biology to characterize the               
              enzyme further and to study its possible function in plants.
