Title       : RUI:Insertion of Protease-Binding Loops into Interleukin-18
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1993   
File        : a9220209

Award Number: 9220209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adele J. Wolfson awolfson@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9229,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to determine whether the reactive                  
              region (a loop) from one protein can maintain its structure and,               
              therefore its function in a new protein environment.  The specific             
              loop to be examined is the elastase-binding loop from the serpin               
              (serine protease inhibitor) al-antitrypsin (AT).  This ten-residue             
              region has been successfully inserted into Interleukin-1b (IL-1b),             
              replacing the turn connecting the fourth and fifth b-sheets.                   
              Because the original insertion placed the loop into part of a b                
              sheet rather than entirely in the desired turn, new hybrids will be            
              constructed by cassette mutagenesis.  This loop, the inhibitor's               
              reactive center, is of particular interest, since its intact                   
              structure has not been determined; comparison to other (non-                   
              inhibitory) members of the serpin family suggests that it may take             
              on the form of a flexible a-helix.  The structure of the reactive              
              loops from a different class of serine-protease inhibitors,                    
              typified by soybean trypsin inhibitor, will be compared to that                
              obtained for AT.  The integrity of the loop will assessed by                   
              assaying for anti-protease activity in the recombinant proteins.               
              Structures will be determined by X-ray crystallography and nuclear             
              magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR).  Previous results indicate              
              that at least some of the functions of the loop are maintained                 
              within the new protein. IL-1B appears to be an excellent scaffold              
              on which to insert heterologous loops, allowing construction of                
              many useful recombinant proteins.                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              This project has the potential to answer useful and interesting                
              questions about the structure of proteins in general and protease              
              inhibitors in particular, and to address the problem of prediction             
              of protein structure.  It is also ideally suited for training                  
              undergraduates in research.
