Title       : Anion Exchange Mechanisms in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1995      
File        : a9220823

Award Number: 9220823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Maloney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns OxlT, a novel transport protein in                       
              Oxalobacter formigenes, a gram-negative anaerobic bacterium.  OxlT             
              catalyzes the exchange of external divalent oxalate for internal               
              monovalent formate.  This electrogenic exchange, along with proton             
              consumption during intracellular decarboxylation, constitutes an               
              indirect proton pump that generates a proton-motive force as the               
              cell extracts "metabolic energy" from oxalate.  It appears that                
              this pattern is replicated by other reactions in other cells, and              
              that indirect proton pumps may be common in microbiology.  To                  
              understand this event at the molecular level, we propose to study              
              OxlT, the antiport protein.  Presently, we have methods to purify              
              and reconstitute OxlT, and we have raised anti-OxlT polyclonal                 
              antibodies that will aid us in cloning the oxlT gene.  With                    
              purified protein and a cloned gene, we will raise peptide-specific             
              antibodies and construct gene fusions to aid in the determination              
              of transport protein structure.  Site-directed mutagenesis will be             
              used to further characterize the structure/function properties of              
              the enzyme together with biochemical and biophysical methods to                
              determine the minimal functional unit (monomeric or dimeric), .-               
              helical content and the binding properties of the protein.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              We have shown that the microorganism, Oxalobacter formigenes, has              
              a novel mechanism to harvest energy from its environment.  This                
              cell uses a specific membrane protein, termed OxlT, to bring                   
              divalent oxalate molecules into the cell in exchange for monovalent            
              formate, which is simultaneously pumped out of the cell.  The                  
              formate, which is required to complete the exchange cycle is                   
              generated by degradation of oxalate after the molecule is brought              
              into the cell.  The asymmetric exchange of negatively charged ions             
              results in the formation of a membrane potential across the cell               
              membrane, that the cell can then use to make additional energy and             
              grow.  At the heart of this new mechanism of energy formation is               
              the membrane protein, OxlT.  We will use the tools of molecular                
              biology (cloning, mutagenesis), immunology (specific antibodies).              
              biochemistry (purification and reconstitution) and biophysics                  
              (spectroscopy) to study the structural and functional properties of            
              the enzyme to help us understand how such an unusual membrane                  
              "pump" protein, such as this one, operates to provide extra energy             
              for the cells.
