Title       : Production of Pure, Intimately Mixed Silicon Nitride/SiliconCarbide Powders by a
               Novel Gas Phase Combustion Synthesis Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1998   
File        : a9220976

Award Number: 9220976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hartwell F. Calcote   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AeroChem Research Labs
	      P. O. Box 12
	      Princeton, NJ  085420012    609/921-7070

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9165,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Fine, ultrapure, uniform, loosely agglomerated particles are                   
              desirable starting materials for advanced ceramics.  Mixtures of               
              silicon nitride and silicon carbide are particularly valuable.  In             
              this program, the use of silane/acetylene/ammonia flames to produce            
              silicon nitride/silicon carbide powders will be studied. Specific              
              tasks include: (1) Experimental determination of flame stability               
              limits on a flat-flame burner for selected mixtures of silane,                 
              ammonia, and acetylene as a function of unburned gas velocity;                 
              (2) Thermodynamic determination of expected flame temperatures and             
              product yields as functions of input compositions, pressure, and               
              initial temperature; (3) Determination of the effects of operating             
              conditions on the properties of the powder produced, specifically              
              what operating conditions devermine whether the individual                     
              particles are a mixture of the carbide and nitride or whether the              
              nitride and carbide are in separate particles; (4) Determination               
              of the product properties (chemical composition, purity, particle              
              size distribution, morphology); and (5) Interpretation of the                  
              results in terms of mechanisms and commercialization potential.                
                                                                                             
              High quality ultrafine silicon nitride/silicon carbide powders have            
              a large potential market in the preparation of advanced ceramic                
              materials via sintering or hot pressing.  Progress in production               
              of advanced ceramics is currently limited by the unavailability of             
              a US-made high quality powder.  In addition, an understanding of               
              the mechanisms involved in this process will have broad                        
              implications for combustion synthesis (especially of mixed                     
              materials) in general.
