Title       : US-Czech Joint Fund Research on Gravity Theories and Black Holes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9220997

Award Number: 9220997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 1,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: JIRI NIEDERLE   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Czechoslovak Academy Scien
	      Heyrovskeho Sq 2 1888
	      ,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under this US-Czech Joint Fund research                                        
              project, Dr. Jiri Niederle, Institute of                                       
              Physics, Czech Academy of Sciences, and Dr.                                    
              Karel V. Kuchar, University of Utah, will                                      
              examine three topics in quantum theories of                                    
              gravity and black hole astrophysics:  1) Gauge                                 
              formulation of gravity theories, 2) Fermion-                                   
              boson quantum equivalence, 3) Minisuperspace                                   
              quantization, and 4) Black hole electrodynamics                                
              and the membrane paradigm.                                                     
                                                                                             
              In gravity theories, the researchers expect to                                 
              clarify the status of gravity or supergravity                                  
              as a gauge system, to extend the fermion-boson                                 
              equivalence from 1+1 to 3+1 dimensions and to                                  
              provide the general framework for                                              
              minisuperspace quantization and apply it to                                    
              spacetimes with horizons.  In relativistic                                     
              astrophysics, they intend to clarify the energy                                
              generation close to the horizon of a rotating                                  
              black hole in simplified dynamo models of                                      
              active galactic nuclei.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This research in theoretical physics fulfills                                  
              the program objective of advancing scientific                                  
              knowledge by enabling leading experts in the                                   
              U.S. and Czech Republic to combine                                             
              complementary talents and pool research                                        
              resources in areas of strong mutual interest                                   
              and competence.  Funds for the project are                                     
              awarded through the US-Czech Joint Fund,                                       
              Prague, in accordance with established                                         
              guidelines.
