Title       : Molecular Analysis of a Nucelar Mutation Affecting Chloroplast Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9220774

Award Number: 9220774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Martienssen martiens@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
                   High chlorophyll flourescent (hcf) mutants of higher plants               
              represent a class of nuclear genes required for the development of             
              photosynthetically active chloroplasts.  Their products may include            
              nuclear-encoded components of the photosynthetic apparatus, as well            
              as enzymes and regulatory genes required for co-factor biosynthesis            
              and plastid gene expression.  Some hcf mutants have pleiotropic                
              effects on membrane protein assembly and thylakoid organization.               
              hcf106 is an example of such a mutation in maize:  The Hcf106 gene             
              has been cloned by transposon tagging, and the gene product shown              
              to be an integral chloroplast membrane protein.  It has a single               
              transmembrane domain, a potential nucleotide binding site, but no              
              other homology to known proteins.  Thylakoid membranes from mutant             
              chloroplasts have lost their characteristic lateral heterogeneity,             
              and fail to accumulate a subset of thylakoid membrane proteins.                
              Analysis of derivative alleles, hypoploids and double mutants will             
              be used to genetically define the hcf106 lesion.                               
              Immunolocalization by suborganellar fractionation and immuno-                  
              electron microscopy will be used to investigate the possible roles             
              of this protein in thylakoid assembly.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Photosynthesis is the basis of life on the planet Earth and a                  
              complete understanding of the process as well as chloroplast                   
              biogenesis is one of the most important goals of biological                    
              research.
