Title       : Molecular Biology and Development of Xenopus Laevis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9220662

Award Number: 9220662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41666              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Support is requested for an intensive 9-day course entitled                    
              "Molecular Biology and Development of Xenopus laevis".  This course            
              will be offered annually in the spring as part of Cold Spring                  
              Harbor Laboratory's post-graduate education program.  The course               
              will provide extensive laboratory exposure to the biology and                  
              manipulation of embryos from the frog Xenopus laevis.  Xenopus is              
              a vertebrate uniquely suited for studies of early development                  
              because large numbers of embryos, from fertilization onward, can               
              easily be obtained.  Development is rapid, and the large size of               
              the embryos facilitates their micromanipulation to allow analysis              
              of the role of cell interactions ("inductions") in development, in             
              ways that are not feasible in mammalian embryos, such as mice.  The            
              course is particularly suited for those who have a current training            
              in molecular biology and knowledge of developmental biology, but               
              have had no experience with Xenopus.  Five main areas will be                  
              covered both in the laboratory and by expert lecturers.  These are:            
              (i) care and handling of adults and embryos, (ii) stages of                    
              embryonic development and anatomy (iii) whole mount in situ                    
              hybridization, (iv) microinjection of eggs and oocytes, (v)                    
              microinjection of blastula and gastrula stages, and induction                  
              assays.
