Title       : Coordination of Leaf Physiology and Morphology with Variations in Resources
               Available to Two Neotropical Tree Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1995     
File        : a9220759

Award Number: 9220759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen S. Mulkey   (Principal Investigator current)
              S. J. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9232,EGCH,ENVI,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              We propose to examine the hypothesis that plant resources are                  
              allocated to maximize carbon gain and productivity under the                   
              constraints imposed by the seasonality of moisture and irradiance.             
              Lifespan, mass per area, nitrogen concentration, area per plant                
              mass, area-based construction costs, and assimilation capacity of              
              leaves will be examined as determinants of productivity (relative              
              growth rate) during the dry season and wet season in Panama. These             
              features have been hypothesized to be mutually supporting,                     
              interdependent, and casually interrelated. Variation in leaf                   
              features will be documented over light gradients within the                    
              canopies of mature evergreen  tropical species, and among seedlings            
              of these species in an experimental common garden with a factorial             
              design of contrasting levels of light and water. These species                 
              encompass considerable variation in leaf longevity, while producing            
              new leaves in seasons of contrasting water and light availability.             
              As such they allow the examination of specific predictions about               
              how functional characters vary in response to variation in the                 
              opportunity for carbon gain. Studies will be conducted at the                  
              Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI) using a construction            
              crane for access to the canopy of a tropical dry forest. Garden                
              treatments and canopy trees will be followed for three years. These            
              will be the first comprehensive data for within-canopy                         
              physiological variation, and the first comparison of seedlings and             
              canopy trees for leaf longevity and function in tropical species.              
              These studies will demonstrate the potential for selection to                  
              produce coordinated responses among leaf characters to short-term              
              and long-term variation in resources. If functional relationships              
              among these features prove to be tightly coordinated, such                     
              physiological syndromes will provide an empirical link between leaf            
              and whole-plant processes of growth and reproduction. The canopies             
              of tropical trees provide some of the steepest resource gradients              
              known with respect to light, humidity, leaf water, and possibly                
              nutrient, and thus are a model system to assess the relationships              
              among functional characteristics. Because of the great concern over            
              tropical deforestation, there is a pressing need to understand                 
              physiological syndromes associated with species capable of rapid               
              regeneration.
