Title       : US-Czechoslovakia Joint Fund Research on Semantics of English and Czech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1993      
File        : a9220955

Award Number: 9220955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : December 15,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva Hajicova HAJICOVA@CSPGUK11  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Charles University
	      Maloslanske nam 25 118 000 Praha
	      , CZ  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This U.S.-Czechoslovakia Joint Fund award is for research on                   
              "Semantics of English and Czech" by Dr. Eva Hajicova of the                    
              Institute for Formal & Applied Linguistics, Charles University,                
              Prague, in cooperation with Dr. Barbara H. Partee of the                       
              University of Massachusetts-Amherst.  The researchers will focus               
              on theoretical and descriptive issues in the comparative semantics             
              of English and Czech, particularly the relation between formal                 
              semantic structure and informational structure.  The collaboration             
              builds on prior work by Hajicova and her colleagues in Prague on               
              topic-focus articulation and functional sentence perspective, and by           
              Partee and her colleagues in the U.S. on cross-linguistic semantics            
              of quantification and related issues in formal semantics.  One                 
              central issue to be investigated is the extent to which theoretical            
              differences between the approaches to semantics developed in the               
              two countries may partially reflect differences in those aspects of            
              meaning and information structure that are grammaticized in                    
              English and Czech.  Results would have important consequences                  
              for semantic theory and semantic typology, as well as practical                
              benefits for both traditional and computational applications in the            
              domains of translation, pedagogy, and information retrieval.                   
                                                                                             
              This research in linguistics fulfills the program objective of                 
              advancing science by enabling leading experts in the United States             
              and Czechoslovakia to combine complementary talents and pool                   
              research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and                      
              competence.
