Title       : U.S.-Hungary Joint Fund Research on Quantitative Structure- Activity
               Relationships for Mutant Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1993      
File        : a9220335

Award Number: 9220335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : February 1,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabor Naray-Szabo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eotvos Lorand University
	      
	      Budapest, HU  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Hungary Joint Fund research project on "Quantitative                   
              Structure-Activity Relationships and Computer Simulation Studies               
              for the Prediction of Mutant Enzyme Spec. QSAR for Mutant                      
              Enzymes" will be conducted by Dr. Gabor Naray-Szabo of Eotvos                  
              University in cooperation with Dr. Arieh Warshel of the University             
              of Southern California.  The similis simili gaudet principle,                  
              formulated recently after experimental work, states that similar               
              (ionic-ionic, polar-polar, and apolar-apolar) side-chain interactions          
              between a mutant enzyme and its substrate contribute more to the               
              transition-state stabilization than dissimilar (ionic-polar, polar-            
              apolar, etc.) ones.  The researchers postulate that the effect can be          
              related to electrostatic and hydrophobic enzyme-substrate                      
              complementarity.  To understand the phenomenon in detail and to                
              check the general validity of the hypothesis, the researchers intend           
              to perform both simple empirical and sophisticated molecular                   
              dynamics calculations on various enzyme-substrate systems and                  
              analyze energy terms in order to select those which may be                     
              interpreted as determinant of the hydrophobic complementarity.                 
              The combination of the similis simili gaudet hypothesis coming                 
              from Hungary and the simulation methods developed and applied                  
              by the American side should contribute to our knowledge of                     
              enzyme-substrate interactions.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research in chemistry fulfills the US-Hungary Joint Fund's                
              program objective of advancing science by enabling leading experts             
              in the United States and Hungary to combine complementary talents              
              and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and             
              competence.
