Title       : Inbreeding Depression and its Genetic Basis in Mimulus: A Comparison Between an
               Outcrossing and Selfing Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9220906

Award Number: 9220906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127691             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele R. Dudash md59@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9109,9251,
Abstract    :
                   Inbreeding depression has been the subject of considerable                
              attention for over 100 years.  Although many researchers have                  
              quantified how progeny generated by self-matings perform poorly                
              relative to progeny generated from matings between two different               
              individuals, few empirical studies have focused on the differences             
              in inbreeding depression in populations that differ in their                   
              natural outcrossing rates.  The main goal of the proposed research             
              is to determine the underlying genetic basis of the expression of              
              inbreeding depression in two closely related native species from               
              northern California, the self-pollinating Mimulas micranthus and               
              the insect dependent (thus outcrossing) M. guttatus. The objectives            
              are three-fold.  First, to quantify the degree of inbreeding                   
              depression in terms of both male and female function in two                    
              populations of both the selfing and outcrossing species.  The                  
              effects of inbreeding on female reproductive function are well                 
              documented, but he effects on male function, such as pollen                    
              production are largely unknown.  Second, the genetic basis of                  
              inbreeding depression will be quantified by two greenhouse breeding            
              experiments.  Third, among-family level variation in inbreeding                
              depression will be quantified in the outcrossing M. guttatus as a              
              function of the observed floral variation.  This two-species                   
              comparison will examine the relationship between the mating system             
              and the genetic basis of the observed inbreeding depression, thus              
              providing baseline information on the genetics driving changes in              
              mating systems in natural plant populations.  The results generated            
              from the research on these two related species will provide                    
              insights into preserving both crop gene pool diversity and rare                
              species genetic diversity.***                                                  
               //
