Title       : Counterion Accumulation Around Finite Nucleic Acid Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1993   
File        : a9220231

Award Number: 9220231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Hagerman paul.hagerman@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              For highly charged nucleic acid polymers, the extent and                       
              distribution of associated counterions can have a profound                     
              influence on the conformation of the macromolecule, and can play a             
              principal role in directing the binding of proteins and small                  
              ligands.  However, except for linear nucleic acids, very little is             
              known regarding the nature of counterion accumulation.  In order to            
              address this issue, the current proposal outlines a combined                   
              computational/experimental approach to determine the extent of                 
              counterion association in the vicinity of various nucleic acid                 
              structures, including branched DNA and RNA helices.  The                       
              computational approach (aim 1) will utilize a grand canonical                  
              ensemble Monte Carlo approach for the determination of ion                     
              accumulation.  The principal experimental approach (aim 2),                    
              equilibrium dialysis, will measure the same quality.  Finally, the             
              technique of steady-state electrophoresis (SSE) will be employed               
              (aim 3) to examine the relationship between thermodynamic ion                  
              binding and the effective charge of a nucleic acid undergoing                  
              electrophoresis.                                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              Small ions in the vicinity of DNA or RNA molecules have a profound             
              influence on the structures of those highly-charged macromolecules.            
              Moreover, it is clear that such ions can participate in directing              
              the binding of a wide variety of gene regulatory proteins to both              
              DNA and RNA.  Thus, the characterization of the interactions of                
              small ions with higher-order nucleic acid structures is of great               
              importance in understanding the broader issue of the regulation of             
              gene expression.  To this end, the goal of the proposed research is            
              to characterize the net accumulation of small ions in the vicinity             
              of simple branched nucleic acid structures, the latter being used              
              as a paradigm for higher-order nucleic acid structure.  The                    
              proposed work couples a theoretical analysis of small ion-                     
              macromolecule interactions with an experimental determination of               
              the net accumulation of the small ions around the branch.  The                 
              experimental work will employ a combination of dialysis and                    
              electrophoretic methods, which, when combined with the                         
              computational work, should provide the first quantitative view of              
              the association of small ions around a higher-order nucleic acid               
              structure -- a necessary antecedent for detailed studies of the                
              salt-dependence of protein-nucleic acid interaction.
