Title       : RUI: Function of Lipoxygenase in the Arabidopsis Pathogen Defense Response
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1997   
File        : a9220254

Award Number: 9220254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Kaye Peterman kpeterman@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,
Abstract    :
              Lipoxygenases are of biological interest because the primary                   
              products of the reaction, fatty acid hydroperoxidase, are typically            
              metabolized into molecules of known or suspected regulatory                    
              activity which may function in the response to stress.  The goal of            
              the proposed research is to understand the function of lipoxygenase            
              in the Arabidopsis defense response to pathogenic Pseudomonads. The            
              proposed experiments test the working hypothesis that lipoxygenase,            
              rapidly induced upon attack by an avirulent pathogen, is required              
              for disease resistance, and functions in the synthesis of jasmonic             
              acid which serves to regulate the host defense response.  The                  
              pathogen defense response will be tested intransgenic plants which             
              either over-produce the lipoxygenase cDNA or in antisense plants               
              with reduced levels of lipoxygenase activity.  These experiments               
              will provide evidence that the rapid induction of lipoxygenase upon            
              pathogen attack is an important component of an effective host                 
              defense response.  The spatial patterns of lipoxygenase mRNA,                  
              protein accumulation and gene expression will be determined in                 
              response to pathogen attack by in situ hybridization,                          
              immunocytochemistry and analysis of lipoxygenase promoter/GUS                  
              fusions, respectively.  Finally, the kinetics of both lipoxygenase             
              induction and jasmonate production inresponse to pathogen attack               
              will be measured to determine the relationship of these two species            
              in signalling.  Completion of these experiments will lead to                   
              important insights into the role of lipoxygenase in pathogen                   
              defense.
