Title       : Hidden Taxonomic Diversity in European Chrysoperla Green Lacewings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9220579

Award Number: 9220579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Henry chenry@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Green lacewings are beneficial predatory insects that eat aphids,              
              scales, and other serious pests of crop plants.  They are often                
              raised artificially for mass release in agricultural areas where               
              they can serve as important agents of biological control.  Henry               
              et. al. have found that several distinct North American species                
              of green lacewings exist which can be told apart only by their                 
              unique courtship songs.  Similar-looking lacewings are found in                
              Europe, but these have songs that differ greatly from North                    
              American ones and vary from region to region.  In the past, all                
              of these European and North American lacewings have been thought               
              of interchangeably as a single species, Chrysoperla carnea, and                
              have been freely exported and imported across the Atlantic for                 
              biological control purposes.  However, since different species                 
              can show strong prey preferences and other individualistic                     
              behaviors, it is feasible that some mass reared and released                   
              green lacewings might be relatively ineffective against certain                
              targeted pest species.  Efforts at biological control should be                
              enhanced by recognizing the hidden biodiversity within this                    
              lacewing species complex and beginning to use the most                         
              appropriate "song species" in each continent, area or habitat.                 
              %%%                                                                            
              This project will investigate the hidden species diversity in                  
              European green lacewings using song analysis, just as has been                 
              done for the North American ones.  Thus, the investigators will                
              determine how many true species exist in this economically                     
              important insect group and which are appropriate for use in                    
              biological pest control programs in different areas of the world.              
              Perhaps, even more importantly, this project will serve as a                   
              model of the importance of song or other behavioral traits in                  
              investigating biodiversity in insects and other groups of                      
              organisms.
