Title       : Social Laws for Artificial Agent Societies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1995      
File        : a9220645

Award Number: 9220645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Les Gasser                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoav Shoham shoham@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9139,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               WPCK               2           B         P     Z                 Courier 10cpi 
              #| x                 K  x   6 X      @   8  ; X @                              
                   HP LaserJet IIISi                    HPLASIII.PRS   x            @       
              ,   \ ,  , 7|X @ #| x               2       Z   B     #         X         F   `
                HP LaserJet IIISi                    HPLASIII.PRS   x            @        ,  
              \ ,  , 7|X @Courier 10cpi Courier 10cpi (Bold)       ? x x x ,       w  x   6 X
                   @   8  ; X @                                          ? x x x ,          x
                         `   B  ; X                                                       
              This is the first year funding of a five year continuing award.  Thi    search
              develops a theory regarding the utility of social laws in a computational e   
              2           I                                   9220645 Shoham                
              ` `                        h h #          (        -    p p 2        7         
                 ? X           This is the first year funding of a three year continuing
              award.  This research develops a theory regarding the utility of social laws in
              a computational environment, laws which guarantee successful coexistence of
              multiple programs and programmers.  It focuses on the coordination of
              activities of computer agents, but the investigations will be guided by, and
              impact, coordination in societies which involve humans as well.  A number of
              approaches to activity coordination have been discussed in the literature; this
              research concentrates on one approach which, although very commonsensical, has
              received relatively little attention in the computer science community. 
              Roughly speaking, the approach is as follows.  The society will adopt a set of
              social laws; each agent will be required to obey these laws, and will be able
              to assume that all others will as well.  These laws will on the one hand
              constrain the plans available to the agent, but on the other hand will
              guarantee certain behaviors on the part of other agents.  The domain of traffic
              laws for  mobile robots illustrates the point:  Rather than install a
              centralized controller (the most common approach in robotics today), or have
              the robots continually negotiate in order to avoid collisions (the spirit of
              which is representative of much work in distributed AI), this approach will
              have robots obey traffic laws such as "keep to the right of the road".  Again,
              although very commonsensical, this approach has not been developed in a
              systematic fashion; as we shall see, it poses some highly nontrivial problems. 
              One part of the proposed research is concerned with the off line design of
              social laws, along the lines mentioned in the previous paragraph.  Another part
              is concerned with the on line evolution of social conventions:  even when we as
              designers are not in a position to impose social laws ahead of time, we will
              want to design the agents in a way which will encourage the evolution of
              conventions over time.  In service of these goals, the following is proposed: 
              (1) define precise models for multi agent systems, in which social laws are
              explicitly represented; (2) define and investigate the basic computational
              problems involved in off line synthesis of useful social laws; (3) implement
              the idea of social laws for artificial agent societies in the framework of
              particular domains of application, while still proving analytical results about
              the usefulness of these laws in those domains; (4) investigate the evolution of
              social conventions in a computational framework.  More specifically, understand
              how different parameters (such as memory and communication) affect the
              efficiency of convention evolution; and (5) investigate the interaction between
              social structure (such as authority hierarchies) and social laws.      h)      
                 0*0*0*
