Title       : Eolian Dispersal Patterns of Zircon and its Subsurface Geochemistry in
               Continental Weathering Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9220049

Award Number: 9220049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210779             (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Brimhall brimall@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Having confirmed the eclectic nature and presence of                      
              eolian additions in a classical lateritic regolith  in                         
              Australia, we request renewal of this funding for continued                    
              study off continental weathering systems.  We seek to make                     
              more new applications of unique microbeam capabilities of                      
              the SHRIMP (sensitive high-resolution ion microprobe) to                       
              surface process studies centering on the provenance,                           
              surficial transport and in situ weathering behavior of                         
              zircon, a chemically resistant and datable pathfinder                          
              mineral of unparalleled utility.  We wish to define ancient                    
              eolian dispersal patterns and mineralogical gradients of                       
              dust-size weathering product and insoluble detrital                            
              accessory minerals across the tectonically-stable Yilgarn                      
              craton of  Western Australia.  Our study will focus on                         
              sampling a sequence of uneroded laterites in an easterly                       
              transect leading away from the principal source region which                   
              we infer to have contributed foreign zircon to the                             
              Jarrahdale bauxite near Perth Australia by paleo-eolian                        
              processes.  In the 700 Ma Leeuwin Block of the Pinjarra                        
              Orogen source region, we wish to study the accessory mineral                   
              suite (zircon, rutile, monazite and ilmenite) in bedrock                       
              granite, granulite and anorthosite exposures and date the                      
              zircons.  Also, by dating eolian zircons in contemporary                       
              dust samples collected from rain gauge arrays, we can                          
              ascertain if source regions have shifted significantly.                        
              Finally, we wish to study the mineralogical and isotopic                       
              processes of in situ weathering of parent material zircon                      
              and to pursue direct SHRIMP dating of authigenic anatase.                      
              We wish to test their use in characterizing and timing the                     
              advance of the weathering front and biomechanical admixing                     
              rate of detritus into the subsurface thereby augmenting the                    
              array of geochronological methods available for surficial                      
              process studies.
