Title       : Cellular and Molecular Characterization of Auxin Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1995   
File        : a9220080

Award Number: 9220080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Jones alan_jones@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Auxins are a class of growth hormone found in plants that induce            
              cells to elongate.  They act rapidly through the mediation of a                
              single receptor or multiple receptors to cause changes in cell wall            
              properties and gene expression.  There are now several candidate               
              auxin receptors in plants; however, their roles in growth and                  
              development have not yet been determined.  These putative receptors            
              are therefore designated "auxin-binding proteins" (ABP's).  This               
              project focuses on the characterization of two such ABP's,                     
              designated ABP1 and 65-kDa ABP.  ABP1 is an endoplasmic reticulum              
              (ER) protein that contains an ER-retention sequence; yet, this                 
              laboratory has demonstrated that a significant amount of this                  
              protein escapes the ER retention mechanism and uniquely migrates to            
              the plasma membrane / cell wall space.  This cell wall localization            
              is consistent with its postulated site of action.  The 65-kDa                  
              subunit ABP, recently identified in this laboratory using anti-                
              idiotypic antibodies, is a nuclear localized protein.  Preliminary             
              data suggest that it binds DNA.  The hypothesis is put forward that            
              this putative receptors is involved in auxin-regulated gene                    
              transcription.                                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              It has been known for many years that plant growth and development             
              is regulated by plant hormones, principally auxins (e.g., indole               
              acetic acid, or IAA) and cytokines.  However, despite a great deal             
              of effort, it is not yet understood how plant hormones exert their             
              effects at a molecular level.  Auxin-binding proteins, such as ABP1            
              and the 65-kDa ABP which are the subject of this project, have been            
              described, but it has not yet been established for any of these                
              that they are functional "auxin receptors," let alone mechanisms of            
              action.  This laboratory has made some very interesting and novel              
              findings, such as the auxin-dependent subcellular localization of              
              ABP1 and the nuclear localization and DNA binding characteristics              
              of 65-kDa ABP, which may lead to breakthroughs in this area.  An               
              understanding of how plant cell growth and development is normally             
              controlled or modulated by plant hormones is critical to this                  
              nation's agricultural biotechnology efforts.
