Title       : Mounds at Moundville: Development of Public Architecture at a Large Missippian
               Ceremonial Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1994   
File        : a9220568

Award Number: 9220568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210564             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon Knight vknight@tenhoor.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Vernon                  
              Knight will continue his archaeological research at the site of                
              Moundville. Located near the Black Warrior River in Alabama this               
              site marks one of the highest cultural achievements of pre-                    
              Columbian Native Americans. It consists of a large number of mounds            
              arranged in roughly symmetrical order, many containing tens of                 
              thousands of cubic meters of fill. Archaeological evidence                     
              indicates that these structures, which were likely built over                  
              extended periods of time contained religious structures at their               
              tops and also served as burial chambers. Several have yielded large            
              series of skeletons and burial goods. Of central importance is not             
              the structures themselves but the nature of the social organization            
              which made them possible. To construct such massive earthworks                 
              requires a social and political organization which can mobilize a              
              large amount of labor for long periods of time. Dr. Knight's                   
              research should provide insight into this underlying social                    
              structure.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Building on past work at the site Dr. Knight will conduct two                  
              seasons of excavation. Using standard archaeological techniques he             
              will cut trenches into a number of mounds. The materials collected             
              will allow him to date the construction (or multiple construction              
              episodes) of each. On this basis estimates of person power over                
              time can also be made. Dr. Knight will attempt to determine the                
              functions of each structure and how these also may have changed                
              over time.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many scientists. It will increase our                      
              understanding of how, at a technologically simple level, complex               
              societies develop and are maintained. It will also assist in the               
              training of graduate students.
