Title       : Mathematical Sciences: 1993 AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar: The Mathematics of
               Tomography, Impedance Imaging and Integral Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1993       
File        : a9220809

Award Number: 9220809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49468              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Maxwell jwm@ams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Todd Quinto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Computed tomography has grown from numerical analysis and                 
              algorithm development for planar X-ray tomography scanners to                  
              encompass a broad range of imaging techniques.  Impedance imaging              
              systems apply current to the surface of a body, measure the induced            
              voltages on the surface, and from this information, reconstruct an             
              approximation to the electrical conductivity and/or electrical                 
              permittivity in the interior.  Mathematically, the problem is ill-             
              posed and nonlinear, and a frequently used approximation reduces to            
              a Radon transform.  Integral geometry is the mathematical basis for            
              tomography and one model for impedance imaging.  The Radon                     
              transform on lines is the model of X-ray tomography and                        
              generalizations model emission tomography and problems in                      
              ultrasound.  Tomographers use integral geometric theorems, such as             
              inversion formulas and range characterizations, to create and                  
              improve reconstruction methods.                                                
                   This project will support the AMS-SIAM Summer Seminar in                  
              Applied Mathematics on the Mathematics of Tomography, Impedance                
              Imaging, and Integral Geometry to be held June 7-18, 1993 at Mount             
              Holyoke College in South Hadley, MA.  One of the features of                   
              tomography is the strong relationship between high level                       
              mathematics (such as harmonic analysis, partial differential                   
              equations, microlocal analysis, and Lie group theory) and                      
              applications to medical imaging, impedance imaging, radiotherapy,              
              and industrial non-destructive evaluation.  The conference has the             
              following main goals:  (1) to give researchers in the field the                
              opportunity to define and articulate the main problems of current              
              interest and to isolate common themes and approaches and (2) to                
              strengthen the connection between the pure and applied aspects of              
              these areas and to facilitate dialogue between researchers in the              
              various areas.  Graduate students, recent doctoral recipients, and             
              new researchers in the field will be encouraged to attend.
