Title       : Concerted Evolution of a Retrotransposon Within a Geographic Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1995     
File        : a9220520

Award Number: 9220520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Holly A. Wichman hwichman@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9119,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Mobile genetics sequences, or transposable elements, are                  
              ubiquitous features of mammalian genomes.  They cause mutations by             
              inactivation of genes, by changing the regulation of gene                      
              expressions, and by acting as sites for recombination which leads              
              to chromosomal rearrangement.  To understand the ways in which                 
              transposable elements affect the organisms, we need a more accurate            
              assessment of transposition rates, and an understanding of the                 
              mechanisms by which elements within the genome interact.  In this              
              regard, it has been observed that elements compared from within a              
              single species are generally more similar to each other than                   
              elements from two related species.  This phenomenon, known as                  
              concerted evolution, suggests that elements are rapidly homogenized            
              by some force(s) acting within a species.  Concerted evolution is              
              a common feature of transposable elements families, but is usually             
              observed at the species level or above.                                        
                   This project examines a unique example of concerted evolution             
              of transposable elements at the population level.  Concerted                   
              evolution has been shown to occur in hundreds of copies of the mys             
              retrotransposon in a single geographic population of the white-                
              footed mouse, Peromyscus leucopus, near Orono, Maine.  Although                
              concerted evolution of mammalian transposable elements is generally            
              believed to result from transposition by one or a few "molecular               
              drivers", data from this population suggest that biased gene                   
              conversion may be the mechanism operating here.  Furthermore, this             
              gene conversion appears to effect only part of the mys element.                
              The specific objectives of this project are:  i) to determine the              
              proportion of mys elements in the Maine population which have                  
              undergone concerted evolution; ii) to test the hypothesis that                 
              concerted evolution of mys within this  population is due to biased            
              gene conversion; and iii) to formulate hypotheses to explain the               
              apparently limited region of the element undergoing gene                       
              conversion.  Methods employed will include radioanalytic imaging of            
              genomic Southern blots and DNA sequence comparisons of elements                
              from the population of interest and orthologous elements from                  
              control populations.  This study will be one of the first to                   
              examine the population biology of a mammalian transposable element.            
              Concerted evolution in this population may well provide insight in             
              to some previously unrecognized process by which transposable                  
              elements interact within the genome and influence the genetic basis            
              of population adaptation to changing conditions.//
