Title       : Behavioral Basis of Shared Paternity in the Striped-backed Wren
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1991     
File        : a9100841

Award Number: 9100841
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19759              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter H. Piper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A successful animal (in the evolutionary sense) is one that                    
              behaves so as to maximize the representation of its genes in                   
              future generations.  Therefore, an animal can be successful                    
              either by raising its own offspring, as usually occurs, or by                  
              helping to raise offspring that are closely related to itself, as              
              occurs in most "cooperative breeders."  For example, adult                     
              helpers at the nests of mated pairs of birds are often helping                 
              their parents raise offspring that are their own full siblings.                
                                                                                             
              In the stripe-backed wren of Venezuela, males and females raised               
              in a given social group become helpers in the same group when                  
              they mature.  Since the mortality rate is high and dominant                    
              females that die are replaced by immigrant females unrelated to                
              the group, helpers often help raise juveniles that are their half              
              siblings.  Thus, the death of a dominant female and her                        
              replacement by an immigrant is a significant event for a male                  
              helper.  His mother's death (1) suddenly decreases the genetic                 
              benefit he enjoys by helping to raise offspring of the dominant                
              pair (since the female is no longer his mother) and (2) creates                
              an opportunity for him to reproduce non-incestuously by mating                 
              with the new dominant female.  Recent behavioral research                      
              revealed that male helpers routinely pursue and attempt to court               
              dominant females unrelated to them and are only kept from mating               
              with dominant females by dominant males.  DNA fingerprinting, a                
              molecular technique used to assign parentage, has shown that 15%               
              of all juveniles from groups that contain male helpers unrelated               
              to the dominant female are offspring of male helpers and dominant              
              females.  The remaining 85% are offspring of the dominant pair.                
                                                                                             
              Dr. Piper's research project will compare in more detail the                   
              behavior of male helpers that are sons of the dominant female and              
              those that are unrelated to her.  Specifically, he will examine                
              the tendency of male helpers to associate with dominant females,               
              the treatment of male helpers by dominant males, and the amount                
              of parental care given by male helpers.  This study will increase              
              our understanding of helping behavior and incest avoidance in                  
              cooperatively breeding animals and, more generally, will give                  
              insight into the evolution of helping behavior.
