Title       : Heterogeneity, Succession, and Patchiness as Factors Affecting Deforestation and
               Carbon Cycling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1993      
File        : a9100526

Award Number: 9100526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilio F. Moran moran@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                   Much attention has focused in recent years on rapid rates of              
              deforestation in the Amazon Basin and about related extinctions of many        
              plant and animal species and adverse impacts on global climatic                
              patterns.  Frequently overlooked, however, has been the ability of the         
              region's forests to naturally regenerate in time frames that mitigate          
              the detrimental impacts of deforestation.  Some scientists estimate            
              that as much as 85 percent of the forests are recolonized by native            
              plants within a few years after clearance.  This project will consist          
              of a detailed analysis of the processes of natural regeneration and the        
              roles of native people as they affect reforestation of forests in the          
              Xingu Basin near Belo Monte in the central Amazon Basin.  Analyses of          
              remotely sensed data will be combined with field observations in order         
              to estimate rates of cleared land and to track the rates of succession         
              at two specific sites.  Field-based analyses will assess the                   
              relationships among various successional forests, soil types, slope            
              conditions, land uses; these analyses will determine rates of                  
              reforestation under different sets of conditions.  Detailed analyses of        
              past and present human activities in two sites with more fertile soils         
              will provide a means for assessing the response of forests to clearance        
              and the potential for encouraging deforestation activities into these          
              types of areas rather than into areas with slower natural rates of             
              recovery.                                                                      
                   This project will provide valuable new information into the               
              processes by which cleared tropical forest tracts regenerate                   
              themselves.  New insights will result both with respect to the Amazon          
              forests of Brazil and for similar biomes on other continents.  The             
              project also will make methodological contributions, providing greater         
              knowledge of the ways that remotely sensed data can be used to monitor         
              deforestation and regeneration.  Because this project is conducted in          
              collaboration with two Brazilian agencies and because Brazilian                
              nationals will be employed to help complete it, the project will help          
              develop Brazilian scientific capabilities with respect to this                 
              important topic and these useful new methods.
