Title       : Gel-Processing as a Route to High Performance Oriented Electronic and Optical
               Polymer Materials: Design and Synthesis on the Supramolecular Length Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1992      
File        : a9100033

Award Number: 9100033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1300000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Heeger ajh@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred Wudl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale S. Pearson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip A. Pincus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is for the renewal of research previously supported                 
              under a Materials Research Group grant (DMR 8703399) at the                    
              University of California - Santa Barbara.  The research of the                 
              group focuses on the design and synthesis on the supermolecular                
              length scale of multi-functional, high performance electronic and              
              optical polymer blends using gel processing.  The morphology of                
              these gels is being determined using x-ray diffraction, optical,               
              scanning, and electron microscopy, mechanical, and electrical                  
              measurements, optical spectroscopy, luminescence, and                          
              photo-induced absorption.  Polymers being investigated include                 
              ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene, polyvinyl alcohol,                   
              polyacrylonitrile, unblended conjugated polymer systems, and                   
              phase-segregated highly oriented polymer blends such as                        
              polyaniline/poly(p-phenylene terephthalamide).  Materials are                  
              being processed into fibers, thin films, and conducting foams                  
              taking care to control the morphology, phase stability, and                    
              spinodal decomposition.  The research is multi-disciplinary,                   
              combining condensed matter physics, synthetic chemistry, theory,               
              and polymer science.  This grant provides the ideal mechanism to               
              train students to synthesize, process and characterize polymers,               
              with the interaction of all of the scientific approaches and                   
              methods used to study polymers.
