Title       : Magnetic Microstructure and Information Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1993      
File        : a9100157

Award Number: 9100157
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcel Muller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Indeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              High density information storage is an emerging                                
              technology crucial to international economic                                   
              competitiveness.  Magnetic and magneto-optic high                              
              density storage will continue to grow in economic                              
              importance for at least the next fifteen years, and                            
              perhaps beyond that.  We propose to carry out a                                
              research program in magnetic microstructures as                                
              applied to information storage.  The research will                             
              study several fundamental issues that should be                                
              addressed to bring the technology closer to thermal                            
              and quantum limits:  Experimental investigations                               
              and modeling of the relation of physical and                                   
              magnetic microstructure to fluctuations and noise is                           
              expected to lead the way to storage media with                                 
              controlled and programmed microstructures.  We                                 
              plan to introduce novel computing methods using                                
              massively parallel processors into the                                         
              micromagnetic modeling.  Studies of medium and                                 
              transducer micromagnetics will be aimed toward                                 
              multielement sensors.  Such sensors will be needed                             
              for servo systems capable of high density recording                            
              track following.  We will also explore their possible                          
              application to adaptive sensing as an innovative                               
              method of eliminating microstructure related                                   
              medium noise.  This will involve research on signal                            
              processing algorithms appropriate to these sensors.                            
              A breakthrough in even one of these directions will                            
              have a far ranging technological and economic                                  
              impact.  Apart from the direct technological                                   
              benefits expected from this research, it will have a                           
              lasting impact through its mission of teaching gifted                          
              professionals principles of information storage                                
              technology and magnetics, engineering disciplines                              
              that are underrepresented in United States                                     
              universities to the serious detriment of our                                   
              international competitiveness.
