Title       : Dissertation Research: Dispersal in Metapopulations of Butterflies: Implications
               for the Dynamics and Genetic Structure of Local Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1991       
File        : a9100860

Award Number: 9100860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10126              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Root rbr1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Merrill A. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Understanding the importance of dispersal to populations of                    
              patchily distributed species is critical to the fields of                      
              population ecology, evolutionary biology, and conservation                     
              biology.  Dispersal can influence population fluctuations through              
              differences in immigration and emigration rates and, through gene              
              flow, can have a major influence on the genetic structure of                   
              populations.  In addition, the regional persistence of a species               
              prone to local extinction can depend on levels of dispersal high               
              enough to allow frequent recolonization of vacant habitat                      
              patches.  This area has a strong theoretical basis, but there has              
              been relatively little empirical research directed at answering                
              the important questions.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This study examines the role of dispersal in the population                    
              dynamics and genetic structure of a patchily distributed                       
              butterfly species, Euphilotes enoptes.  The interplay of patch                 
              quality and isolation with the dynamics of local populations by                
              coupling experiments with observations of individual behavior and              
              year-to-year population fluctuations will be studied.  Patch                   
              isolation and size will be related to gene flow and the                        
              allocation of genetic variability through a survey of mtDNA                    
              markers.  Finally, by studying two metapopulations, The                        
              generalizability of results from a single metapopulation of a                  
              species will be examined.
