Title       : Cobalt Macrocycle-Catalyzed Electrochemical Coupling Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1993  
File        : a9100943

Award Number: 9100943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Fry AFRY@WESLEYAN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The electrochemical reduction of geminal dihalides in the                      
              presence of electrophilic reagents has several disadvantages                   
              (poor chemoselectivity and stereoselectivity) for the synthesis                
              of mono-and bis-substituted materials.  The process will be                    
              catalyzed with cobalt (I) macrocyclic complexes, including                     
              vitamin B12, cobalt bis-salicylideneethylenediamine, and                       
              cobaloximes.  The strategy is to reduce the cobalt species to                  
              the reactive Co(I) state, which is expected to undergo rapid                   
              oxidative addition with a geminal dihalide in the medium.  The                 
              resulting adduct, a Co(III) species, will be reduced in situ to                
              eject the desired carbanion for reaction with an electrophile                  
              in the medium.  In effect, the cobalt macrocycle will catalyze                 
              the reduction of the geminal halide to the corresponding                       
              alpha-halocarbanion.  The catalytic process is expected to                     
              occur in far higher stereoselectivity and chemoselectivity than                
              the direct electrochemical process, and permit conversions not                 
              possible at all by the direct process.  Furthermore, by                        
              carrying out the electrolysis at potentials where oxidative                    
              addition to Co(I) takes place but the Co(III) adduct is stable,                
              it will be possible to make radicals by thermal or                             
              photochemical decomposition of the latter.  A number of                        
              synthetic applications, including reductive electrophilic                      
              substitution on geminal dihalides (including both open chain                   
              and cyclic systems), synthesis of substituted cyclopropanes,                   
              arenes, and polycyclic systems, and synthesis of alkenes, based                
              on these principles, will be undertaken. These principles will                 
              be further extended to electrocatalytic generation of                          
              carbanions from substrates other than alkyl halides.                           
                                                                                             
              The Organic Synthesis Program is supporting this research to                   
              develop cobalt macrocycle-catalyzed electrochemical coupling                   
              reactions.  This research will lead to a new and novel route to                
              synthetically useful reactive intermediates that can be used to                
              synthesize the increasingly complex substances needed in our                   
              economy.
