Title       : Heterocarboranes of Main Group Elements and Early TransitionMetals: Chemistry in
               Novel Directions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1993   
File        : a9100048

Award Number: 9100048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Narayan S. Hosmane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Narayan S. Hosmane of the Chemistry Department, Southern                   
              Methodist University, is being supported by the Inorganic,                     
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program to synthesize extended                
              cage carborane species and characterize their electrochemical,                 
              structural, and spectral properties.  These novel compounds                    
              will contain main group and early transition metal elements                    
              "sandwiched" between carborane cages which are linked to form                  
              chains.  To accomplish the synthesis, Hosmane will take                        
              advantage of the stabilization afforded carborane cages by                     
              attachment of the C-trimethylsilyl group.  Stable carborane                    
              carbanions are to be generated by stepwise removal of these                    
              silyl groups.  In addition, metallocarborane cages linked by                   
              pyrimidine will be synthesized.                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              The compounds to be prepared are unusual in terms of bonding,                  
              structure, and reactivity.  As a result, production of stable                  
              species with interesting electronic properties is a possible                   
              outcome.  More importantly, fundamental information will be                    
              obtained on the electrochemical properties of a class of                       
              compounds which has not been studied previously.  Also,                        
              designed synthesis of extended arrays and development of a                     
              means of activating carborane cages are important developments                 
              in borane and carborane chemistry and have implications for                    
              transition metalloborane and metallocarborane cluster chemistry.
