Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1992     
File        : a9100266

Award Number: 9100266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Blumsack   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wolfgang H. Heil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   This Research Experiences for Undergraduates award will                   
              support ten students engaged in a nine-week program of research                
              spanning a broad spectrum of the mathematical frontier.  The                   
              grant continues REU support based on a plan of broad faculty                   
              involvement and problem selection.  Each student will be involved              
              in one of four possible research areas, with between one and                   
              three students working in each area.  Past experience at many REU              
              sites indicates that students are unsure of their own interests                
              and profit from learning specifics from several faculty advisors.              
              The advisors will be joined by faculty from Florida A&M                        
              University.                                                                    
                   Mathematical areas will include the study of fundamental                  
              groups and covering spaces.  Using algebraic and topological                   
              techniques efforts will be made to construct covering spaces of                
              various manifolds.  Work will also be done using an interactive                
              graph program to study mapping properties of complex functions as              
              representations of idealized flows.  Modern game theory will be                
              employed to study conditions under which noncooperative games                  
              have cooperative solutions.  Studies on dynamical systems will                 
              focus on discretizations of the barotropic vorticity equation of               
              fluid dynamics.                                                                
                   There will be several other scholarly activities on the                   
              campus at the same time as this project.  The opportunities for                
              mixing among students in different disciplines will create a                   
              stimulating environment.  Joint social events are planned.
