Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Small Geometry Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1993   
File        : a9100267

Award Number: 9100267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin C. Adams Colin.Adams@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
                   A Research Experiences for Undergraduates project involving               
              12 students will be supported by this award.  The students will                
              work for ten weeks under the supervision of seven faculty                      
              advisors.  Other funds will provide support for additional                     
              students bringing the total size of the group to about 20.  The                
              grant renews funding of successful projects of similar size                    
              carried out during the past three years.  Although many of the                 
              participants have not yet graduated, at least seven are known to               
              be enrolled in graduate study in mathematics and computer                      
              science.                                                                       
                   The program is structured so that each student works with                 
              two subgroups.  They focus on several problems initially until                 
              one emerges as the most promising.  The themes are geometric                   
              although the term SMALL in the title is an acronym representing                
              the initials of the first group of advisors and is not used as an              
              adjective.  Typical problems areas will include questions                      
              involving knot theory.  Students will consider how an analysis of              
              the crossings of knots can provide information about their                     
              general classification.  These ideas are related to others in                  
              graph theory in that certain knots can be embedded in graphs.                  
              One would like to characterize such graphs.  Other topics include              
              the calculation of topological characteristics called Betti                    
              numbers, vector-valued Hermitian forms arising in the                          
              differential geometry of Cauchy-Riemann structures and work in                 
              analytic number theory on the divisor problem for arithmetic                   
              progressions.                                                                  
                   Students will be recruited from the New England area.                     
              Efforts will be made see that the research continues after the                 
              summer ends.  This will be particularly true of the students who               
              are recruited from Williams College.  It is expected that several              
              publishable papers will result from the project and that some                  
              students will have the opportunity to present their work at                    
              professional meetings.
