Title       : Acid and Aluminum Effects on Sodium Homeostasis in Freshwater Zooplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1991      
File        : a9100844

Award Number: 9100844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl E. Havens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University Fdn
	      
	      Kent, OH  44242    /   -

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0312000   Population                              
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Lake acidification strongly affects zooplankton, microscopic              
              animals which consume algae and are a major food source for fish.              
              Acidification selectively eliminates large zooplankton, which are              
              the most effective grazers of algae and the preferred food source              
              for fish.  The small zooplankton which dominate in acid lake are               
              ineffective in both roles.  The objective of this study is to                  
              determine why some zooplankton are acid-sensitive, while others                
              are acid-tolerant.  The hypothesis to be tested is that high                   
              acidity and aluminum (a toxic element which becomes concentrated               
              in acid lakes) hinder normal osmoregulation (water and ion                     
              balance) in acid-sensitive zooplankton, but not in acid-tolerant               
              zooplankton.  When animals cannot osmoregulate, they lose                      
              essential ions like sodium.  Consequently, they experience                     
              dysfunction of their nervous and muscular systems and die.                     
                   Experiments will be performed in which several common North               
              American zooplankton (including both acid-sensitive and acid-                  
              tolerant species) will be exposed to lakewater at various                      
              combinations of acid and aluminum levels, covering the range                   
              which occurs during lake acidification.  After exposures of                    
              varying duration, animals will be removed from the treatments,                 
              weighed, and their body sodium content assayed using a standard                
              technique called neutron activation analysis.  Mortality rates                 
              will also be determined, and vital staining will be done to                    
              determine the extent and location of aluminum binding to tissues.              
              Statistical analyses will quantify the effects of pH and aluminum              
              on body sodium content of the test animals, and the effects of                 
              sodium losses on their survival.
