Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Exploration in Algebraic Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1991     
File        : a9100782

Award Number: 9100782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Lewis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4650

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   This award supports a program of Research Experiences for                 
              Undergraduates focusing on problems arising in the mathematical                
              theory of algebraic topology.  Six students will join with the                 
              principal investigator in a nine-week activity designed to                     
              develop and implement algorithms to search for a certain kind of               
              topological construct called a cell complex.  Cell complexes                   
              arise in the study of topological spaces that are higher-                      
              dimensional versions of the sphere, torus, polyhedra, etc. One                 
              constructs cell complexes (also known as CW-complexes) from                    
              elementary building blocks by combining cells together in                      
              prescribed ways.  Questions about cell complexes translate into                
              questions about algebraic objects, Abelian groups, which can be                
              represented as matrices.  Matrices are ideal tools for                         
              representing matrices and the operations between them.  The                    
              complexes of interest are those called nilpotent.  It is                       
              difficult to see how to put cells together to get nilpotent                    
              complexes, but computers - properly programmed - can construct                 
              multitudes of examples.  This particular project seeks to answer               
              a basic unsolved problem about the existence of finite three-                  
              dimensional nilpotent complexes.                                               
                   The program first introduces the students to topological                  
              concepts not normally encountered in undergraduate courses.                    
              Then, exploiting results of students discovered on prior REU                   
              projects, the team will seek to improve existing algorithms and                
              codes to increase their speed and scope.  The final tasks will be              
              to find new and more complex examples.  Either a group with a                  
              finite fundamental group will turn up or else, an idea for a                   
              proof of their non-existence will be suggested.  In either event,              
              the program will provide of full measure of sense of a research                
              experience to the students.
