Title       : Dissertation Research: Ecologial Constraints and Relatedness Asymmetries in
               Augochlorella striata (Halictidae: Hymenoptera)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1991       
File        : a9100473

Award Number: 9100473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5940               (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Eickwort   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ulrich G. Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Workers in eusocial Hymenoptera colonies (relatedness asymmetry                
              present) are  predicted to favor a more female-biased sex-ratio as             
              compared to the sex-ratio favored by workers in parasocial                     
              colonies (relatedness asymmetry absent).                                       
                                                                                             
              Experiments on the primitively eusocial sweat bee Augochlorella                
              striata, with random assignment of colonies to a eusocial and                  
              parasocial condition confirmed the predicted female-bias in                    
              eusocial colonies, but were unable to test the hypothesis that                 
              worker reproduction of males is greater in parasocial than in                  
              eusocial colonies.  The determination of maternity of males by                 
              means of a genetic analysis is essential to test this hypothesis.              
                                                                                             
              This study will involve genetically fingerprinting reproductives,              
              workers, and male sexuals of the experimental nests in order to                
              compare worker reproduction of males in eusocial and parasocial                
              colonies.  Because of parthenogenetic production of males, all                 
              bands in a fingerprint of a male must also be present in the                   
              fingerprint of his mother.  Maternity of males can therefore be                
              determined by matching fingerprints of males to fingerprints of                
              putative mothers (e.g. foundresses and workers).  If evidence                  
              from genetic fingerprinting refutes the hypothesis of worker                   
              reproduction, relatedness asymmetries deriving from haplodiploidy              
              remain as the only explanation of the observed sex-ratio                       
              adjustments.  This would imply that social behavior in A. striata              
              evolved not only in response to ecological constraints limiting                
              reproductive options, but also in relation to genetic variables                
              (relatedness asymmetries) intrinsic to the haplodiploid system of              
              sex-determination.
