Title       : Dissertation Research: The Phylogeny of the Creodonta and a Study of their
               Carnivorous Adaptations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1991       
File        : a9100925

Award Number: 9100925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13092              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Clemens billc@ucmpl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Padian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul David Polly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              For the first half of the Cenozoic, members of the order                       
              Creodonta were the predominant terrestrial carnivores in North                 
              America, Eurasia, and Africa.  Creodonts exploited many of the                 
              same adaptive zones as later members of the Carnivora and                      
              Marsupialia, and they exhibit many of the same morphologies.                   
              Although they had a wide distribution and great ecologic                       
              importance, the phylogeny and major locomotory and feeding                     
              adaptations of creodonts remain largely unstudied.                             
                                                                                             
              This study will be the first comprehensive assessment of creodont              
              phylogeny and evolution in the context of phylogenetic                         
              systematics.  It will address the questions of creodont                        
              monophyly, their relationship to the Carnivora, their                          
              phylogenetic position within Eutheria, and the position of                     
              several problematic taxa within Creodonta.  Furthermore, this                  
              phylogenetic information will be used to examine the origin of                 
              morphologies convergent with those seen in other carnivorous                   
              mammals.  Creodonts had three relatively separate radiations.                  
              These, along with the radiations of Carnivora and carnivorous                  
              marsupials, provide an excellent chance to look at the phenomena               
              of convergent evolution and community structure in terrestrial                 
              ecosystems of the Tertiary.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Data will come from original analysis of museum specimens and                  
              from the published literature.  In the phylogenetic analysis                   
              dental, cranial, postcranial, and inferred anatomical characters               
              will be used.
