Title       : Scientists, Engineers, and Technicians in Trade and Regulated Industries, 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1991     
File        : a9100311

Award Number: 9100311
Award Instr.: Contract Interagency Agreement               
Prgm Manager: Mary J. Golladay                        
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian MacDonald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bureau of Labor Stat
	      
	      Washington, DC  20212    /   -

NSF Program : 8800      SCIENCE RESOURCES STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will provide information on scientist,                       
              engineer, and technician (SET) employment in industry.  It will                
              develop national estimates from the ongoing Occupational                       
              Employment Statistics Survey of the Bureau of Labor Statistics                 
              (BLS) which provides annual information on employment in detailed              
              occupations by industry.  The OES survey is a Federal-State                    
              cooperative program in which State Employment Security Agencies                
              collect data following BLS specifications.  Data collection                    
              occurs on a three-year cycle, sequentially covering                            
              manufacturing,                   nonmanufacturing, and trade and               
              regulated (communications, public utilities, and transportation)               
              industries and colleges and universities.                                      
                                                                                             
                   The OES data help NSF meet its  mandate under the National                
              Science Foundation Act to develop and maintain a data base of                  
              demographic, educational, and employment information on SET. The               
              OES surveys are a key part of the system for developing such                   
              information.  Thus, the survey data:                                           
               a) help in developing an accurate profile of U. S. SET                        
                   personnel;                                                                
                b) are used in studying supply of and demand for scientists,                 
                    engineers, and technicians;                                              
                  c) are used to develop current estimates of SET employment in              
                     total and by detailed SET field and industry; and                       
                  d) allow identification of SET growth fields, and those in                 
                      decline or otherwise changing.
