Title       : Data Base Management of NSF Academic Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1993   
File        : a9100672

Award Number: 9100672
Award Instr.: Contract                                     
Prgm Manager: Mary M. Machen                          
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $662321             (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Nozicka gnozicka@qrc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Quantum Research Corp
	      
	      Chevy Chase, MD  20825    /   -

NSF Program : 8800      SCIENCE RESOURCES STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The objectives of this procurement are two-fold.  First,                  
              the contractor is to perform all functions associated with the                 
              conduct and data processing of the annual Survey of Scientific                 
              and Engineering Expenditures at Universities and Colleges.  The                
              contractor will also provide technical support for analytical,                 
              descriptive, and comparative purposes for data maintained in                   
              the system.  Second, the contractor will provide maintenance                   
              support of the academic Integrated Data Base (IDB).  The IDB                   
              includes the survey mentioned above and as well as additional                  
              academic surveys conducted under separate contracts within the                 
              Division of Science Resources Studies.  As part of the IDB                     
              task, the contractor will produce summaries of institutional                   
              data, as well as perform systematic edit checks across surveys                 
              to assess the relationship of financial and personnel resources                
              and the validity of the data as reported.                                      
                   As part of its statutory charge to provide a central                      
              clearinghouse for the collection, interpretation, and analysis                 
              of data on the current and projected availability of scientific                
              and technical resources in the United States, NSF collects and                 
              disseminates statistical data on detailed characteristics of                   
              science and engineering resources in colleges and universities.                
              The annual survey that is the subject of this study as well as                 
              other academic surveys in the IDB provide statistical data and                 
              analytical reports for dissemination to users including                        
              internal NSF management and the National Science Board, other                  
              science and technology policy makers, institutional                            
              researchers, and private organizations interested in higher                    
              education.
