Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Approaches to the Stability of Travelling Waves
               & Other Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9100085

Award Number: 9100085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Jones ckrtj@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Travelling waves are the solutions of partial differential                
              equations that transport information in a fixed direction.  A                  
              physically observable wave must be stable to perturbations in its              
              profile.  The work under this grant will be aimed at the                       
              development of techniques for discriminating betwen stable and                 
              unstable waves.  In diffusive problems, there is envisioned a                  
              theory in which the structure of the wave determines any                       
              instabilities.  The analysis of such systems necessarily involves              
              a reduction to a simpler system, such as through a singular                    
              perturbation.  A new geometric approach to singular perturbations              
              is being developed with Kopell which is designed to solve                      
              stability problems in such equations as those of Hodgkin-Huxley                
              for nerve impulse propagation.  Other stability problems to be                 
              attacked involve the subtle effects ocurring in fluid and optical              
              problems.  Exponential decay to waves does not happen in these                 
              cases and new techniques need to be developed.  The theory of                  
              transversality in dynamical systems will also be developed and                 
              aplied to problems in spin-orbit resonance and uniqueness in                   
              elliptic problems.                                                             
                   The complexity of physical systems that can be analyzed is                
              confined by the mathematical techniques available.  Systems with               
              some simple character, such as those which are linear or an                    
              equation with a single unknown function, yield to well-developed               
              methods of analysis that are now part of the engineer's toolbox.               
              However, more complicated systems remain a challenge to the best               
              applied mathematicians and many important phenomena are missed by              
              the simplification to systems that can be easily analyzed.                     
              Future advances in science may well be driven by the mathematical              
              development of techniques for the analysis of such complicated                 
              systems.  One aspect of such a system that demands a mathematical              
              solution is the question of the stability of basic structures,                 
              under the perturbing influences suplied by the outside world.                  
              The work in this grant will be largely devoted to the development              
              of techniques for assessing the stability of such structures.  It              
              is hoped that at some point in the future these techniques will                
              be in the engineer's toolbox.
