Title       : CRB: Food Web Analysis of Biodiversity: Application to Algal-based River Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1994       
File        : a9100123

Award Number: 9100123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Power mepower@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                   The investigators propose a foodweb-based procedure for                   
              analysis of biodiversity problems.  To test the validity of this               
                                                                                             
              approach, they will apply it to a river food web at a site                     
              within an old-growth conifer forest in northern California.  At                
              present, this site is relatively pristine, but invasion by exotic              
                                                                                             
              predators and herbivores (squawfish and bullfrogs) is anticipated              
                                                                                             
              within a few years.  In the pre-invasion community, the                        
              researchers will investigate how macroalgae, which dominate                    
              primary producer assemblages in the river, mediate predator-prey               
                                                                                             
              interactions involving the dominant vertebrate and invertebrate                
              grazers.  The effects of macroalgae on habitat selection, feeding              
                                                                                             
              rates, growth, survival, and emergence of 1) frog tadpoles (Hyla               
                                                                                             
              regilla and Rana boylei) in the presence and absence of predatory              
                                                                                             
              aquatic garter snakes (Thamnophis couchi); and 2) algivorous                   
              midge larvae (Pseudochironomus richardsoni) in the presence and                
              absence of predatory fishes (roach, Hesperoleucas symmetricus,                 
                                                                                             
              and juvenile steelhead, Oncorhynchus mykiss) will be analyzed in               
                                                                                             
              manipulative field experiments.  Results from these studies will               
                                                                                             
              allow the investigators to evaluate the relative importance of                 
                                                                                             
              macroalgae in providing food, refuges, or thermally favorable                  
                                                                                             
              microhabitats to these dominant vertebrate and invertebrate                    
                                                                                             
              grazers, or to their predators.  Predictions of how changes in                 
                                                                                             
              algal or predator assemblages following invasions will alter                   
                                                                                             
              critical food web linkages will be developed, then tested in                   
                                                                                             
              similar river reaches where predatory squawfish and/or bullfrogs               
                                                                                             
              have already arrived.  These predictions will also be tested at                
                                                                                             
              the primary study site of the principle investigators following                
                                                                                             
              the establishment of invaders.
