Title       : Collaborative Research in the LTER Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1993   
File        : a9100342

Award Number: 9100342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1234136            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry F. Franklin jff@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,1126,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) program has transformed               
              itself from a loosely-affiliated collection of sites to an                     
              integrated network.  Recent accomplishments include: equipment                 
              and software standardization; creation of an effective electronic              
              networking system; standardization in data collection and                      
              management; collaboration in ecological research including multi-              
              site experiments, and comparative analyses and syntheses                       
              addressing major ecological issues; development of the                         
              infrastructure for support of intersite activities; major efforts              
              to identify appropriate technologies and to train LTER scientists              
              in their application; and creation of long-term plans                          
              identifying network goals and action programs.  Collectively the               
              LTER Network has expanded its focus to include larger spatial                  
              dimensions (regional and global) in its long term research and                 
              assumed a leadership role in ecological research related to                    
              global change.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The networked activity of LTER has allowed scientific                          
              collaboration that has spread far beyond the formal LTER Network.              
              This interest in collaboration with and by the larger ecological               
              community, and other research organizations and agencies, has led              
              to increased requests for the Network Office to provide research               
              coordination and communications not only within LTER, but to the               
              larger ecological community.  The LTER electronic mail forwarding              
              system developed at the Network Office, has been particularly                  
              effective in providing a simple means of rapid communication and               
              data exchange for ecologists.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This project will support the activities which facilitate                      
              collaborative research in the LTER Network.  Most of the                       
              resources will be used to support the infrastructure of the                    
              organized, electronically-linked group of ecological scientists                
              working on multi-site research and synthesis within and beyond                 
              the formal LTER program.  Proposed activities include: (1)                     
              Development of on-line, long-term data bases, and operation and                
              expansion of electronic networking; (2) Acquisition, archiving,                
              and analytic use of an array of remote sensing imagery for the                 
              LTER sites; (3) Maintenance of the facilitating infrastructure                 
              and publication program associated with the Coordinating                       
              Committee and Network Office; and (4) Increased involvement with               
              other long-term research programs both domestically (e.g.,                     
              sponsored by agencies such as DOE, USDA, and USGS) and                         
              internationally.  Research and development efforts by the Network              
              staff will occur in areas of database management, remote sensing,              
              and geographic information systems.
