Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates at The University ofNorth Carolina at
               Chapel Hill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1993     
File        : a9100380

Award Number: 9100380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146646             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard M. Fried refried@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Program in Molecular Biology and              
              Biotechnology, an independent campus-wide unit created to promote              
              genetic engineering research and education at the University of                
              North Carolina, Chapel Hill, to continue its Research Experiences              
              for Undergraduates (REU) Site for an additional three years.                   
              Academically promising students chosen from a national pool will               
              participate in ongoing research carried out by a select group of               
              PMBB faculty.  Emphasis will be placed on recruitment of students              
              with limited research opportunities and on students from groups                
              historically under-represented in the sciences.  A total of 12                 
              REU students will participate.  Nine students will be funded by                
              the NSF, two students will be funded by the UNC School of                      
              Medicine, and one student will be supported with funds from the                
              Division of Health Affairs.  The overall goals are to (1)                      
              introduce students to a diversity of biological research and                   
              techniques, particularly in molecular biology and molecular                    
              genetics, (2) familiarize students with the process of                         
              independent research, (3) promote development of laboratory and                
              communication skills, and (4) provide guidance to aid students in              
              selection of graduate programs.  To meet these goals students                  
              will (1) work for ten weeks with faculty on projects having                    
              meaningful scientific objectives and derived from ongoing                      
              research, (2) attend weekly research topic discussions with each               
              faculty preceptor, (3) attend a meeting in which Directors of                  
              Graduate Studies from various departments provide students with                
              advice and information about Ph.D. programs (4) visit campus                   
              scientific core facilities (eg, protein sequencing and analysis),              
              laboratories at the UNC Hospitals that employ molecular                        
              techniques in medical diagnoses (eg, DNA Diagnostic Facility),                 
              and pharmaceutical establishments in Research Triangle Park, and               
              (4) present the results of their research in talks before the                  
              campus community.
