Title       : Biological Conservation and Human Ecology: Conflict or Compatibility Between
               Wildlife and Pastoralists in Sub-Saharan Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1995      
File        : a9100132

Award Number: 9100132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Galvin kathy@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Terrence McCabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1390,9285,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the multidisciplinary research of                        
              anthropologists and ecologists in a conservation park in                       
              Tanzania, Africa.  The central question of the project is whether              
              subsistence pastoralists can coexist with large African mammals                
              in a conservation park.  The question of compatibility between                 
              pastoralists and wildlife in Africa, or indeed between humans and              
              other species in any part of the world, has major implications                 
              for the future of global biological diversity and how we go about              
              the business of biological conservation.  If we assume                         
              incompatibility, this obligates us to continue to use the "park"               
              model of conservation, where people are excluded from exploiting               
              those areas set aside for biodiversity preservation.  If we                    
              assume compatibility, a "regional conservation model" may be                   
              adopted which incorporates both environmental conservation and                 
              maintenance of biological diversity as well as providing                       
              opportunities for human development and welfare.                               
                                                                                             
              The project will investigate these issues by measuring human land              
              use and biological conservation in three different land-use                    
              regimes in the Ngorongoro Conservation Area, Tanzania.  Specific               
              studies will include land use patterns; human nutrition, economy,              
              and demography; livestock nutritional ecology, production and                  
              demography; wildlife diversity, density and habitat use patterns;              
              and vegetation and habitat mapping. This research should                       
              contribute valuable knowledge to inform policy makers on                       
              strategies of biodiversity conservation.
