Title       : REU Site: Training Students to Use Computer Simulations as Research Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9100818

Award Number: 9100818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna C. Balazs Balazs@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Patzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Levitan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This is a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site grant.                  
              The award permits undergraduate students to participate in a                   
              research program in the materials field under the supervision of               
              faculty members actively engaged in research.  Recruitment of                  
              students places strong emphasis upon females, with sources being               
              University of Pittsburgh, Carnegie Mellon University, Chatham                  
              College, Seaton Hill College, and Carlow College.  The latter                  
              three are female colleges in the Pittsburgh area.  Students who                
              succeed in the summer program can then continue to participate                 
              informally during the academic year if they desire.  The award                 
              supports up to six students.  The goal of the research is to                   
              allow students to create "electronic laboratories" in which they               
              can model behavior of complex molecular fluids.  Models used                   
              include Monte Carlo computer simulations of aggregation and                    
              adsorption of thin films of polymers on surfaces and interfaces,               
              and subsequently to relate the microstructure of the polymer                   
              chains to the macroscopic properties of the films.  The program                
              lets students begin with existing models and progress to                       
              independent research where they generate models themselves under               
              the supervision of a faculty member. The program enhances current              
              research activities as well as adding to the number of                         
              scientifically trained individuals.  It is hoped that this hands-              
              on experience will serve as a stimulus to attract and retain                   
              highly-gifted students into careers in teaching and research.
