Title       : Establishment of a Research Experiences for Undergraduate Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1991     
File        : a9100289

Award Number: 9100289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Paesler Paesler@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site grant.                  
              The award permits undergraduate students to participate in a                   
              research program in the materials field under the supervision of               
              faculty members actively engaged in research.  This program has                
              strong participation by women and minority undergraduate students              
              from institutions primarily in the Southeastern United States.                 
              Funding for up to twelve students is provided.  Students spend                 
              ten weeks in the summer involved in group meetings and individual              
              research with faculty members at North Carolina State University.              
              Progress is discussed in the meetings, and results are presented               
              in a seminar series during the last week.  Students elect to work              
              on research with individual professors on one of the following                 
              topics: super-resolution optical spectroscopies, molecular beam                
              epitaxial growth of cadmium telluride, fundamental physics of                  
              atomic collisions, x-ray absorption spectroscopy of amorphous                  
              semiconductors, studies of supernova remnants, thin films and                  
              interfaces of semiconductors, theoretical studies of the                       
              properties of solids.  It is possible for students who can                     
              accommodate the schedule and afford the time to continue their                 
              individual research beyond the ten week period using supplemental              
              funding by the institution or the faculty researchers by mutual                
              arrangement.  The program enhances current research activities as              
              well as adding to the number of scientifically trained                         
              individuals.  It is hoped that this hands-on experience will                   
              serve as a stimulus to attract and retain highly-gifted students               
              into careers in teaching and research.
