Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1992      
File        : a9100774

Award Number: 9100774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49779              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Condit   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award proves funds to establish a biotechnology-oriented                  
              Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the                      
              University of Nevada, Reno to serve 10 students, 5 from UNR and 5              
              from other institutions.  The program will help the students                   
              realize their own potential as research scientists by introducing              
              them to laboratory research and giving them insight into the                   
              training needed for such a career.  Target groups include women                
              and minority students and non-UNR students who have had little                 
              exposure to laboratory research.  Funds are included to hire a                 
              Minority Affairs Consultant in order to increase success in                    
              identifying, recruiting and retaining these students.  The                     
              program is modeled after a 10 year old High School Science                     
              Scholars in Research Summer Program (sponsored by the university,              
              private groups, USDA, and NIH).  The REU students (college                     
              juniors or seniors) will work for 10 weeks at the University of                
              Nevada, Reno on molecular biotechnology research projects chosen               
              by them, but designed by biochemistry and molecular biology                    
              faculty members.  Biweekly discussion groups will be held to                   
              cover:  selection of and application to graduate programs,                     
              financial incentives for graduate studies, opportunities                       
              available in biochemical and molecular biology research and what               
              it's like to be a scientist.  Speakers will include scientists                 
              from under-represented groups.  Students will be selected on a                 
              regional basis with room and board provided for non-local                      
              students.  The program culminates with a one-day retreat at which              
              oral and written reports on the summer's activities will be                    
              given.  Students, faculty and staff will also discuss the                      
              educational and career opportunities.  Follow-up of the REU                    
              students will be done by phone calls and, where practical, by                  
              visits to the students' campuses.
