Title       : Study of the Magnetic Properties of Rare Earth Doped Fluoride Glass Systems: A
               Search for Spun Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1992       
File        : a9100820

Award Number: 9100820
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Hall Dave@galileo.physics.brockport.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brockport
	      
	      Brockport, NY  14420    716/395-2211

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site grant.                  
              The award permits undergraduate students to participate in a                   
              research program in the materials field under the supervision of               
              faculty members actively engaged in research.  Students are                    
              recruited from  the student body at the State University of New                
              York at Brockport, Erie Community College, and Monroe County                   
              Community College.  Strong emphasis is placed on recruitment of                
              under-represented minority and economically disadvantaged groups.              
              Students are trained in operation and construction of scientific               
              instruments typically used for research in low temperature                     
              physics, planning of experiments, analysis of data,                            
              familiarization with the scientific literature, report writing,                
              and oral presentation of results.  Funding is provided for                     
              participation by four students.  Research is performed on                      
              magnetic properties of rare earth doped fluoride glass systems                 
              with interest in spin glass systems.  The research is performed                
              in teams of two students and one faculty member, and continues                 
              throughout the year.  Students present their results at national               
              conferences in low temperature physics.  The program enhances                  
              current research activities as well as adding to the number of                 
              scientifically trained individuals.  It is hoped that this hands-              
              on experience will serve as a stimulus to attract and retain                   
              highly-gifted students into careers in teaching and research.
