Title       : Purification, Characterization, and Molecular Cloning of A Viral Protease
               Inhibitor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1992   
File        : a9100036

Award Number: 9100036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361623             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chao-yun T. Shih   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clyde E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern University
	      P O Box 9614
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708139614    504/771-4500

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1111,9130,
Abstract    :
                Proteolytic cleavage of precursor proteins by virus coded                    
              proteases is a common protein synthesis strategy utilized by                   
              many animal and plant viruses for synthesis of functional                      
              viral proteins.  Prevention of these cleavage processes may                    
              offer a specific means for controlling replication of these                    
              viruses.                                                                       
                The proposed project is designed to investigate a protease                   
              inhibitor which Southern University biologists found to                        
              exist in cowpea embryos.  This inhibitor can completely                        
              prevent proteolytic processing of the precursor proteins of                    
              cowpea mosaic virus (CPMV) in an in vitro protein                              
              synthesizing system.  The plan is to develop a purification                    
              procedure for complete purification of the inhibitor, to                       
              characterize the inhibitor biochemically, to compare the                       
              activity of the inhibitor to the activities of synthetic                       
              peptides, to determine the existence or absence of this                        
              inhibitor in CPMV resistance and sensitive cowpea plants,                      
              and to determine the amino acid sequence of the inhibitor                      
              using DNA cloning and sequencing methods.  The long range                      
              goals of this research are to gain a complete understanding                    
              of the structural and functional properties of this                            
              inhibitor, and to use this inhibitor as a model for                            
              examining the possibility of utilizing protease inhibitors                     
              as antiviral agents for prevention or treatment of viral                       
              diseases.                                                                      
                Besides the research goals, an additional objective of this                  
              proposed project is to present an opportunity to minority                      
              students and faculty of Southern University and other                          
              minority institutions to receive research training and to                      
              gain experience in modern molecular biology techniques,                        
              including genetic engineering techniques.  This objective                      
              will be accomplished through seminars and workshops.
