Title       : Degradative Plasmids: Comparative Regulatory Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1994 
File        : a9100015

Award Number: 9100015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ananda M. Chakrabarty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9178,9232,
Abstract    :
              Highly chlorinated compounds have been manufactured by the chemical            
              industry for several decades now, resulting in their release into              
              the environment.  While simple chlorinated compounds are                       
              biodegradable, highly chlorinated compounds are quite persistent               
              due to limited breakdown by natural microflora which reflects the              
              absence of degradative genes against such compounds in these                   
              microorganisms.  We have thus been interested in understanding how             
              new genes encoding degradation of simple chlorinated compounds                 
              evolve in nature with the hope that such understanding may help us             
              to accelerate the process of evolution in a laboratory setting                 
              against highly chlorinated compounds.  Three structural genes                  
              encoding the degradative enzymes of 3 chlorocatechol and a                     
              regulatory gene that regulates positively the expression of the                
              three structural genes, have been mapped on a plasmid pAC27 in a               
              main strain of Pseudomonas putida as an operon ( the clc operon),              
              similar to another set of chromosomal genes that allow degradation             
              by P. putida of the natural parent compound, catechol ( the cat                
              operon).  This grant seeks to determine how the products of the                
              regulatory genes catR and clcR bind with the operator/promoter                 
              regions of the two operons catBC and clcABD to allow transcription             
              of these two operons in presence of the inducers cis, cis-muconate             
              and 2 chloro-cis, cis-muconate.  Since the genetic organization of             
              the two operons is quite similar, and the individual genes of these            
              two operons demonstrate extensive homology, it is important to                 
              understand how genes for a regulated pathway, which includes a                 
              chlorinated compound as an inducer, evolve from ancestral genes                
              that encode dissimilation of an analogous non-chlorinated compound.            
              The molecular details of specific nucleotides in the catBC and                 
              clcABD operator/promoter regions that are involved in the binding              
              with CatR and ClcR in presence of the non-chlorinated and                      
              chlorinated muconates as well as the amino acids of the regulatory             
              proteins CatR and ClcR that are involved in specific base contacts             
              in the operator/promoter region, will provide considerable insight             
              regarding the mechanism of evolution of regulatory systems in                  
              response to the release of chlorinated compounds.
