Title       : Dissertation Research: The Impact of Seasonality and Food Habits on
               Maternal-Child Nutritional Well-Being and Health Among Highland Basotho
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1991     
File        : a9100128

Award Number: 9100128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Himmelgreen  (Student current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Highly seasonal ecologies can severely impact the nutritional                  
              well-being and health status of individuals.  Two groups which                 
              are particularly at risk are mothers and their infants and young               
              children.  In order to survive in such situations socieities                   
              develop a variety of coping mechanisms that may buffer against                 
              the deleterious environmental conditions.                                      
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will undertake to determine the effects of               
              seasonal food supplies on the health of mothers and young                      
              children in the highlands of Lesotho, a southern African country               
              with highly seasonal food supplies.  Data will be gathered on                  
              seasonal ecology, household demographics, financial reseources,                
              various aspects of diet, health and nutritional variables.                     
              Samples will be drawn from both the general population and a                   
              subset of those who attend a local health clinic.                              
                                                                                             
              It is hypothesized that women who show the greatest variability                
              in weight will have the children with the poorest nutritional                  
              status and that those with the greatest dietary variety will                   
              maintain higher anthropometric status as well as the lowest                    
              incidence of infectious disease. It is also hypothesized that                  
              ther will be more dietary diversity in families in which both                  
              parents are present and/or maintain an extrended family                        
              structure.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Such research will provide valuable information on the                         
              relationship of seasonal stresses and biosocial responses.
