Title       : Advanced Corrosion Resistant Materials For Electrochemical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1992       
File        : a9100359

Award Number: 9100359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259661             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony B. LaConti   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GINER, INC.
	      89 Rumford Avenue
	      Newton, MA  024661311    781/529-0500

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 1700,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During the first phase of this NSF sponsored Small Business                    
              Innovation Research project, Giner, Inc. demonstrated increased                
              corrosion resistance of uniformly deposited, boron-doped conductive            
              diamond coatings on graphite substrates (fuel cell bipolar                     
              separator plate materials) and a reduction in acid absorption (in              
              a phosphoric acid fuel cell environment) as compared to the                    
              uncoated or non-uniformly coated graphite.                                     
                                                                                             
              Very little is known regarding the relationship between growth                 
              initiation conditions on the substrate and the resulting                       
              microstructure of thin diamond coatings, and the adherence of the              
              coatings to substrates. Hence, the research plan for Phase II                  
              focuses on: (1) effect of pretreatment process of nucleating                   
              surfaces (graphite and silicon) on nucleation density and on the               
              nature and properties of the transition layer; (2) growth                      
              experiments for determining the variables that affect the                      
              microstructure of the diamond films; (3) determination of corrosion            
              behavior and correlation with phase purity and crystallite size;               
              (4) development of a process model to describe the parameters and              
              relationships that control: (i) the formation of reproducible dense            
              and corrosion-resistant, very thin boron-doped diamond films; and              
              (ii) the properties of the transition layer interfaces between the             
              films and the substrates. The diamond coating process will be done             
              by another small business firm, Epion Corporation, under the                   
              guidance of Giner, Inc.                                                        
                                                                                             
              It is expected the knowledge gained from this research will                    
              facilitate the development of advanced electrochemical cells and               
              constitute an important contribution to diamond films technology.
