Title       : Vibration Control of Rotating Plates and Translating Bands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9100386

Award Number: 9100386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Devendra P. Garg                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clayton D. Mote   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project addresses three fundamental problems in machine                   
              dynamics whose solutions are important in the design of high                   
              productivity machines in the material processing and computer                  
              industries.  The three research topics are (1) supercritical speed             
              rotating plates, (2) vibration of damped, asymmetric, high speed,              
              rotating circular plates subjected to a stationary slider bearing              
              system, and (3) vibration and stability of high speed bands (tapes,            
              fibers, belts, and saws).                                                      
                                                                                             
              The  first topic's impact will be in computer disk drives and                  
              circular sawing machines.  Current systems use subcritical speed               
              to avoid resonance of vibration waves by low frequency excitations.            
              Supercritical speed plates are subject to aeroelastic flutter and              
              thereby limited in their use.  Supercritical speed plates would                
              imply gains in productivity, and this research seeks to determine              
              the maximum operating speed of a rotating plate.                               
                                                                                             
              The second problem addresses a class of systems which includes                 
              computer disk drives, circular sawing rigs, and disk brake rotors.             
              The plate/slider system can be unstable at subcritical and                     
              supercritical speed.  This research develops a complete                        
              understanding of the stability of axisymmetric plate/slider                    
              systems.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The third research problem addresses the class of systems which                
              includes digital memory tapes, drive belts, band saws, tramway                 
              cables, textiles, paper rolls, and newsprint.  Enhanced                        
              productivity is possible with higher transport speed, but higher               
              speed also leads to transverse vibration which can lead to reduced             
              accuracy and even system failure.  This research provides for                  
              higher speeds by developing linear vibration control of distributed            
              axially moving materials through the use of transverse force                   
              actuators and of tension control.
