Title       : REU: Reserach Experiences for Undergraduates Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1993      
File        : a9100809

Award Number: 9100809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Sharp wsharp@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy L. Killeen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9178,9250,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the continuation of an                    
              Research for Undergraduate site at the Space Physics Research                  
              Laboratory of the University of Michigan.  The Space Physics                   
              Research Laboratory is a broad interdisciplinary research                      
              organization which is part of the Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space              
              Sciences academic department of the University of Michigan.                    
              Research undertaken in the laboratory spans several fields of                  
              engineering and geophysical sciences, with an emphasis on the                  
              observation and understanding of the physical processes which                  
              control the gaseous, plasma and liquid envelopes of the Earth and              
              planetary bodies.  The annual research budget of the laboratory                
              is  $9M and major funding comes from the National Science                      
              Foundation and NASA as well as other agencies.  Because of the                 
              strong ties to the academic environment as the University, and                 
              its presence within a geoscience department in the College of                  
              Engineering, the Space Physics Research Laboratory has always                  
              maintained an active interest in providing significant                         
              undergraduate and graduate research opportunities, particularly                
              in the area of Solar-Terrestrial research and Aeronomy.  The                   
              continued REU site will involve the direct participation of about              
              11 key faculty members (plus about 7 others) who have all had                  
              previous experience with the training of undergraduate students                
              in research on the REU program on the SPRL.  Funding is                        
              requested to provide support for approximately 12 students, of                 
              whom at least half will be from institutions other than the                    
              University of Michigan.  Because of its commitment to high-                    
              quality to undergraduate education, the University has agreed to               
              waive indirect cost on this program.  The rich variety and                     
              significance of the research carried out within the Laboratory                 
              and the commitment of time on the part of the faculty                          
              participants will provide the undergraduate of the program a                   
              significant opportunity to have hands-on experience in active and              
              exciting research.
