Title       : Program for Undergraduate Research in Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1993  
File        : a9100622

Award Number: 9100622
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian D. Fabes Fabes@aml.ariona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Lochner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site                   
              grant.  The award permits undergraduate students to participate                
              in a research program in the materials field under the                         
              supervision of faculty members actively engaged in research.  The              
              REU Site at the University of Arizona is designed to integrate                 
              undergraduate students into already active and stimulating                     
              research groups in Materials Science and Engineering.                          
              Recruiting for students places high emphasis upon hispanic and                 
              other minorities as well as females, and places additional                     
              emphasis on attracting students from the surrounding Community                 
              Colleges, such as Pima Community College.  Funding provides for                
              support of six students.  The program begins with a five week                  
              summer instructional program at the University of Arizona                      
              Materials Laboratory, and then progresses into the academic year               
              with more emphasis on research.  Skills taught in the summer                   
              portion include laboratory safety, mixing chemicals, running                   
              characterization instrumentation, analysis of data, and report                 
              preparation.  Students who show highest aptitude and desire will               
              continue to pursue their research participation during the                     
              academic year with matching funding support from the University                
              of Arizona.  Students present their results in a seminar, and are              
              encouraged to publish the results in the appropriate scientific                
              literature. The topics selected for the research include laser                 
              processing of sol-gel coatings, structure of thin ceramic films,               
              strengthening of inorganic glass by alkoxide coatings, and                     
              processing of glass-ceramics from lunar resources.  The program                
              enhances current research activities as well as adding to the                  
              number of scientifically trained individuals.  It is hoped that                
              this hands-on experience will serve as a stimulus to attract and               
              retain highly-gifted students into careers in teaching and                     
              research.
