Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Undergraduate Research in applying Algebra and Scientific
               Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1991     
File        : a9100491

Award Number: 9100491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Myoung An   (Principal Investigator current)
              Helen Strassberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY York College
	      94-20 Guy R. Brewer Boulevard
	      Jamaica, NY  11451    718/262-2060

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   A Research Experiences for Undergraduates project supported               
              by this grant will follow a three-stage approach.  The format                  
              does not follow the traditional summer schedule.  Rather,                      
              students will first complete two six-week cycles of study and                  
              research during the academic year.  They will concentrate on                   
              understanding the structure of crystallographic groups.  The work              
              will cover the necessary concepts in modern algebra and number                 
              theory which form the basis of X-ray crystallography.  Matrix                  
              groups, subgroup structure , normality and quotient structure                  
              will be analyzed first.  Particular crystallographic groups will               
              be taken up next and students will learn how to extract relevant               
              properties from these structures.                                              
                   The second cycle involves activities related to the study of              
              crystallographic groups on certain rings.  This will involve the               
              development of computational techniques for matrix manipulation.               
              Students will learn the orbital decomposition of rings and the                 
              concept of fundamental region.  They will, at this stage, be                   
              introduced to the Center for Large Scale Computation to observe                
              research activities on the applications of computation in                      
              research, design of algorithms and scientific computing.                       
                   The third stage involves independent work and will take                   
              place immediately after the close of spring semester.  Students                
              will use computers to determine fundamental regions and the                    
              permutation matrices mapping one region onto another.  They will               
              investigate the efficiency of the permutation relative to                      
              specific computer architectures.  Time will also be spent                      
              developing algorithms and implementing theoretical ideas to the                
              computational environment, where properties overlooked in the                  
              theoretical phase become evident.
