Title       : Shipboard Technician Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1996      
File        : a9100400

Award Number: 9100400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371493             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard S. Barnes  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis A. Hansell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 5415      OCEANOGRAPHIC TECHNICAL SERVCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Bermuda Biological Station will receive support for                        
              shipboard technician activities associated with the R/V                        
              WEATHERBIRD II, a 120-foot research vessel that is owned and                   
              operated by the Station.  Nearly all of the ship's operating                   
              schedule during 1991 is in support of NSF-sponsored research                   
              projects.  The Shipboard Technician Program has two                            
              components: an at-sea component and an ashore component.                       
                                                                                             
              The at-sea component consists of instructing scientific                        
              personnel in the use of shared shipboard equipment; mainten-                   
              ance, repair, and calibration of scientific instrumentation;                   
              instruction and supervision of deck operations; and providing                  
              logistics assistance to on-coming and off-going scientific                     
              parties.  On shore activities include maintenance, repair,                     
              and calibration of shared-use seagoing equipment and                           
              assisting scientific personnel in preparing for field work on                  
              the vessel.  Shipboard technicians funded by this award have                   
              broad responsibilities for providing the coordination and                      
              assistance needed for the successful completion of research                    
              projects at sea.  The level of activity and amount of support                  
              are closely related to the size and capability of the vessel,                  
              and its scientific outfit and capability.
