Title       : Social Ecology Research Experience for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1992       
File        : a9100837

Award Number: 9100837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary W. Evans   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Social Ecology at               
              the University of California, Irvine to establish a Research                   
              Experiences for Undergraduates SITE in the discipline of social                
              ecology.  Undergraduates in this program will be mentored by a                 
              faculty member in the Program of Social Ecology and will                       
              participate in a major research project.  Each student                         
              participant will learn about the research approaches of the other              
              students and faculty in the program during periodic receptions                 
              and seminars.  Students will also participate in workshops on the              
              GRE, application to graduate school, and will be provided with                 
              tutoring and academic counseling tailored to their individual                  
              needs.  At the beginning of winter quarter each involved faculty               
              member will meet with the group to discuss the research area of                
              the undergraduate whom he/she will mentor.  Throughout winter and              
              spring faculty will build a personal mentorship relationship with              
              their student through the vehicle of the research project.  The                
              research activities of the group will focus on recurring social                
              and environmental problems related to crime and justice in                     
              society, social influences on human development over the life                  
              cycle, and effects of the physical environment on health and                   
              behavior.  Research techniques are designed to reveal human                    
              adaption by concentration on the study of events in the natural                
              settings in which they occur.  Near the end of spring quarter all              
              students will present their results to the group.  Finally,                    
              students will be formally and informally encouraged to continue                
              research activities and the mentorship relationship and to pursue              
              an academic career.
