Title       : Dissertation Research: The Functional Significance of the Anthropoid Postorbital
               Septum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1991     
File        : a9100523

Award Number: 9100523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11495              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Hylander bill_hylander@baa.mc.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this research is to clarify the role of               
              an anatomical structure known as the postorbital septum.  This is              
              a thin sheet of bone which forms the lateral aspect of the rear                
              of the orbit.  It is apparently a recently evolved structure                   
              which is only found in the cranium of the anthropoids (the higher              
              primates) and the tarsier.                                                     
                                                                                             
              While the postorbital septum has been used as a diagnostic                     
              criterion of the higher primates for many years, there have been               
              virtually no tests of the various hypotheses which have been put               
              forward to account for its existence.  The PIs will undertake a                
              variety of experiments in an attempt to account for the trait's                
              evolution.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              One explanation which has been advanced is that the sheet of bone              
              serves to isolate muscles which are involved in mastication                    
              (those in back of the septum) from the anterior muscles which are              
              involved in vision.  This would presumably be of significance to               
              highly visually-oriented animals such as the anthropoids.  The                 
              PIs will undertake a number of dissections of animals, including               
              anthropoids, to determine the placement of various masticatory                 
              muscles relative to the orbit.  Results will be plotted and                    
              examined as a predictive tool.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Another explanation which has been advanced relates the septum to              
              the reduction of strain in the face during mastication.                        
              Measurements of bone stress can be carried out using a series of               
              animals already at the Yerkes Primate Center.                                  
                                                                                             
              This research will help to test and clarify the forces which                   
              brought the bony septum into existence millions of years ago and               
              understand its functioning in animals today.
