Title       : A Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Developmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1991        
File        : a9100922

Award Number: 9100922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44693              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl D. Rhodes   (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Kirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0113000   Animal Welfare                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Division of Biology and                       
              Biomedical Sciences at Washington University to continue a                     
              Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site that was established              
              last year.  Twelve undergraduates, from a diversity of collegiate              
              and ethnic backgrounds, will be recruited to spend 8-12 summer                 
              weeks engaged in developmental biology research with faculty                   
              mentors who will be selected, on the basis of mutual interests,                
              from the about 30 developmental biologists on the faculty.  These              
              staff members have active, well-equipped and funded research                   
              groups working on a wide range of developmental problems, ranging              
              from mating and zygote formation in Chlamydomonas, through organ-              
              specific gene expression in transgenic plants, and control of                  
              germ cell differentiation in nematodes, to formation of patterned              
              connections in the mammalian CNS.  The emphasis of the program                 
              will be on getting each student actively engaged in increasingly               
              independent research in one of these productive laboratories.                  
              However, to help the students view their own research in a                     
              broader scientific and professional context, four supplementary                
              activities will be provided: (1) Five days during the early part               
              of the program will be devoted to introducing the REU students to              
              some of the major research models and methods of contemporary                  
              developmental biology, and hands-on laboratory experiences.  (2)               
              In each odd-numbered week a member of the participating faculty                
              will present an informal research seminar and discussion,                      
              designed specifically for these students.  (3) In even-numbered                
              weeks, the students will participate with Washington University                
              graduate students, postdocs and faculty in an ongoing                          
              Developmental Biology Journal Club.  (4) At the end of the                     
              summer, a weekend retreat will be held at which students in this               
              program, together with other summer undergraduate research                     
              students, will present the results of their summer research                    
              either orally or as poster papers.  A number of social                         
              activities, designed to bring the students and faculty together                
              more often on an informal basis, will also be sponsored by the                 
              program and the Division.
