Title       : Genetic and Biochemical Studies of the Tryptophan Operon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9206321

Award Number: 9206321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $730000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Yanofsky yanofsky@cmgm.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Studies will continue on the regulatory-metabolic network that                 
              modulates uptake, synthesis and utilization of tryptophan in                   
              Escherichia coli.  The effects of nutritional shifts will be                   
              examined in wild type, and in mutants lacking specific regulatory              
              functions.  Global effects of the TyrR protein will be explored.               
              in vitro band shift analyses will be performed with RNA polymerase,            
              trp superrepressor, and various target operators, to determine the             
              basis of the differential in vivo regulation of transcription                  
              initiation in the four operons controlled by the trp repressor of              
              E. coli.  in vivo experiments will be performed to determine the               
              effects of replacing the normal repressor by a slowly dissociating             
              superrepressor.  Second and third site revertants will be isolated             
              in tryptophan synthetase a mutants altered in catalytic residues;              
              residue changes should reveal important features of the active site            
              of this protein.  The basis of the defects in Crawford's trpB                  
              repairable mutants will be examined.  The amino and carboxy                    
              terminal segments of the tryptophan synthetase chains of E. coli               
              will be systematically altered in an effort to explain the order of            
              gene fusion that occured during evolution of the fused tryptophan              
              synthetase structural gene of fungi.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Much of what is known about metabolism of the amino acid tryptophan            
              in bacteria is due to the work of this laboratory.  Although many              
              details of the complex network of regulation controlling tryptophan            
              synthesis and utlization can now be explained, the problem still               
              offers many avenues of study that will provide information                     
              concerning a wide range of fundamental biochemical and genetic                 
              processes.
