Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Stochastic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1993     
File        : a9206937

Award Number: 9206937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50006              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rabindra N. Bhattacharya bhattach@ucs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Nonlinear stochastic models, especially those which are                   
              either Markovian or may be analyzed by Markovian methods, are the              
              main focus of the proposal.  Among these are nonlinear                         
              autoregressive (-moving average) processes of much interest in                 
              time series analysis, and random perturbations of dynamical                    
              systems and flows which exhibit various phase transitions as a                 
              parameter changes.  The interplay between Markov processes and                 
              dynamical systems that this proposal explores has significant                  
              consequences to both fields.  For those Markov processes which                 
              approach a unique steady state as time progresses, a further                   
              object of study is the central limit theorem and its refinement                
              by asymptotic expansions.  These refinements have applications in              
              diverse areas such as bootstrapping in time series, and singular               
              perturbation expansions of large time solutions of a class of                  
              partial differential equations which arise in the prediction of                
              the spread of contaminants in an aquifer.                                      
                   Random processes which occur in nature may often be regarded              
              as a deterministic system perturbed by random noise.  Just as the              
              nature of the deterministic part greatly influences the behavior               
              of the random process, the statistical behavior of the random                  
              process may also be used in predicting the large time behavior of              
              the deterministic system itself.  This latter study is                         
              particularly useful in analyzing complex deterministic systems                 
              such as those arising in the study of turbulence.  The present                 
              proposal seeks to explore this interplay between deterministic                 
              and random processes.  Another object is the refinement of                     
              precise statistical laws governing the long-run average behavior               
              of many important random phenomena.  Among diverse potential                   
              applications are bootstrapping in time series and the prediction               
              of the spread of contaminants in an aquifer.
