Title       : Mechanisms of Mitochondrial RNA Self-Splicing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1994      
File        : a9206525

Award Number: 9206525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig L. Peebles cpeebles@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Investigation of self-splicing Group II intorns (GIIs) from the                
              motochondria of the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae has shown that             
              GII transcripts undergo self-splicing to yield intron lariats and              
              spliced exons.  GII and nuclear pre-mRNA introns use similar                   
              chemical mechanisms; consequently, analysis of GII reactions will              
              further understanding of nuclear pre-mRNA splicing.  GIIs are                  
              organized into discrete secondary structure domains; this suggest              
              that each domain has a definite three dimensional shape that forms             
              independenlty and is maintained in the presence of other domains.              
              Assembly of the tertiary structure of the whoe intron depends on               
              specific contacts between domains.  Structural study of isolated               
              domains, mapping interdomain contacts, and assessment of the                   
              interchangability domains from different GIIs is proposed.                     
              This project will determine catalytically critical substrate                   
              contacts between Domains 5 (D5) and other domains.  D5 is required             
              for both steps of splicing.  Mutant derivatives of D5 will be                  
              prepared systematically to alter the structure and evaluate the                
              function of D5 quantitatively.  These changes will target sites                
              that are highly conserved among D5s.  Kinetic parameters and                   
              structural requirements for splicing related reactions will be                 
              determined.  D5 (or derivatives) will be combined with Domain 6                
              (D6) to analyze their functional cooperation.  D6 contains the                 
              branch site that attacks the 5' splice site in the first step of               
              splicing.  D5 and D6 will be tested with Exon 2 to study the second            
              step of splicing.  To identify the site of D5 action, D5 will be               
              prepared with photoactive reagents and crosslinked to the intron.              
              Finally, chemical synthesis will yield enough D5 for direct                    
              structural analysis.  RNA catalysis is a widespread biological                 
              phenomenon; this project offers insight into the chemical mechanism            
              of a unique RNA catalyst.                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              In the cell nucleus of plants and animals, genes are assembled from            
              mosiacs of expressed and intervening sequences by a process called             
              RNA splicing.  All cells with nuclei first make long RNA molecules             
              by copying the DNA directly.  The cells then cut and join the large            
              RNA molecules to assemble mature messenger RNAs that will be                   
              translated in the cytoplasm to express proteins.  The process of               
              RNA splicing must be efficient and accurate to allow functional                
              proteins to be produced.  The cellular machinery for RNA splicing              
              is extraodinarily complex, to allow for fine control of gene                   
              expression in development, brain function, and the immune system.              
              We know that many genetic abnormalities are associated with faulty             
              RNA splicing, so developing rational and effective treatments will             
              require a thorough description of the process of RNA splicing.  The            
              RNA splicing machinery is built up with several small RNAs in                  
              assemblies with proteins and dozens of additional protein                      
              molecules. Because there are so many different parts, it is hard               
              biochemically to analyze RNA splicing from higher cells in detail.             
              This project will analyze a special kind of RNA splicing machinery             
              that operates in the mitochondrion, the energy producing                       
              compartment of yeast cells. This special RNA splicing reaction uses            
              the same chemistry as splicing in plant and animal cells, but only             
              RNA molecules are needed in this case.  We are studying how two                
              different RNA molecules recognize and bind to each other                       
              specifically and then work together to carry out the reaction of               
              splicing.  In particular , we will find out what parts of each                 
              molecule are needed for splicing and where each molecule touches               
              the other one.  We want to produce a very detailed picture of the              
              molecular structure of these two RNA molecules.  This work will                
              provide a better understanding of RNA splicing as it occurs in                 
              cells and a more precise picture of catalytic strategies that may              
              be used by RNA enzymes.  Another benefit of this project will be               
              the possible rational design of antibiotics to prevent growth of               
              yeast and fungus pathogens that afflict humans, animals, and crops             
              plants, since animal cells do not use this special type of RNA                 
              splicing that is found in virtually all fungi.
