Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: In Situ Analysis of the Distribution and
               Phylogeny of Bacteria Isolated from Deep- Sea Hydrothermal Vents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1992       
File        : a9206824

Award Number: 9206824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11050              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Craig Cary   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Giovannoni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  In Situ Analysis of the                          
              Distribution and Phylogeny of Bacteria Isolated from Deep-Sea                  
              Hydrothermal Vents                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a three-month postdoctoral research visit              
              by Dr. S. Craig Cary of Oregon State University to the Institut                
              Francais de Recherche pour L'Exploitation de La Mer (IFREMER)                  
              to work with Dr. Daniel Desbruyeres.                                           
                                                                                             
              The discovery of the deep-sea hydrothermal vents revealed a                    
              unique community of marine invertebrates solely supported on                   
              reduced carbon fixed by chemoautotrophic endosymbiotic bacteria.               
              The restricted geography of these deep-sea vents and geochemically             
              similar habitats lends itself to interesting questions concerning the          
              diversity and distribution of the free-living bacteria.  An                    
              unprecedented collection of bacterial isolates from a range of                 
              hydrothermal and cold-seep sites has been established at                       
              IFREMER.  Dr. Cary and Dr. Desbruyeres will examine the                        
              phylogeny and distribution of deep-sea bacteria within and between             
              hydrothermal and cold-seep habitats.  Isolates of autotrophic                  
              bacteria from different geographic locations and depth ranges will             
              be examined.  16S ribosomal RNA sequence analyses will be used                 
              to determine the genetic diversity and relationship  of the bacteria.          
              Computer comparisons of these sequences with established                       
              sequence data bases will allow phylogenetic analysis to define the             
              structure of the microbial community.  The genetic diversity of                
              bacteria found associated with the tube-dwelling vent polychaete               
              Alvinella pompejana will also be ascertained and compared to the               
              free-living and endosymbiotic representatives.                                 
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a stipend for three months.
