Title       : Function of Mg1 Proteins in Gliding in Myxococcus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9206996

Award Number: 9206996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Hartzell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The long range goal of this project is to understand the                     
              mechanism of surface translocation, or gliding, in myxobacteria.               
              The survival of a diverse group of environmentally important                   
              organisms, including myxobacteria, cytophaga, cyanobacteria, and               
              Beggiotoa, depends upon their ability to glide.  In this project,              
              Myxococcus xanthus will be used as a model to understand gliding               
              because it is genetically well-characterized.  One gene, mglA, is              
              essential for gliding; the focus of this project will be on how                
              MglA protein interacts with other motility components.  Since mglA             
              is the only gene common to the two known genetically-identified                
              systems, A and S, that control gliding, MglA protein may affect                
              expression of A- and S-gliding genes.  The first aim will therefore            
              be to isolate and characterize reporter gene (lacZ) insertions in              
              A- and S-motility genes and determine if their transcription is                
              altered in an mgl- strain.  Another goal will be to use mutagenesis            
              to probe the functional domains of MglA by identifying mglA mutants            
              that show aberrant gliding.  Suppressor experiments have also been             
              designed to identify genes encoding proteins that interact with                
              MglA.  One mutant has already been identified that suppresses the              
              mglA defect, and the corresponding gene will be cloned to determine            
              if it encodes a gliding protein that interacts with MglA.                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Bacteria need to be able to move from one place to another in order            
              to survive.  One of the most intriguing, and least understood,                 
              mechanisms of bacterial motility is the phenomenon of gliding on               
              solid substrata.  The field is complicated by the likelihood that              
              the gliding mechanisms employed by one group of gliding bacteria               
              may not be the same as those employed by other groups.  In                     
              myxobacteria, gliding is crucial not only to enable the bacteria to            
              find food, but also to enable the bacteria to undergo a                        
              developmental transition from the vegetative gliding bacterium form            
              to a sporogenic "fruiting body."  There are two almost independent             
              motility systems, termed "A" ("adventurous") and "S" ("social").               
              S-motility requires cell-to-cell proximity for movement to occur,              
              and is known to involve at least 12 distinct genes.  A-motility                
              does not require cell-cell contact, and is controlled by at least              
              22 genes.  Wild-type myxococci exhibit both A+ and S+ motility.  A             
              mutation in one of the A or S genes abolishes only the A or S type             
              of motility.  Both of these mechanisms seem to involve regulation              
              of the same basic motility machinery.  In addition, there are other            
              genes, termed "frz" genes, which affect the rate at which cells                
              reverse direction while gliding.  However, there is a single                   
              genetic locus, mglA, for which a mutation abolishes both A and S               
              type motility, resulting in totally nonmotile bacteria.  The                   
              proposed studies of this pivotal gene are likely to shed new light             
              on the mechanism of gliding in myxococci.
