Title       : DNA Recognition by Basic-Leucine Zipper Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9206095

Award Number: 9206095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $644750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Guiltinan mjg9@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1166,9119,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EmBP-1 is a wheat basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) class                            
              transcription factor which has been implicated in the control                  
              of gene expression.  Proposed experimentation will address the                 
              structure-function relationships of the DNA binding domain of                  
              EmBP-1.  By analyzing mutant DNA binding proteins with altered                 
              binding preferences, insight can be gained of the ways in which                
              amino acid sequences within the DNA binding domains of bZIP                    
              proteins encode functional specificities.  The minimal domains                 
              for the dimerization and DNA binding functions of EmBP-1 will                  
              be determined using deletion analysis and in vitro binding                     
              assays.  cDNA libraries encoding randomly mutagenized basic                    
              region domains will be constructed and probed with degenerate                  
              oligonucleotides to determine how changes in the amino acid                    
              sequences of the bZIP domains are manifested in altered binding                
              specificities.  The functional significance of these findings                  
              will be tested in vivo by expressing mutagenized versions of                   
              EmBP-1 in transgenic Arabidopsis plants.  Additional, to                       
              examine the natural variation in bZIP sequences, members of the                
              EmBP-1 gene family will be isolated from Arabidopsis.  Because                 
              the leucine zipper class of transcription factors has been                     
              conserved from plants to animals, the knowledge gained from the                
              proposed research will be applicable to the basic principles                   
              operating in most eukaryotic cells.                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              EmBP-1 is a wheat DNA binding protein involved in controlling                  
              gene expression.  Understanding the way in which DNA binding                   
              proteins recognize specific DNA sequences will lead to a                       
              greater understanding of the mechanisms by which cells activate                
              gene expression.  This has great significance in understanding                 
              normal growth and development as well as in understanding                      
              aberrant gene expression which is often associated with human                  
              disease such as cancer.  By analyzing mutant DNA binding                       
              proteins with altered binding preferences, insight can be                      
              gained of the ways in which this class of proteins function.                   
              Randomly mutagenizeds Dna binding domains will be constructed                  
              analyzed to determine how changes in the amino acid sequences                  
              are manifested in altered binding specificity.  These findings                 
              will be tested by expressing mutagenized versions of EnBP-1 in                 
              genetically engineered plants,  Additionally, to examine the                   
              natural variation in DNA binding sequences, related genes will                 
              be isolated from Arabidopsis (a model plant species used in                    
              molecular genetic studies).  Because this type of protein is                   
              found within organisms ranging from plants to animals, the                     
              knowledge gained  from the proposed research will be applicable                
              to the basic principles operating in most cells.
