Title       : Developmental and Hormonal Regulation of Gene Expression During Flower
               Senescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1994      
File        : a9206729

Award Number: 9206729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Woodson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The senescence of flower petals is associated with increased                   
              synthesis of the phytohormone ethylene, which in turn serves to                
              initiate and regulate the processes of programmed cell death.  This            
              research aims to investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in              
              the induction of ethylene synthesis, and determine how ethylene                
              acts to initiate this developmental program.  The initial                      
              experiments have focused on identifying senescence-related mRNAs               
              and characterizing their temporal, spatial, and hormonal                       
              regulation.  Among these senescence-related transcripts are those              
              encoding enzymes in the ethylene biosynthetic pathway including 1-             
              aminocyclopropane- 1 carboxylate synthase and the ethylene forming             
              enzyme.  Expression of antisense RNAs of senescence-related genes              
              will be used to determine if these genes are essential for                     
              programmed cell death.  The PI will define the cis-acting elements             
              involved in the regulation of tissue-specific and/or ethylene-                 
              regulated expression of petal senscence-related genes and -                   
              glucuronidase and the PI will evaluate the expression of this                  
              reportedr gene in response to developmental factors and ethylene               
              in transgenic plants and transient assays.  Identification of                  
              regulatory sequences will allow us to screen expression libraries              
              of senescing petal mRNAs for clones whose products specifically                
              bind to these DNA sequences.  Aside from questions concerning the              
              developmental biology of programmed cell death, these experiments              
              will identify intermediates in the signal transduction pathway                 
              linking initial perception of ethylene to gene expression.
