Title       : Structure and Function of Troponin and Myosin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9206325

Award Number: 9206325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Collins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The interaction of myosin (thick filaments) and actin (thin                    
              filaments) which results in muscle contraction is regulated by                 
              reversible binding of calcium ions to intracellular, regulatory                
              proteins.  Depending on the source of the muscle, the calcium-                 
              binding protein may be a subunit of myosin, troponin (associated               
              with actin), or both acting in concert.  The long term objective of            
              the research is to elucidate the basic molecular mechanisms of the             
              troponin-linked and myosin-linked calcium regulation in muscle.  We            
              will investigate the way in which calcium influences the                       
              interactions of the muscle regulatory proteins.  The calcium-                  
              binding subunits, troponin C and myosin light chains, are                      
              homologous proteins.  Our results will identify similarities and               
              differences in the structures and interactions of these proteins               
              which are indicative of fundamental common mechanisms as well as               
              key specific differences which have led to functional                          
              specialization in the two regulatory systems.  Our experimental                
              approach is based on the use of intermolecular chemical                        
              crosslinking of the regulatory proteins.  Mass spectrometry and                
              protein chemistry techniques will be used to identify crosslinked              
              amino acid residues in each protein.  Site-directed mutagenesis                
              will be used to be used to increase the range of possibilities for             
              crosslinking and to further characterize the details of the                    
              interaction sites.                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Muscle contraction is regulated by reversible binding of calcium               
              ions to intracellular, regulatory proteins.  Depending on the                  
              source of the muscle, the calcium-binding protein may be a subunit             
              of myosin, troponin (associated with actin), or both acting in                 
              concert.  The long term objective of the research is to elucidate              
              the basic molecular mechanisms of the troponin-linked and myosin-              
              linked calcium regulation in muscle.  The calcium-binding subunits,            
              troponin C and myosin light chains, are homologous proteins.  This             
              research will identify similarities and differences in the                     
              structures and interactions of these proteins which are indicative             
              of fundamental common mechanisms as well as key specific                       
              differences which have led to functional specialization in the two             
              regulatory systems.  The experimental approach is based on the use             
              of intermolecular chemical crosslinking of the regulatory proteins.            
              Mass spectrometry and protein chemistry techniques will be used to             
              identify crosslinked amino acid residues in each protein.  Site-               
              directed mutagenesis will be used to be used to increase the range             
              of possibilities for crosslinking and to further characterize the              
              details of the interaction sites.
