Title       : Quantum Critical Phenomena in Disordered Interacting Bose Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9206023

Award Number: 9206023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233806             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Scalettar scalettar@physics.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gergely T. Zimanyi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The physics of disordered, correlated Bose sytems constitutes a                
              major challenge.  Recently a density controlled superfluid                     
              transition was observed in helium-four absorbed in porous materials            
              with a superfluid density exponent contrdicting earlier theories;              
              new types of scaling behavior of the resistivity have been seen in             
              disordered superconducting films and wires; and the observation of             
              a possible universal conductance in granular superconducting films             
              has attracted considerable excitement.  A related problem of                   
              primary importance is the vortex state of the high temperature                 
              superconductors, where an unconventional, vortex-glass phase has               
              been observed in some materials.  At the same time, the discovery              
              of heavy fermion and oxide superconductors has driven a substantial            
              improvement in numerical techniques and also led to genuinely new              
              analytical approaches to strongly correlated fermions.  These                  
              advanceshave yet to be applied to the interacting boson problem.               
              The research will apply Quantum Monte Carlo, the Schwinger boson               
              approach and the perturbative scaling methids of localization                  
              theory to explore the quantum phase transitions taking place in                
              helium-four absorbed in porous media and granular superconductors,             
              as modeled by a disordered, interacting boson Hamiltonian.  The                
              disorder will be handled by methods which were successful in the               
              spin-glass problem, among others finite size scaling of                        
              appropriately chosen dimensionless quantities, and a suitable                  
              version of the maximum entropy method.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Theoretical research will be conducted using numerical and                     
              analytical techniques to study the behavior of disordered,                     
              interacting many particle systems which obey Bose statistics.  New             
              methods will be applied to describe such diverse physical systems              
              as properties of helium absorbed in porous materials and the                   
              behavior of high temperature superconductors.
