Title       : Structure Function Studies on Phytochrome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9206110

Award Number: 9206110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Clark Lagarias   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1168,
Abstract    :
              The ability to adjust to changes in the external light                         
              environment is especially important to plant survival because,                 
              unlike animals, plants depend on sunlight for photosynthesis                   
              and they do not have a neuromuscular system which allows them                  
              to move to a more optimum light environment.  Plants therefore                 
              possess the unique light-sensing photoreceptor molecule                        
              phytochrome which enables them to perceive the frequent                        
              fluctuations of intensity, direction and spectral quality of                   
              light in their environment.  Experiments outlines in this                      
              proposal seek to provide new information on phytochrome                        
              structure and to address the hypothesis that phytochrome is a                  
              light-regulated enzyme.  The long tern goal of these studies is                
              to define the structural basis for phytochrome function.  For                  
              a number of our studies, we will; employ the unicellular green                 
              alga Mesotaenium caldariorum as a model system.  Identification                
              of the components of the phytochrome signal transduction                       
              pathway in this algal should produce useful tools for analysis                 
              of phytochrome response pathways in considerably more complex                  
              higher plant tissues.                                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              The ability to adjust to changes in the external light                         
              environment is especially important to plant survival because,                 
              unlike animals, plants depend on sunlight for photosynthesis                   
              and they do not have a neuromuscular system which allows them                  
              to move to a more optimum light environment.  This project                     
              focuses on phytochrome, a light-sensing protein found in all                   
              plants which perceives the direction, intensity and color of                   
              light that impinges on the plant.  Specifically, we are                        
              interested in how this information is received by phytochrome,                 
              how it passed on to other molecules, and ultimately how these                  
              processes lead to changes in plant growth and development (e.g.                
              seed germination, flowering and growth rate). Since all life on                
              earth depends on photosynthesis by green plants, a basic                       
              understanding of the biochemical processes which enable plants                 
              to adapt to their light environment is of great importance.
