Title       : Membrane Topology and Macromolecular Transport of the Bacterial Envelope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9206674

Award Number: 9206674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manfred E. Bayer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Margret H. Bayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Cancer Research
	      7701 Burholme Avenue, Fox Chase
	      Philadelphia, PA  191112412    215/728-2490

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 The proposed research focuses on the functional and structural              
              organization of envelope membranes of established strains of                   
              Escherichia coli and of new constructs.  Biochemical, immunological            
              and molecular-biological techniques will be used in combination                
              with new developments in cryofixation procedures to optimize high              
              resolution topography of the membranes of Gram-negative bacterial              
              cells.  Emphasis is placed on a biochemical, structural and genetic            
              dissection of translocation processes involving membrane proteins              
              and polysaccharides as they are transported from the inner membrane            
              (IM) to their target site at the outer envelope membrane (OM).                 
              Two models of translocation pathways will be tested:  after                    
              synthesis and passage through the IM, a molecule may travel either             
              via IM/OM connections (the membrane adhesions sites), or via the               
              periplasmic space.  The proposed experiments are aimed at the study            
              of topographic relationships of the envelope components in                     
              undisrupted cells, and at a molecular stabilization of the cell                
              envelope.  The work will be subdivided into two aspects:  1, the               
              topology of export pathways of outer membrane polysaccharides and              
              proteins; and 2, stabilization of the membrane organization using              
              cryofixation and UV-flash crosslinking, to determine the in vivo               
              structure of adhesion sites and periplasm.  It is hoped that                   
              development of the UV-flash and cryo preparation methodologies will            
              permit future investigations into the spatial distribution of                  
              components of the protein export machinery (e.g., localization of              
              Sec A, Sec E, and export sites of precursor proteins in wild type              
              and mutant cells).                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Gram-negative bacteria are bounded by envelopes consisting of an               
              inner membrane (equivalent to the plasma membrane of the bacterial             
              cell) and an outer membrane (a true biological membrane, with                  
              proteins associated with a lipid bilayer), and a layer of wall                 
              (peptidoglycan) sandwiched between the two membranes.  The envelope            
              forms a barrier against macromolecules, drugs, and viruses, and                
              provides mechanical stability toward turgor pressure and physical              
              injury.  The envelope membranes also have to provide for the                   
              specific transmembrane transfer of large molecules (both coming in             
              and going out).  It also must be dynamic in structure, to allow for            
              insertion of new membrane constituents during cell growth.  The                
              goal of this work is to elucidate the structural and functional                
              organization of the Gram-negative bacterial surface.  It is                    
              expected that some of the methodological advances will have broader            
              applications in cell and membrane biology.  This research will                 
              contribute significantly to the understanding of the dynamic                   
              organization of the bacterial envelope membranes, their export                 
              machinery, and their structural and functional mosaic.
