Title       : Biosynthesis of Linoleic Acid in Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9206584

Award Number: 9206584
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Blomquist blomquis@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charlotte Borgeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes studies designed to characterize a novel                
              12 desaturase in insects.  Vertebrates cannot synthesize and thus             
              require a dietary source of linoleic acid, 18:2(n-6), which is used            
              both as a structural component of membranes and as a precursor for             
              the eicosanoids.  Until recently, all animals, including insects,              
              were considered unable to synthesize linoleic acid.  Studies in our            
              laboratory demonstrated that a number of insect species possess a              
               12 desaturase and are thus able to produce linoleic acid.                     
              Extensive research, funded by the NSF, was performed to                        
              unambiguously demonstrate that insect tissue, and not associated               
              microorganisms, contain the  12 desaturase.  Studies are proposed              
              herein to characterize the  12 desaturase from three representative            
              insect species, a cockroach, a cricket and an aphid.  Work will be             
              done to elucidate the substrate requirements and specificity for               
              the desaturase, to optimize activity, to determine the number and              
              nature of the components in the desaturase, to examine the                     
              physiological regulation of activity, to determine the fate of the             
              newly synthesized linoleate and to begin work on the solubilization            
              and purification of the enzyme.  Significant fundamental knowledge             
              of comparative lipid metabolism will be obtained from this work.               
              %%%                                                                            
              One of the important dietary requirements in all vertebrates,                  
              including humans, is the essentials fatty acid, linoleic acid.                 
              This fatty acid is required as a component of cell membranes as                
              well as functioning as a precursor for other physiologically                   
              important compounds such as certain hormones.  Until recently, all             
              animals were considered unable to synthesize this fatty acid due to            
              the absence of a specific enzyme, the  12 desaturase.  However, we             
              have discovered that many, but not all, species of insects possess             
              this enzyme.  Therefore, manipulation of this enzyme, novel in                 
              insects, holds the potential for insect control.  The work                     
              described in this proposal is designed to examine this enzyme in               
              greater detail, to compare it across insect species and to the                 
              similiar enzyme found in plants.  Significant fundamental knowledge            
              of comparative lipid metabolism will be obtained from this work.
