Title       : Purification and Cloning of Elicitor Binding Protein(s) from Soybean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9206882

Award Number: 9206882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $547041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Hahn HAHN@CCRC.UGA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long term goal of this research is to understand how plant                 
              cells perceive and respond to extracellular signals.  The system               
              being studied is the induction of plant defense responses,                     
              phytoalexin accumulation in soybean (Glycine max) induced by                   
              oligosaccharides (elicitors) originating from the mycelial wall of             
              a phytopathogenic fungus, Phytophthora megasperma f. sp. glycinea.             
              Considerable information has been obtained about the structure of              
              an elicitor (a branched hepta-beta-glucoside) derived from mycelial            
              wall glucans and about the identity and regulation of elicitor-                
              induced genes encoding enzymes required for the biosynthesis of the            
              phytoalexins.  However, little is known about the mechanisms by                
              which plant cells perceive the elicitor, or how that signal is                 
              transmitted to the cell nucleus to initiate changes in gene                    
              expression.  The research described in this proposal focuses on the            
              first step in the elicitor-stimulated signal transduction pathway,             
              that is, the recognition of a hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor by a               
              plasma-membrane localized receptor.  The proposed research has                 
              three major goals.  The first goal is the identification,                      
              purification, and characterization of hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor            
              binding protein(s) (EBPs) from soybean root microsomal membranes.              
              Evidence has already been obtained that a single class of specific,            
              high-affinity (dissociation constant of 1 nM) EBPs exist in soybean            
              root microsomes originating from the plasma membrane.  These EBPs              
              have been successfully solubilized from the membranes using                    
              detergents, and the solubilized EBPs retain their high affinity and            
              specificity for the elicitor.  The number and identity of the                  
              proteins that have hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor binding activity              
              will be established by photo-affinity labeling.  The EBPs will be              
              purified by affinity chromatography and antibodies against the                 
              binding protein(s) will be prepared.  The second goal is the                   
              isolation and characterization of cDNA sequences that encode EBPs.             
              Clones carrying EPB sequences will be identified by screening cDNA             
              expression libraries with radiolabeled hepta-beta-glucoside                    
              elicitor.  Alternatively, partial protein sequences obtained from              
              the purified EBPs will be used to prepare synthetic nucleic acid               
              probes with which to screen cDNA libraries.  These clones and their            
              derived sequences will be used to identify possible structural and             
              functional domains in the EBPs that might relate to their role in              
              signal transduction.  The third goal, which will be undertaken if              
              time permits, is to demonstrate that the EBPs identified in these              
              studies are physiological receptor(s) for the elicitor.  Sequence              
              comparisons and expression of truncated EBP genes will be used to              
              identify and delineate functional domains of the EBPs.  Transgenic             
              expression of wild-type and mutant EBPs in plant cells that do not             
              contain endogenous EBPs, tissue-specific localization of EBPs in               
              relation to localization of plant defense responses, and                       
              determination of the effect of anti-sense EPB sequences on the                 
              expression of hepta-beta-glucoside-induced plant defense responses             
              will be undertaken to demonstrate the physiological significance of            
              the EBPs in elicitor-mediated signal transduction.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The long term goal of this research is to understand how plant                 
              cells perceive and respond to extracellular signals.  The system               
              being studied is the induction of a defense response in soybean                
              plants.  The defense response is triggered by exposure of the plant            
              to certain carbohydrates (elicitors) which originate from the                  
              filament wall of a pathogenic fungus which specifically infects the            
              soybean.  In response to the elicitors the soybean plant                       
              synthesizes and accumulates protective chemicals known as                      
              phytoalexins.  The more immediate goals of this project are to                 
              identify and characterize the plant receptors for the elicitors.               
              Detailed characterization of the elicitor receptor will be an                  
              important step toward understanding of the signal transduction                 
              pathway by which plants detect and respond to pathogens.
