Title       : Mathematical Sciences: On the Construction of Efficient Estimates in
               Semi-Parametric and Nonparametric Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9206138

Award Number: 9206138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sallie Keller-McNulty                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anton Schick anton@math.binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A general abstract theory has been developed for the                      
              construction of efficient estimates of the parameter of interest               
              in semiparametric models when the data are independently and                   
              identically distributed.  This project will expand this theory in              
              two directions.  First is the development of a satisfactory                    
              calculus for the construction of the efficient influence                       
              function.  Second is the extension of the theory for dependent                 
              data.                                                                          
                   This research will provide a unified view and a rigorous                  
              mathematical basis for constructing estimators for a large class               
              of statistical models.  When models are only partially specified               
              in terms of the determining features or attributes, the                        
              anticipated behavior for new observations can be modeled                       
              nonetheless using so-called semiparametric or nonparametric                    
              models.  How well this is done depends on how fully the                        
              information in the data is utilized and on how precisely the                   
              model can be expressed given the data.  This research focuses on               
              abstracting the necessary mathematical properties for good                     
              estimates and good predictions for future observations.  Then the              
              mathematical requirements for these desired properties can be                  
              derived.
