Title       : Electromagnetic Studies of the Continents (EMSOC): Continental Shelf EM
               Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9206820

Award Number: 9206820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel F. Weill                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. Chave achave@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean H. Filloux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award provides funding to design and build a set of                  
              instruments to measure the electric and magnetic fields while                  
              deployed in the submarine environment of continental shelves. The              
              design will permit simultaneous recording of variations in the                 
              horizontal electric field, the 3-component magnetic field, tilt of             
              the instrument, and ambient temperature. The instruments will be               
              developed and built by collaborating groups at the Woods Hole                  
              Oceanographic Institution in Massachusetts and the Scripps                     
              Institution of Oceanography in California. They will subsequently              
              be used as an essential part of a planned magnetotelluric                      
              geophysical transect reaching from the continental southeastern                
              Appalachians to the deep Atlantic ocean.                                       
                   Electrical conductivity in rocks, which depends on ionic fluid            
              content, metal or carbon content, and temperature can provide                  
              information about large scale geological structures that is                    
              complementary to other geophysical measurements such as seismic or             
              gravity. Recent experiments have demonstrated that large-scaled                
              structures can be imaged with this approach but that a combination             
              of land and seafloor measurements are essential to proper                      
              interpretations of continental structures extending seaward.                   
              Instrumentation for measuring electrical conductivity on land and              
              in the deep (calm) ocean environments already exist. This project              
              will result in instrumentation to fill in the gap for measurements             
              in the shallower waters of the continental shelf areas.
