Title       : The Endosome System and Membrane Trafficking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9206097

Award Number: 9206097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Allen allen@pbrc.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Agnes K. Fok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Communication between cellular compartments frequently occurs by            
              shuttle vesicles.  The unique features of the endosomal system of              
              Paramecium will be explored by the use of monoclonal antibodies,               
              confocal fluorescence microscopy, replicas of quick-freeze freeze-             
              dried cell fragments, immunogold labeling of cryosections and                  
              Lowicryl sections, and high resolution scanning electron microscopy            
              of isolated organelles.  The course of probes will be followed from            
              coated pits to early endosomes and on to the next compartment,                 
              which may or many not be the acidosomes.  Initial studies indicate             
              that this latter transport is via 90 nm clathrin-coated shuttle                
              vesicles arising from early endosomes.  Selective labeling, antigen            
              blocking and trypsinization techniques in conjunction with a                   
              monoclonal antibody will be used to follow the reappearance on the             
              cell surface of a plasma membrane resident antigen, C6, which                  
              enters the early endosome compartment from coated pits via 190 nm              
              preendosomal vesicles but does not enter the 90 nm early endosome-             
              derived shuttle vesicles.  Another mAb, specific for acidosomes,               
              will be used to study the biogenesis of the acidosomal membranes               
              and their relationship to the endosomal or contractile vacuole                 
              systems.  Finally, quick-freeze, freeze-dry techniques and high                
              resolution scanning electron microscopy will be used to visualize              
              and study the true cytosolic surfaces of membranes associated with             
              the endosomal, phagosome-lysosome, and contractile vacuole systems             
              of this cell.                                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Virtually all eukaryotic cells contain an internal membrane system             
              which creates a series of functionally and biochemically distinct              
              intracellular compartments isolated from the "cytoplasm" by their              
              membrane boundaries.  Although these compartments are functionally             
              and biochemically distinct, it is known that they "communicate"                
              with and exchange contents with each other and with the                        
              extracellular space (isolated from the cytoplasm by the cell's                 
              plasma membrane) either directly or indirectly via membrane fusion             
              events.  This internal membrane system is the route by which cells             
              take up materials from their environment and process them                      
              enzymatically, as well as secrete products to the environment.                 
              Understanding how this system functions, and how it is regulated,              
              is a major goal in cell biology.  In this project, the single-                 
              celled freeliving organism, Paramecium, is used as a readily                   
              manipulable model to study how cells communicate between selected              
              compartments, how they package and return resident proteins to                 
              their home compartment or membrane, and how the topography of their            
              true cytosolic membrane surface is related to the compartment's                
              function.
