Title       : Functional Group Interactions in DNA Protein Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1994     
File        : a9206528

Award Number: 9206528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry W. McLaughlin larry.mclaughlin@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The mechanisms involved in macromolecular recognition are                 
              central to the understanding of gene regulation.  This project will            
              examine the nature and relative importance of functional group                 
              interactions between proteins (and other selected ligands) and                 
              nucleic acids that are responsible for the formation of high-                  
              affinity, sequence-specific complexes.  The laboratory will prepare            
              a series of modified oligodeoxynucleotides as possible recognition             
              sites for restriction and modification enzymes, a repressor protein            
              (the tryptophan repressor) as well as selected minor groove binding            
              ligands.  The modifications have been chosen in order to minimize              
              structural changes in the B-DNA helix, and involve primarily the               
              "deletion" of selected functional groups.  These DNA fragments will            
              be prepared by chemical syntheses employing a variety of modified              
              nucleoside derivatives, including those obtained during the initial            
              and ongoing periods of this project.  Parallel studies will be                 
              directed toward the effects of modified bases upon DNA structure               
              and the implications of such structure modulation upon recognition             
              processes.  Specifically, we will continue to use modified base                
              residues to study DNA curvature phenomena.  Additionally, with the             
              minor groove modifications proposed for the present project period,            
              one can examine B-form structure as a function of the ability to               
              form the putative minor groove spine of hydration.  By studying                
              recognition phenomena, using site-specifically modified                        
              macromolecules, this project should contribute to the understanding            
              of cellular recognition processes and provide access to a variety              
              of useful biochemical tools.                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              There are many examples in nature that involve the selective                   
              production of specialized proteins by cells, tissues, and organs               
              which result from the expression of particular genes.  This project            
              will examine the nature of functional group interactions between               
              proteins and nucleic acid polymers that are responsible for the                
              formation of high-affinity, sequence-specific complexes involved in            
              gene expression.   A series of modified nucleic acid polymers will             
              be prepared to test with proteins which bind to, cut, or chemically            
              modify the related natural polymer.  The DNA fragments will be                 
              prepared by chemical syntheses employing a variety of modified                 
              nucleoside derivatives. Parallel studies will be directed toward               
              the effects of modified bases upon DNA structure and the                       
              implications of such structure modulation upon recognition                     
              processes.  Thus, by studying recognition phenomena, using site-               
              specifically modified macromolecules, this project should                      
              contribute to the understanding of cellular recognition processes              
              and provide access to a variety of useful biochemical tools.
