Title       : Nucleic Acid Selectivity of Zinc Finger Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1994       
File        : a9206873

Award Number: 9206873
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martyn Darby M_Darby@lac.jci.tju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A zinc-finger is an independent polypeptide structural unit                    
              that is shaped by the co-ordination of a  zinc atom.  Hundreds                 
              of genes for potential zinc finger proteins have been                          
              identified in the genomes of eukaryotes.  Yet the function of                  
              only a tiny fraction of these is known or can be predicted.  To                
              learn more about the recognition of RNA by zinc finger proteins                
              Xenopus TFIIIA and p43 will be altered by recombinant means.                   
              These proteins have a similar organization of nine zinc                        
              fingers, yet TFIIIA binds specifically to RNA and DNA, whereas                 
              p43 binds only to RNA.  Mutant zinc finger proteins will be                    
              constructed in which amino acids or groups of amino aids from                  
              DNA-binding zinc fingers will be replaced with amino acids from                
              the corresponding position in RNA-bindings zinc fingers and                    
              their affinity for RNA and DNA will be compared.  As a                         
              preliminary to designing sequence-specific RNA-binding                         
              proteins, mutant proteins will be synthesized in which the                     
              order of zinc fingers has been changed.  To identify the RNA                   
              substrates of these mutants, oligonucleotides containing a                     
              random sequence will be transcribed to produced a population of                
              RNA substrates.  RNA molecules that bind to the mutant proteins                
              will be selected, amplified and sequenced.                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Many essential cellular functions are controlled through proteins              
              that bind to RNA or DNA.  One class of these proteins contains a               
              protein structure call a 'zinc finger'  -- a loop of amino acids               
              shaped into a finger-like structure by the coordination of a zinc              
              atom.  Zinc fingers mediate protein binding to DNA and RNA.                    
              However, the molecular features that allow some zinc fingers to                
              distinguish RNA and others DNA are unknown.  This research seeks to            
              understand the molecular basis for selectivity of zinc finger                  
              containing proteins for RNA or DNA.  Two zinc finger proteins,                 
              TFIIIA and p4, provide and excellent model system for this study,              
              because these proteins have a similar organization of nine zinc                
              fingers, yet TFIIIA binds to both RNA and DNA, whereas p43 binds               
              only to RNA.  Therefore, the differences and similarities between              
              these two proteins should enable us to learn which features of the             
              zinc finger are  needed for interaction with RNA and which features            
              of the zinc finger are needed for interaction with RNA and which               
              DNA.  Using recombinant DNA technology to synthesize hybrids of                
              TFIIIA and p43 in which different zinc fingers or parts of zinc                
              fingers have been combined, the specificity and affinity of                    
              individual zinc fingers for RNA and DNA will  be measured.  These              
              studies will lay the groundwork for designing protein molecules                
              that bind to specific RNA sequences or structures.  Such molecules             
              could form the basis for a new class of therapeutic agents that may            
              be able to block RNA function, for example by inhibiting                       
              translation of a specific messenger RNA into protein.
