Title       : Genetic Analysis of the Photosynthetic Reaction Center in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9206080

Award Number: 9206080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Bylina   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The bacterial reaction center complex mediates a series of                     
              efficient electron transfer reactions resulting in the conversion              
              of light into chemical energy.  This pigment-protein complex is the            
              only membrane protein whose structure has been determined to atomic            
              resolution.  While the highest resolution structural data (2.3A) is            
              available from the reaction centers of Rhodopseudomonas viridis, a             
              system for the expression of genetically modified reaction centers             
              in this organism is not available.  We have been characterizing a              
              heterotrophic strain of Rps. viridis which will be used to develop             
              such a genetic system.  The puf operon of Rps. viridis (encoding               
              the beta and alpha subunits of the light haveresting complex and               
              the L subunit, M subunit, and cytochrome subunit of the reaction               
              center) will be deleted from the Rps. viridis chromosome.  A                   
              plasmid containing a copy of the puf operon will be used to                    
              complement this chromosomal deletion.  To efficiently grow the                 
              large volumes of Rps. viridis required for spectroscopic and                   
              crystallographic studies of genetically engineered reaction                    
              centers, culture conditions will be optimized for the dark growth              
              of Rps. viridis in a bench fermentor.  The development of this                 
              system will allow the modification of pigment-protein binding                  
              interactions throughout the reaction center by site-directed                   
              mutagenesis of the Rps. viridis structural genes., followed by the             
              crystallographic and spectroscopic characterization of these                   
              altered reaction center complexes.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The insights provided by the Rps. viridis reaction center system               
              will provide a more detailed understanding of substrate                        
              recognition/binding requirements in membrane proteins and electron             
              transfer in biological systems.
