Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Cohomological and Homotopical Methodsin Mathematical
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1994      
File        : a9206929

Award Number: 9206929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Varchenko varchenko@mathe.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Cohomological physics refers to that part of physics,                     
              primarily gauge and field theories, in which a variety of                      
              cohomological techniques are seeing increasing application.  The               
              instant project is concerned with application of techniques                    
              developed in the investigator's previous study of classifying                  
              spaces and rational homotopy theory as an algebraic topologist.  It            
              is particularly directed to four classes of problems:  (1) homotopy            
              associative differential graded algebras and Lie analogs,                      
              especially as they occur in string field theories and spin n-                  
              algebras;  (2) quasi-Hopf algebras and deformations of bialgebras;             
              (3) Zamolodcdhikov's tetrahedral equation and generalized                      
              classifying spaces;  (4) the homological aspects of reduction of               
              constrained Hamiltonian systems, both classical and quantum, as                
              embodied in the BRST formalism and the Batalia-Fradkin-Vilkovisky              
              complex and its generalizations.  (1) and (2) bear a very strong               
              resemblance; one major thrust of this research being to understand             
              the underlying reason for this resemblance.  (3) involves "higher              
              dimensional algebra," which is the analog of the algebra in (1) and            
              (2) but beginning with structures for which one-dimensional                    
              diagrams are inadequate.  Although defined in greater and more                 
              abstract generality, such structures as occur in mathematical                  
              physics are the focus of this work.                                            
                   In another context, a noted mathematical physicist has                    
              marveled at the "unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics."  This             
              project is devoted to a special case of that observation, namely,              
              the unreasonable effectiveness of algebraic topology.  It begins               
              with the discovery that a paper the investigator published almost              
              thirty year ago as an algebraic topologist was slated for a key                
              role in conformal string theory and related matters.  The "higher              
              order associativity" of H-spaces that he developed there has gone              
              through a sequence of developments at the hands of MacLane;                    
              Brustein, Ne'eman, and Sternberg; Joyal and Street; and finally                
              Drinfeld, who, in 1989, gave deep and ingenious applications to                
              both physics and low dimensional topology.  Stasheff has become an             
              enthusiastic participant in the ensuing explosion of interest in               
              this and related areas.
