Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9206725

Award Number: 9206725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9994               (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia F. McDowell pmcd@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Paleolakes in closed basins are sensitive indicators of past              
              climatic variations.  The chronology of the fluctuations in the                
              level of a particular lake can provide evidence of changes in                  
              local climate, while basin-wide variations reveals past changes                
              in the large-scale circulation of the atmosphere.  One hypothesis              
              resulting from lake studies states that latitudinal shifts in the              
              jet stream and associated surface weather systems, resulting from              
              decay of the continental ice sheet, affected the timing of high                
              stands of closed basin lakes during the late Pleistocene.  This                
              project will develop lake-level chronologies during a critical                 
              interval of the late Quaternary period for three basins in                     
              eastern Oregon.  These chronologies will be used to test                       
              hypotheses concerning atmospheric circulation controls of                      
              regional climatic change.  Chronologies will be determined from                
              radiocarbon dates on samples collected from shoreline sediments.               
              A physically based evaporation model and a water balance model                 
              will be used to estimate the range of climatic conditions                      
              consistent with a specific lake level.  The resulting climate                  
              scenarios will be employed in a test of the hypothesis that high               
              lake stands were governed by the mean seasonal positions of the                
              jet stream over the western United States.                                     
                   This research will contribute to the regional geomorphology               
              of a region in need of additional study, and it will further our               
              understanding of the mechanisms that control regional climate                  
              changes, and thus the responses of hydrological systems.
