Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of det Loci of Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9206331

Award Number: 9206331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $640000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne Chory chory@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,9109,9197,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this proposal is to begin to unravel the control                
              circuits of light-regulated seedling development using Arabidopsis             
              thaliana mutants, the de-etiolated mutants (det).  Previous work in            
              my laboratory has shown that recessive mutations in any one of four            
              DET genes uncouple light signals from a number of light-dependent              
              processes, resulting in dark-grown plants that grow as light-grown             
              seedlings.  Because det mutations are both recessive and                       
              pleiotropic, we have proposed that the wild-type DET proteins play             
              a negative regulatory role in light-regulated gene expression and              
              development in Arabidopsis.  The genetic, biochemical, and                     
              molecular experiments proposed here seek to further define these               
              genes, with emphasis placed on the DET1 gene and its protein                   
              product, DET1.  A major objective of the proposed experiments is to            
              complete the cloning the DET1 locus.  We are cloning DET1 by                   
              chromosome walking from a nearby RFLP marker.  We have cloned over             
              1 megabase of DNA around the chromosome walk is almost finished.               
              The DET1 gene will be used in biochemical and genetic experiments              
              to begin analysis of the molecular mechanisms of how light signals             
              are transduced to developmental strategies.  To further elucidate              
              the role of DET1 in the negative regulation of the light response,             
              we have isolated extragenic suppressors of the det1-1 mutation.                
              These suppressors will be mapped and extensively characterized in              
              the det1- and DET+ backgrounds with respect to light-regulated gene            
              expression, pigment synthesis, and leaf and chloroplast                        
              development.  Finally, we plan to investigate the functional                   
              interactions between the various det genes and other genes involved            
              in light signal transduction by constructing doubly mutant strains             
              carrying both det and various other photomorphogenetic mutations               
              that have been previously isolated by ourselves and others.  The               
              interactions between the various det genes will also be determined             
              by analysis of doubly, triply, and quadruply mutant lines.                     
              %%%                                                                            
              The date from these experiments will allow us to construct models              
              of the mechanisms by which light and other signals control                     
              chloroplast development in plants.  Arabidopsis thaliana is                    
              uniquely suited for these studies due to its small genome size,                
              high seed yield, low level of interspersed repetitive DNA, and                 
              transformability.
