Title       : Empirical and Hierarchical Bayes Methods in Small Area Estimation Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1994        
File        : a9206326

Award Number: 9206326
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55043              (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Lahiri plahiri@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,1333,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   In large scale sample surveys,  estimates of a variety of                 
              characteristics are frequently given for large populations.                    
              Similar estimates for smaller domains or areas also are required.              
              Recently,  considerable attention has been given to improve                    
              procedures related to small area estimation problems.  The                     
              traditional sample survey estimators which use information from a              
              given small area often yield large standard errors because of small            
              sample size in the area.  Reliable small area statistics are needed            
              by many federal agencies for regional planning and allocating                  
              government resources.  Among these are the Bureau of Labor                     
              Statistics,  which is interested in providing estimates of the                 
              unemployment rate not only for the nation but also for the states              
              and the Census Bureau which inevitably misses people and must face             
              the problem of adjusting spatially for the undercounts.                        
                   The investigator spent the last academic year at the Bureau               
              of Labor Statistics and the Census Bureau as a Senior Research                 
              Fellow under the American Statistical Association/ National Science            
              Foundation Fellowship Program.  The proposed research is a                     
              continuation of his work at these agencies aimed at developing                 
              reliable small area statistics.  Attention is focussed on various              
              multivariate and time series models to combine information from                
              related sources.  The plan is to develop different empirical and               
              hierarchical Bayes procedures.                                                 
                   To determine measures of accuracy of the empirical Bayes                  
              estimators,  second order approximations will be sought to the mean            
              squared errors of the estimators.  This will require the extension             
              of the existing methodology to multivariate and time series                    
              modelling and also to the situation when the prior parameters are              
              estimated by the method of maximum likelihood or restricted maximum            
              likelihood.  It is anticipated that the posterior mean and the                 
              posterior variance in a hierarchical Bayes analysis will involve               
              multi-dimensional integrals.  Different sampling-based methods to              
              evaluate the integrals will be investigated.  In this context the              
              modification and approximation of the Gibbs sampling method will               
              be considered.                                                                 
                   The principal investigator has a solid research record in                 
              small area estimation and is well equipped by experience and by his            
              collaborative ties with leading statisticians in the field to                  
              conduct the proposed research.  His successes in this project will             
              readily find applications in the particular areas of government                
              with which he is familiar and other important arenas as well.
