Title       : Dissertation Research: Survey and Excavations at Quim Chi Hilan, El Peten,
               Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1992     
File        : a9206742

Award Number: 9206742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dirk Van Tuerenhout  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. E.W. Andrews, Mr. Dirk Van Tuerenhout               
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Building on                   
              earlier fieldwork, he will conduct archaeological excavation at                
              the site of Quim Chi Hilan which is located in the El Peten                    
              region of Guatemala. This small "non-elite" site is situated near              
              the larger more impressive walled site of Aguateca. While the                  
              latter has been subjected to extensive work and thus yielded                   
              information on elite life, much less is known about the behavior               
              of other strata of society. Mr. Van Tuerenhout will spend 4                    
              months actively involved in excavation. He will employ a posthole              
              digger to locate habitation middens, test pit these and analyze                
              the materials recovered. He will strip overburden covering a                   
              series of residential structures and also selectively expose                   
              walls and terraces. The immediate goals are to determine the size              
              and date of the community and the status and occupations of its                
              inhabitants. Data will also provide insight into the age of the                
              walls and their functions as well as the subsistence strategies                
              followed.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The Mayan peoples of Middle America developed a complex society                
              with monumental stone architecture, high chiefs and priests. This              
              society, which reached its peak during the Classic period also                 
              declined well before Columbus reached the New World and in this                
              regard is different from most other such civilizations. While                  
              much effort has been focussed on understanding the development of              
              Maya society relatively little is known about its decline. Mr.                 
              Van Tuerenhout's research is part of a larger effort to                        
              understand this process. It has been hypothesized that in this                 
              area of Middle America at least organized intergroup warfare                   
              played a major role and the defensive walls which surround sites               
              in the region provide support for this. However very little is                 
              known about life during this period at non-elite sites and Mr.                 
              Van Tuerenhout's work will help to remedy this situation.                      
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to a large number of archaeologists. It will                  
              shed new light on the decline of a complex society and will                    
              assist in the training of a promising young scientist.
