Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9206033

Award Number: 9206033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Abbott  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Research on Holocene landscape evolution in the                           
              Mediterranean region concerns the relative impact of climate                   
              change and human activity on episodes of erosion and valley                    
              alluviation.  The complex nature of geomorphic response to                     
              climate change often results in differing landscape adjustments                
              to a given stimulus within a single drainage basin, resulting in               
              temporal lags in certain portions of the basin as the system                   
              progressively adjusts to the new conditions.  Because the                      
              character and intensity of anthropic disturbances vary spatially               
              and temporally, geomorphic responses to these stimuli are                      
              typically asynchronous and more variable.  One approach to                     
              assessing causality is to conduct tandem studies in several                    
              different basins which have been subject to different types and                
              intensities of cultural activity while experiencing similar                    
              shifts in climate.  This project addresses the overall question                
              of late Quaternary landscape change in southern Italy by                       
              examining the stratigraphy and sedimentology of alluvial and                   
              colluvial deposits in six drainage basins.  It will integrate                  
              geomorphic, sedimentologic, and pedological evidence with                      
              regional paleoenvironmental, archaeological, and historical data               
              in order to generalize about the nature and timing of landscape                
              change.  Sediment data will be collected in the field, and they                
              will be augmented by laboratory analysis and aerial and                        
              topographic map analysis to determine the causes of landscape                  
              change.                                                                        
                   Results of this research will add new knowledge on the                    
              regional geomorphology of the Mediterranean region, and it will                
              establish the relative importance of climate and human causative               
              factors in the evolution of the landscape during the late                      
              Quaternary.
