Title       : Trophic Factors of the Vertebrate Integument: Role in the Regulation of Pigment
               Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9206734

Award Number: 9206734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph T. Bagnara   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1147      ENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research is based upon the hypothesis that the expression of              
              pigmentation patterns of vertebrates from primitive fishes to man              
              is determined by the presence of intrinsic inhibiting and/or                   
              stimulating factors present in the skin. It is considered that                 
              these factors work in concert with other agents, viz. hormones such            
              as melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH), to either inhibit or                  
              stimulate the development and maintenance of the circumscribed                 
              pigment cells of vertebrates. These include the black or brown                 
              melanophores, the yellow to red xanthophores, and the iridescent               
              iridophores. All three pigment cell types are derived from the                 
              cadre of the neural crest cells that migrate from atop the neural              
              tube to the skin. Presumably, after these prospective pigment cells            
              arrive at their destinations, they are exposed to the localized                
              putative melanization inhibiting factors (MIF) and melanization                
              stimulating factors (MSF) which affect pigment cell development.               
              The activities of these factors, both individually and in                      
              combination, on various aspects of amphibian pigment cell                      
              expression will be tested in vivo and in vitro. Both biological and            
              biochemical characterization of the putative MIF and MSF will be               
              undertaken and antibodies raised to these molecule will be utilized            
              as probes to further study the distribution and activities of these            
              factors. This information should provide insight into our                      
              understanding of the mechanisms of pigment pattern formation and               
              maintenance. These patterns include the dorsal ventral pigmentation            
              patterns commonly found in most vertebrates as well as the                     
              individual spots and stripes that are also seen frequently.
