Title       : Characterization of cis- and trans-acting factors regulatingroot-specific gene
               expression in tobacco
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9206506

Award Number: 9206506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Conkling mark conkling@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In this proposal, we propose to further our analysis of the               
              regulation and cell biology of the tobacco root-specific gene,                 
              TobRB7.  We have chosen to concentrate our analyses to genes                   
              expressed specifically in roots.  To date, only seven such genes               
              have been reported (four of which were reported by us).  Cis-acting            
              sequences responsible for regulated root-specific expression have              
              been characterized for only one gene (TobRB7).  We propose to                  
              combine linker-scanning and internal deletion mutational analysis              
              with DNA footprinting experiments to identify the precise sequences            
              responsible for regulating root-specific gene expression.  These               
              sequences will be used subsequently to identify cDNA clones                    
              encoding the cognate DNA-binding proteins.  The cell biology of the            
              TobRB7 gene product (expressed in the immature vascular tissue and             
              predicted to served as a membrane channel) will be characterized               
              further.  Immunolocalization experiments have putatively localized             
              the gene product to the plasma membrane.  Experiments are proposed             
              to examine the physiology of transgenic plants carrying sequences              
              designed to disrupt TobRB7 gene product function.  Finally, we                 
              propose to initiate the analysis of a second root-specific gene                
              (TobRD2) using technologies similar to those that have proven                  
              successful for TobRB7.  In situ hybridization experiments using                
              TobRD2 probes demonstrate that this gene is expressed specifically             
              in the root cortex.  We propose to compare and contrast the                    
              regulatory circuitry of this gene with that of TobRB7.                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Despite the importance of roots in plant growth and development,               
              relatively few genes expressed specifically in roots have been                 
              isolated.  The results of this study should significantly improve              
              that situation.
