Title       : Genetic Regulation of Streptomyces Antibiotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9206068

Award Number: 9206068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy C. Champness champnes@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Streptomyces are well-known for their capacity to synthesize a vast            
              repertoire of secondary metabolites (antibiotics).  Besides their              
              commercial importance, the Streptomyces are interesting for their              
              complex developmental cycle.  In the course of this life cycle,                
              antibiotic synthesis is developmentally regulated.  The objective              
              of this research is to define aspects of the global genetic                    
              regulation of Streptomcymes coelicolor antibiotic synthesis.  The              
              research planned is based on a set of genes, recently discovered in            
              this laboratory, which regulate the expression of antibiotic genes.            
              The goals include genetic and molecular characterization of the                
              absA, absB and mia genes; study of the regulation of absA, absB and            
              mia using reporter gene fusions, and investigation of the mechanism            
              by which these genes globally regulate antibiotic synthesis.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              This molecular genetic analysis of the abs and mia genes promises              
              to contribute not only to our understanding of microbial                       
              developmental gene regulation, but also to biotechnology.                      
              Understanding of S. coelicolor regulation is highly likely to                  
              explain much of antibiotic regulation in other Streptomycetes and              
              Actinomycetes, and this increase the potential for rational                    
              manipulation of production of commercially important metabolites               
              including the many new metabolites that are continuously being                 
              discovered.
