Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Analysis Related to Symmetrization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1994        
File        : a9206319

Award Number: 9206319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Baernstein al@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The value of symmetry in mathematics is universally                       
              recognized as one of the great concepts used in the analysis of                
              complex problems.  In nature as well as in abstraction, the most               
              symmetric choice for a solution often turns out to be the correct              
              one or the most favorable among all candidates.  Work to be done               
              on this project continues an extended program in the development               
              of a unified theory of symmmetrization deriving from a certain                 
              master inequality formulated and proved in 1974 (with antecedents              
              going back to the fifth book of Pappus, at least) .  Particular                
              emphases will be placed on extremal problems from complex                      
              function theory, partial differential equations and                            
              quasiconformal mapping.  Examples include finding the best                     
              constant in Landau's covering theorem giving the best inequality               
              between the diameter of the image of a holomorphic function and                
              its derivative at some point.  In partial differential equations,              
              work will be done in determining the shape of those domains of                 
              fixed diameter which minimize the heat kernel.  The distortion of              
              quasiconformal maps in any given direction is well documented.                 
              Very little is known on the limitations of how these maps can                  
              distort area.  Work will focus on this question.                               
                   It is axiomatic in mathematics that by asking the right                   
              questions, one is often led to the answer of a difficult question              
              with comparative ease.  Often right questions involve new                      
              insights into symmetry.  The purpose of this research is to                    
              continue expanding the scope of general symmetry principles which              
              have the potential for broad applicability.
