Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Methods for Biological Rhythms and
               Population Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9206677

Award Number: 9206677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank C. Hoppensteadt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chichia Chiu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigators study two different but synergistic areas               
              of applied mathematics: neural networks and population genetics.               
              The neural network studies are based on Voltage Controlled                     
              Oscillator model Neurons (VCONs), which are constructible                      
              electronic devices that have interesting mathematical models and               
              many parallels with physiological nerve cells.  The investigators              
              have recently derived VCON networks that filter, process, and                  
              store information based on frequency encoding; they extend and                 
              refine this work in parallel with known physiological circuits.                
              The mathematical aspects of interest in this are rotation vectors              
              and generalized Fourier analysis of dynamical systems.  The                    
              applied aspects are related to the design and study of circuits                
              that can reproduce known functions of parts of mammalian brains                
              based on frequency encoding and decoding.  Specifically, the                   
              investigators study tonotopic mappings, storage and retrieval of               
              messages, and the structure and function of processing circuits                
              similar to neocortical columns.  The second part of this proposal              
              studies populations and genetics.  The investigators focus on                  
              food chains and colony synchronization in bacterial communities,               
              pattern formation in bacterial lawns, and plasmid stability in                 
              genetically engineered microorganisms.  Computational methods                  
              developed for simulation of VCON networks are applied to study                 
              bacterial communities.                                                         
                   The project involves two problems in mathematical biology                 
              that illustrate two important contributions that mathematics                   
              makes to the life sciences: First, mathematics enables us to                   
              analyze large networks that resemble parts of our brains, and                  
              second, mathematical formulations enable us to use scientific                  
              computers to predict the outcome of experiments that are                       
              expensive or difficult to perform.  First, the investigators                   
              study large collections of electronic devices that mimic brain                 
              circuits.  These devices (called VCONs) are based on phase-locked              
              loops that are widely used in electronic communications.  They                 
              have designed, analyzed, and simulated VCON networks that focus                
              attention on the most persistent among many competing stimuli,                 
              and that memorize and recall messages.  They extend this work to               
              include other aspects of the brain, including parts of the                     
              hippocampus.  The novelty of this work is that it is based on                  
              frequency encoded information rather than discrete information                 
              bits, as in digital computers.  As a result, the networks are                  
              quite stable, even functioning well when partially destroyed.  In              
              the second part of this work, they use methods developed for VCON              
              networks to study problems about bacterial communities.  While                 
              these two problem areas are widely separated, certain                          
              mathematical aspects of the two are remarkably similar: Bacteria               
              lead oscillatory lives, and using the methods for large networks               
              of VCON oscillators, the investigators are able to describe in                 
              mathematical terms large communities of bacteria -- for example,               
              as arising in soil.  In addition to working on problems that are               
              similar between the two areas, they study problems specific to                 
              bacterial genetics, including how stable are genetically                       
              engineered variations in bacterial cell lines.
