Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9206716

Award Number: 9206716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8433               (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen L. O'Brien  (Student current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Tropical forests in Latin America are disappearing at a rate              
              higher than in any other region of the world.  The causes of                   
              deforestation vary with local conditions, but include conversion               
              of forest to agriculture or pasture lands, logging, and the                    
              expansion of human settlements.  One argument for preservation of              
              tropical forests is that local, regional, and global climates may              
              be altered by the loss of forest cover.  Forests act as climate                
              regulators, influencing the nature and pattern of temperature and              
              precipitation.  Deforestation changes the radiation budget and                 
              microclimate of a local area, but the magnitude and spatial                    
              extent of the change is poorly known.  It is even less clear how               
              precipitation regimes may be affected.  Also, little research has              
              been conducted on the influence of tropical forests on local and               
              regional climates outside of the Amazon Basin, although the rate               
              of deforestation is greater in Mexico and Central America.  This               
              project will examine the microclimatic, local, and regional                    
              effects of deforestation in the Lancandon Forest of Chiapas,                   
              Mexico.  It will involve an analysis of historical climate data                
              for the region, a synoptic-scale analysis of the regional                      
              climate, and a micro level study of local meteorology in forest                
              and cleared areas to document the effects of deforestation.                    
                   This project will contribute to an understanding of how                   
              tropical forests and climate interact, the geographical scale                  
              over which these interactions are important, and it will assess                
              the implication of deforestation for agricultural and                          
              conservation policies in environmentally sensitive areas.
