Title       : Structural and Functional Analysis of Photosystem I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1997     
File        : a9206851

Award Number: 9206851
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Bryant DAB14@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The cyanobacterial Photosystem I reaction center is a light-driven             
              oxidoreductase catalyzing electron transport from cytochrome c533 to           
              ferredoxin.  The long-term goal of this research program is to                 
              understand the structure and function of the Photosystem I reaction            
              center.  In this project biochemical resolution and reconstitution             
              are combined with site-directed mutagenesis and protein                        
              overproduction in E.coli to produce reaction centers with altered              
              spectroscopic and electron transport properties.  Building upon our            
              most recent results and the tools developed and mutants constructed            
              in the current funding period, the following long-term goals will              
              be addressed:                                                                  
              1.  The roles of FA AND/OR FB in the room-temperature photoreduction           
                  of ferredoxin (or flavodoxin) and NADP+ via FNR.                           
              2.  Biochemical characterization of the two forms of FNR identified            
                  in Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002.                                             
              3.  Characterization of the remaining genes encoding PS I                      
                  polypeptides in Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002.                                
              4.  The roles of PsaD and PsaE in PS I structure and function.                 
              5.  The mechanism of the specific interactions between the PS I                
                  complex and ferredoxins and flavodoxin.                                    
              6.  The 3-dimensional structures of the PsaC, PsaD, PsaE, and FNR              
                  proteins.                                                                  
              7.  The nature of the PsaE- and NdhF-dependent paths of electron               
                  transport in P700+ re-reduction.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              All life on Earth ultimately depends on solar light energy capture             
              during photosynthesis, a process which leads to the reduction and              
              fixation of carbon dioxide and the evolution of oxygen gas as a by-            
              product.  Light energy capture and transduction takes place in                 
              multiprotein complexes known as reaction centers, which utilize the            
              light energy to initiate oxidation-reduction reactions and electron            
              transfer events which result in the production of chemical energy              
              (in the form of ATP) and chemical reductant (in the form of NADPH).            
              In oxygenic photosynthesis--the type which occurs in green plants,             
              algae, and bacteria known as cyanobacteria--the cooperation of two             
              reaction centers, denoted Photosystems I and II, are required.  The            
              long-term goal of the research here proposed is to understand the              
              structural organization of the Photosystem I reaction center and to            
              unravel specific details of the electron transfer events that lead             
              to charge separation, charge stabilization, and electron transfer              
              to soluable carriers in this reaction center.  The proposed project            
              is a marriage of two different research disciplines and is the                 
              result of a close collaboration and coordination of our research               
              activities with those of the laboratory of Dr. John H. Goldbeck                
              (Dept. of Biochemistry, University of Nebraska).  A combination of             
              modern molecular genetics, recombinant DNA technology, site                    
              directed mutagenesis, protein overproduction and protein                       
              biochemistry (my lab) is combined with biochemical reconstitution,             
              modern ultra-fast laser spectroscopy, electron spin resonance (ESR)            
              spectroscopy, and other biophysical measurements (the Golbeck                  
              laboratory).  We will also jointly characterize alternative                    
              electron transport pathways involving the Photosystem I reaction               
              center (e.g, cyclic electron transport) and function of the                    
              alternative electron acceptors ferredoxin and flavodoxin.  Through             
              our work we hope to provide a better understanding of                          
              photosynthetic solar energy capture and photochemical conversion.
