Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Role of Exsolution Lamellae in the Rates and
               Mechanisms of Dissolution of Plagioclase Feldspars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1993       
File        : a9206583

Award Number: 9206583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Nater   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Bloom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Plagioclase feldspars are abundant primary minerals in nature             
              and represent an important source of Ca and Na in noncarbonate                 
              systems.  Two phase intergrowths of calcic and sodic rich phases               
              (exsolution lamellae) are common features in plagioclase feldspars,            
              yet few studies have evaluated their role in the rates,                        
              stoichiometry and mechanisms of plagioclase dissolution.  The                  
              objectives of the proposed collaborative study are to (i) determine            
              the effects of exsolution lamellae on the rates and stoichiometry              
              of plagioclase feldspars, (ii) determine the effect of                         
              preferentially weathered lamellar phases on the interpretation of              
              data collected using surfaced sensitive spectroscopies such as                 
              x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and (iii) examine the                   
              potential role of exsolved phases in preferential release of Ca                
              from plagioclase samples collected from well characterized                     
              watershed laboratories.  Collaboration among the principal                     
              investigators will combine expertise and facilities necessary to               
              accomplish these objectives.  Dissolution experiments will be                  
              conducted at pH 4 using batch pH stat, flow through cell, and                  
              column reaction vessels using plagioclase samples over a range of              
              an contents with and without exsolution lamellae.  In addition,                
              plagioclase samples from watershed laboratories will be used in                
              characterization and dissolution studies to evaluate the potential             
              role of exsolution lamellae in natural systems.  The surfaces of               
              reacted minerals will be characterized using scanning electron                 
              microscopy (SEM-EDX), x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and               
              high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM-EDX,                   
              HRTEM-ED).  Results from this study will be used to model the rate             
              and stoichiometry of plagioclase dissolution as a function of An               
              content in minerals with and without exsolved phases.  Hypotheses              
              concerning the mechanisms of plagioclase dissolution and the                   
              preferential release of Ca relative to Si and Na during dissolution            
              will be tested for both laboratory and watershed weathering                    
              environments.
