Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in the Cohomology of Arithmetic Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1992    
File        : a9206659

Award Number: 9206659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. McConnell mmcconn@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator intends to work on three projects.  The                  
              first, joint with Avner Ash (Ohio State), deals with arithmetic                
              subgroups G of SL(3,Z).  A cuspidal cohomology class for G which is            
              a Hecke eigenclass generates an automorphic representation which               
              should be attached to a family of Galois representations.  They                
              will study these Galois representations in two special cases.  The             
              second project involves a general approach to understanding the                
              cohomology of G(N) in SL(3,Z) for prime N.  The third project is               
              joint with Robert MacPherson (M.I.T.).  For any torsion-free                   
              finite-index G in Sp(4,Z), they have built a G-equivariant                     
              deformation retract (a "spine") inside the symmetric space for                 
              Sp(4,R); it has properties like those of the well-rounded retract              
              for SL(n).  They intend to attempt to extend their construction to             
              non-torsion-free G, and to build a similar object for Sp(6) and                
              higher-rank groups.                                                            
                   The intricate computations envisioned here are intended to                
              shed light on structures which arise in important ways in several              
              different mathematical areas.  The so-called arithmetic locally                
              symmetric spaces interest number theorists as well as geometers,               
              while some of the questions about them have been transformed by the            
              investigator into pure topology.  No transformation removes their              
              difficulty, but when looked at in the right way, some difficulties             
              can be seen to have been addressed by earlier generations of                   
              geometers.  Seventeenth and nineteenth century geometers studied a             
              beautiful class of objects known as projective configurations, and             
              bearing out the mathematical dictum that beautiful objects repay               
              study because they recur again and again in different guises,                  
              properties of these configurations have turned out to bear on the              
              cohomology of certain arithmetic groups, normally considered a                 
              purely twentieth century invention.
