Title       : Transport, Concentration, and Deposition of Precious Metals in Layered Gabbros
               During Continental Rifting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9206962

Award Number: 9206962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis K. Bird bird@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Recent discoveries of gold and platinum group (PGE) mineralization             
              in Eocene layered gabbros of East Greenland demonstrate that                   
              physical and chemical processes associated with the transition from            
              continental to oceanic rifting can concentrate precious metals in              
              the Earth's crust.  One of these gabbros, the Kap Edvard Holm                  
              Complex, exhibits an unusual combination of features related to                
              stratiform precious metal mineralization.  An understanding of                 
              these processes requires detailed field, petrologic, isotopic, and             
              chemical analyses, combined with theoretical analysis of the                   
              thermodynamic and transport characteristics of magma-hydrothermal              
              systems.  The long-term plans for this research program inviove                
              using these techniques to provide new insights into the nature of              
              processes controlling:  1) precious metal concentration during                 
              gabbro crystallization; and 2) precious metal transport and                    
              deposition in gabbro-hosted hydrothermal systems.  A specific                  
              objective of the research will be evaluation of various hypotheses             
              that may explain the unusually high ratio of precious metal to                 
              sulfide that is characteristic of this deposit.  Investigation of              
              the processes responsible for mineralization in the East Greenland             
              gabbros is potentially of great importance to understanding the                
              global distribution of precious metals and to formulating future               
              mineral exploration strategies.  The present award will enable him             
              to get started while he is formulating a plan to achieve the                   
              long-term goals.
