Title       : Conditions Favorable for the Development of Heavy Precipitation During TAMEX
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1993       
File        : a9206124

Award Number: 9206124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi-Leng Chen dave@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Flash floods are major meteorological disasters which occur               
              around the globe.  Understanding of this phenomenon is a                       
              challenging problem because it is necessary to understand both                 
              complex dynamic and microphysical processes at scales of motion                
              that are smaller than typically measured by conventional weather               
              networks.  This scale of motion is termed storm-scale or mesoscale             
              by meteorologists.                                                             
                                                                                             
                   The National Science Council of Taiwan established a Multiple             
              Hazards Mitigation Project whose meteorological component focused              
              on improving flash flood predictions.  A major field project,                  
              entitled the Taiwan Area Mesoscale Experiement (TAMEX), was held in            
              the Spring of 1987.  The project was a joint effort of various                 
              Taiwanese agencies with participation from the National Oceanic and            
              Atmospheric Administration and the National Science Foundation                 
              (NSF).  The scientific goals were to study the mesoscale systems               
              that form on a quasi-stationary and consistent feature known as the            
              Mei-Yu front and cause the heavy rains known as the "plum rains".              
                                                                                             
                   Under a previous award, the Principal Investigator used the               
              special observations collected during the TAMEX in diagnostic                  
              studies that identified important factors for the formation of                 
              heavy rainfall.  These studies have lead the Principal Investigator            
              to concentrate on three topics -- the dynamics of the low level                
              jet; the barrier jet which forms along the northwest windward coast            
              of Taiwan under the prevailing southwesterlies; and the upper-level            
              circulations.  In addition to further analysis using the                       
              observational data, the Principal Investigator will utilize a                  
              numerical model to help identify the important dynamic factors for             
              heavy rain production.
