Title       : Biogenic Sources of Oxygenated Hydrocarbons in the Troposphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9206621

Award Number: 9206621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203700             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Ray Fall fall@cires.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  The impacts of volatile organic compounds (VOCs emitted by                 
              vegetation on atmospheric chemistry are under increasing                       
              scrutiny, especially since they play a central role in                         
              photochemical smog formation.  Past investigations have focused                
              on hydrocarbon components of VOC's, but recently large quantities              
              of oxygenated hydrocarbons (OHC's), such as methanol and acetone,              
              have been found in the air of rural forests, leading to questions              
              about their origins and roles in tropospheric chemistry.                       
              Preliminary measurements indicate that methanol can be emitted by              
              leaves at high rates, similar to that for isoprene emission, and               
              that conifer buds emit substantial quantities of acetone,                      
              suggesting that vegetation is a significant source of volatile                 
              OHC's.  The proposal addresses several key questions. 1) How much              
              methanol and acetone are emitted by various species of plants? 2)              
              What different plant parts (e.g., buds, leaves, bark, etc.) emit               
              methanol and acetone? 3) How do environment, phenology, season,                
              and plant stress influence methanol and acetone emissions?  The                
              effects of environment and stresses will be examined in                        
              controlled laboratory experiments.  Fluxes of OHC's from                       
              different plant families will be assessed as part of the Rural                 
              Oxidants in a Southern Environment (ROSE II) study in a                        
              southeastern forest (summer 1992), and from field surveys in the               
              boulder area.  Fluxes will be measured using bud, leaf, branch,                
              and stem enclosures with OHC analysis by gas chromatography.                   
              This work will provide the first comprehensive overview of plant               
              methanol and acetone emissions, which will be useful in                        
              atmospheric modeling of tropospheric chemistry, particularly of                
              rural areas, and will provide estimation of natural sources of                 
              atmospheric methanol before methanol-containing fuels come on                  
              line.
