Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Sedimentology and Environment of Deposition of the Hadar
               Formation, Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1993     
File        : a9206516

Award Number: 9206516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82832              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl F. Vondra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The premier East African hominid site of Hadar recently                   
              reopened for research after a 15 year lapse.  Major geologic                   
              opportunities are offered by the Pliocene Hadar Formation because              
              of its setting along the tectonic margin between the Ethiopian                 
              Plateau and the Afar Depression with an outstanding badlands                   
              exposure that extends well beyond the studied site of Hadar.  We               
              will build a facies model of deposition for the formation pegged               
              to a very good stratigraphic/geochronologic framework.  The                    
              previous sedimentological work stressed stratigraphic correlation              
              and suggested only very generalized environments of deposition.                
              Being just 50 km east of the presently 2.5 km high Plateau                     
              escarpment, these Pliocene deposits remarkably consist of 70% mud              
              units and only 30% sands.  Most of the muds are massive with                   
              incipient arid paleosols.  Minor laminated mud sequences were                  
              deposited in a lake we hypothesize transgressed from the east                  
              (central Afar).  While the massive mud sand sequence seems to                  
              represent deposits of a meandering river the sands are too                     
              laterally extensive and too gradational into cobble conglomerates              
              (westward toward the escarpment) to be explained by presently                  
              available meandering stream models.                                            
                   By delineating and mapping detailed subfacies, especially in              
              the sands and by cataloging lateral and vertical sequences and the             
              first systematic paleocurrent data, we can assess sandflat versus              
              various channelized flow options.  For the muds we hope to                     
              delineate paleosols of varying maturity, and whether  the lake was             
              saline or fresh.  Careful facies mapping along the several                     
              isochronal tuff surfaces will provide environmental mosaic                     
              time-slices across Hadar.  This research should provide:  (1) a                
              significant segment of the history of the Afar tectonic boundary;              
              (2) knowledge of the environments where the hominids lived and were            
              preserved, and a strategy for exploring for them in the vast                   
              exposures east and west of Hadar, and; (3) a contribution toward               
              a general facies model for thick rapid alluvial deposition where               
              sheets sands exist in association with thick muds.
