Title       : Control of Heterocyst Differentiation in Free-Living and Symbiotic Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9206130

Award Number: 9206130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Meeks jcmeeks@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Nelson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The PI hypothesizes that the mechanisms regulating the                         
              differentiation of heterocysts (sites of aerobic N2 fixation by                
              Nostoc sp. differ when Nostoc is in symbiotic association relative             
              to growth in the free-living state.  He plans to use physiological             
              and molecular genetics to test the hypothesis with analyses in both            
              free-living and symbiotic growth states.  Existing mutants will be             
              complemented by electroporation of genomic DNA after in vitro                  
              ligation into a plasmid.  Insertional mutagenesis will be used to              
              isolate additional mutants.  Interrupted genes will be isolated by             
              rescue of the insertion elements; genomic DNA adjacent to the                  
              insertions will be cloned form cosmid libraries and characterized.             
              Transcriptional regulation of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase                
              (zwf) will be analyzed in response to nitrogen deprivation and                 
              symbiotic interaction using the recently cloned gene.  Insertional             
              mutants of zwf will be used to analyze its role in heterocyst                  
              function.  Recently identified potential nitrogen and anaerobic                
              regulatory genes will be isolated from cosmid libraries by                     
              heterologous hybridization and used to construct insertional                   
              mutants in Nostoc for analysis of heterocyst differentiation.  The             
              results will lead to an understanding of the environmental signals             
              and mechanisms of regulation of cell differentiation in filamentous            
              cyanobacteria in two different growth states.
