Title       : Dissertation Research: Selective Forces in the Evolution of Gender
               Specialization in the Genus Lycium (Solanaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a9801391

Award Number: 9801391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. Lawrence Venable venable@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  Venable  9801391                 The selective forces responsible for the
              evolution of gender specialization  are being investigated in Lycium
              (Solanaceae), a genus of desert shrubs,   using a phylogenetic framework. 
              Lycium is unusual in possessing both   hermaphroditic and separate-sexed
              species and in having multiple   evolutionary origins of separate sexes. 
              Specifically, the importance of   selection for outcrossing will be estimated
              through investigation of   self-compatibility, inbreeding depression, and
              natural selfing rates.  Also,   whether females compensate for loss of male
              function by reallocating   resources and the importance of this compensation
              effect will be determined   using data collected for several reproductive
              components.  A model is   developed that enables us to evaluate the
              significance of these components   to the evolution of gender specialization. 
              These two hypotheses will be   explicitly tested by first inferring
              phylogenetic relationships (the   evolutionary tree) in the genus, using both
              morphological and molecular   data, and then making comparisons between
              dimorphic and monomorphic sister   taxa.     The evolution of gender systems is
              an important general issue in biology  that has intrigued evolutionary
              biologists for decades.  This research   project will elucidate the selective
              forces operating on the evolution of   gender specialization.  Plants make
              excellent systems in which to study the   evolution of gender, both because of
              their tremendous variation in gender   systems and their ease of study in the
              field.  Although gender   specialization is a relatively rare condition
              (occurring in <10% of   angiosperm species), its repeated evolution among many
              unrelated taxa makes   it an important evolutionary issue.  Comparative data
              have frequently been   used to study the evolution of gender in plants, but the
              analyses have   usually been flawed.  There have been repeated calls for a more
              careful   analysis of comparative data.  The approach taken here, of  combining
              field   studies of function with sound phylogenetic comparisons, is one answer
              to   this call, and will provide an important contribution to the evolutionary 
               interpretation of gender specialization in plants.
