Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution of Inbreeding in Tomato: A Development and
               Genetic Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9801157

Award Number: 9801157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6720               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Lord LORD@UCRAC1.UCR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Georgiady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lord  9801157         The  change  from  cross- to self-pollination is  a 
              common  trend  in  flowering   plant  evolution  and  domestication.  A  common
               syndrome   of  characters  is associated with this change, including specific 
              changes  in  flower form. Relatively little is known about the developmental
              and genetic  basis of these changes in flower form. The proposed study will
              examine  the  developmental  basis for differences in mature flowers, in
              closely  related  lines of wild tomatoes. Quantitative trait locus (QTL)
              mapping will then be  used   to  estimate  the  minimal  number  of  loci 
              responsible  for   the  morphological  changes,  and  to find their  general 
              location  within  the  genome.         This  study  will be significant in
              several respects. It will  utilize  relatively  new  molecular  and 
              statistical  techniques  to  address   the  long-standing  question  of 
              quantitative  trait  evolution,   using   both  developmental and genetic
              approaches. It will examine what is considered to  be   the   single  most 
              common  trend  in  the  evolution  of   angiosperm  reproduction: the shift
              from outcrossing to inbreeding. It will  utilize  a  subject  plant,  tomato, 
              which is economically  important,  and  which  is  becoming  a  major focus of
              both pure and applied research.  It  will  also  advance   our  knowledge  of 
              the  genetic  control  of  flower  form   and  development.
