Title       : Extending Hilbert Space Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9801461

Award Number: 9801461
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155745             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jim Agler jagler@math.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Agler. Abs    Proposal: DMS-9801461  Principal Investigator: Jim Agler   
              Abstract:        After the spectral theorem it is difficult to think of a
              theorem that has had a more profound effect on the development of operator
              theory and its myriad applications to mathematics and science than the Sz.-Nagy
              Dilation Theorem.  The idea of representing a general operator in a specified
              class of operators as a part of a nice operator in the class has had many
              successes and we seek to develop this point of view with a primary focus on
              unsolved problems in matrix theory, operator theory,  and the theories of
              functions in one and several complex variables. A particular group of problems
              that we propose to attack involve the generalizations to several complex
              variables of some of the classical moment and  interpolation problems on the
              unit disc such as the interpolation theorem of Nevanlinna and Pick, and the
              moment theorems of Caratheodory and Herglotz. Another group involves deriving
              analogs of the theorem of Adamyan, Arov, and Krein on spaces more general than
              the classical Hardy space. Research intrinsic to operator theory that we will
              undertake  includes issues involving model theory in one variable on nonsimply
              con- nected domains in the plane and in several variables on domains other than
              the bidisc.    Operator Theory,  the particular type of mathematics that we are
              proposing to investigate, has direct and  concrete benefits for a number of
              areas of human endeavor.  For example, the model theory aspects of our proposal
               all involve the generalization of the Commutant Lifting Structure, which leads
              to an efficient algorithm for the discovery of oil from acoustical data taken
              on the surface of the earth.  Other aspects would add to the theory of Linear
              Matrix Inequalities.  LMIs, which currently are all the rage in several areas
              of engineering, are an extension of linear programming, which has made large
              scale resource allocation and economic prediction possible. Finally, the
              particular brand of functi on theory we propose to study forms the mathematical
              core of the recently developed H-infinity control theory, which has been used
              to design control systems for fusion reactions inside Tokamaks and feedback
              stabilization systems for the space shuttle.
