Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution in a Recently Arisen Species Complex:
               Phylogeography and Genetic Diversity in Manihot esculenta Crantz
               (Euphorbiaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9801213

Award Number: 9801213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Schaal schaal@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Schaal  9801213           The process by which populations within a species
              diverge over time to   form new species is poorly understood.  Schaal and Olsen
              propose to   study this process of genetic divergence, using two species in the
              plant   genus Manihot as a study system.  They will examine patterns of genetic
                differentiation within and among the three subspecies of M. esculenta, as  
              well as between M. esculenta and the closely related species M. pruinosa.  
              Using a combination of DNA sequence data and other molecular genetic   markers,
              they will study how present-day population genetic structure   reflects
              historical relationships among populations in the study system.    Their
              analysis is specifically designed to discriminate between the effects   of gene
              flow (migration) between populations and the random sorting of   genetic
              variation (lineage sorting).       Understanding the process of genetic
              divergence at the boundary between   populations and species is crucial to
              understanding speciation and   evolutionary diversification.  This issue is
              thus of fundamental importance   in understanding the process of evolution. 
              The study proposed by Schaal and   Olsen offers several advantages for studying
              this speciation process.    Because their study system involves populations
              within a species as well   as between species, their analysis explicitly
              encompasses the   population-species interface.  Moreover, because
              interspecific   hybridization has been proposed to occur between the two
              species of   Manihot in the wild, the potential influence of gene flow is
              relevant at   both above and below the species boundary.  In addition, one of
              the three   subspecies of M. esculenta is the cultivated crop cassava, which is
              the   fourth most important starch crop in the world and a staple food for over
                500 million people.  The proposed study will help to shed light on the  
              evolutionary and geographical origins of cassava, and will therefore   have
              important implications for approaches to conserv ing genetic diversity   in
              this crop.
