Title       : SBIR Phase II: Photocatalytically Active Filters for Volatile Organic Compounds
               (VOC) Removal from Gas Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9801248

Award Number: 9801248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir M. Zamansky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Energy & Envir Resrch Corp
	      18 Mason
	      Irvine, CA  92618    714/859-8851

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9801248  Zamansky  This Phase II SBIR project continues research on
              utilizing the Photo-catalytic Reactor-Filters (PRF) for effective VOC (volatile
              organic compounds) and PM (particulate material)  removal from gas streams
              before discharging them to the atmosphere.  An economic analysis and testing in
              a small catalytic reactor were performed in the Phase I study.  Phase I
              confirmed that the PRF system is economically and technically feasible and can
              achieve high efficiency VOC control.  The overall objective of the Phase II
              program is to develop information and know how to move the technology to the
              full scale demonstration, Phase III.  The Phase II program will be conducted
              over a two year period and will culminate in development of a conceptual full
              scale design.  The first year Phase II technical goal will be to design and
              construct a research prototype, prepare and characterize the catalysts, and
              start the test program.  Two potential applications were selected for
              optimization: removal of VOC/PM emissions from pulp and paper and dry cleaning
              industries.  The second year goal will be to complete the test program and
              engineering design and economic studies.  Phase II will demonstrate that above
              90% VOC control levels can be achieved with effective removal of fine particles
              in an environmentally safe manner for sigificantly lower cost when compared to
              commercial VOC control technologies.  Potential applications of' the PRF system
              include chemical manufacturing, organic chemicals processes, semi-conductor
              manufacturing, petroleum refining, combustion systems, pulp and paper industry,
              dry cleaning, treatment of VOCs stripped from industrial waste waters, etc.,
              all of which have off-gas streams that contain chlorinated or non-chlorinated
              VOCs.  The process has the potential to be widely used for VOC and particulate
              removal from air and industrial gases.  ***
