Title       : Kinetics of Charge-Density Waves: Time-Resolved X-Ray Scattering Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9801792

Award Number: 9801792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel D. Brock jdb20@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801792 
              Brock    This  experimental  research project is  concerned  with  charge- 
              density-wave (CDW) conduction processes, in quasi-one-dimensional  materials.
              Specifically, this project investigates the pinning of  the CDW by the randomly
              distributed defects in a material such as  NbSe3.  This  is  considered a model
              system for a one-dimensional  metal, and it is pointed out that the
              mathematical description of  motion  of  a  CDW  is  in  many  cases  identical
               to  equations  describing  growth  of  materials or the motion  of  a 
              flux-line  lattice  in  a high Tc superconductor. Thus new understanding  on 
              CDW  behavior  may  be useful in these other contexts  also.  The  experimental
              project focuses on the kinetics of the CDW  and  how  these  kinetics  are 
              affected by quenched  random  defects.  The  effects  of  such pinning defects
              are sought on the  kinetics  of  equilibrium,  near-equilibrium, and  highly 
              non-equilibrium  CDW  systems.  The  experimental probe employed is x-ray 
              diffraction,  using  state  of the art methods which are enabled  by  the  high
               intensities  of  modern synchrotron sources. The  methods  to  be  employed 
              are  time-resolved high-resolution diffraction,  micro-  diffraction, 
              quasi-elastic scattering and inelastic  scattering.  Measurements  with these
              techniques focus on the  time-dependence  of  the  phase  fluctuations of the 
              CDW  state  as  affected  by  quenched  random  impurities. The data will be 
              used  to  perform  quantitative  tests  of several current theories.  This 
              research  program  is interdisciplinary in nature and involves one or  more 
              postdoctoral   and  graduate  students,  who  receive   excellent  training  in
               preparation  for careers  in  industry,  government  laboratories or academia.
               %%%  This  experimental  research project is  concerned  with  unusual 
              electrical  conduction  processes  which  occur  in  a  class  of  conducting 
              materials  which are call ed  "quasi  one  dimensional  metals".  Such  a 
              material  is  NbSe3  which  forms  needle-like  crystals  which reflect the
              one-dimensional or linear  tendencies  of  this material. In these materials,
              electronic charge can move  only  in  one direction, along the needle-like
              crystal.  This  is  quite  unlike common metals like copper in which electron 
              motion  is  three-dimensional,  and substances like  graphite,  in  which 
              motion  is  confined essentially to a plane.  There  are  special  effects
              which occur in the one dimensional case, and one of these  is  called  a
              charge-density-wave (CDW). In this case  electrical  conduction  occurs when
              the CDW wave, representing  a  correlated  motion of all the electrons along
              the crystal, moves together  as  a unit. This is an extreme example of
              correlated electron motion.  This   type   of  conduction  process,  in 
              quasi-one-dimensional  materials, is of considerable interest, and is the focus
              of  this  experimental  project. The experimental probe employed  is  x-ray 
              diffraction, using state of the art methods which are enabled  by  the  high
              intensities of modern synchrotron sources. The  methods  to  be  employed  are
              time-resolved high-resolution  diffraction,  micro-diffraction,   quasi-elastic
                scattering   and   inelastic  scattering. The information gained in this
              investigation will add  to the base of knowledge about conduction of
              electricity in solid  state  materials,  and  could lead to  new  types  of 
              electronic  devices. This research program is interdisciplinary in nature and 
              involves  one  or  more postdoctoral and graduate  students,  who  receive  
              excellent  training  in  preparation  for  careers   in  industry, government
              laboratories or academia.  ***
