Title       : Conference on Waves and Continuation Methods in Biology and Related Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9801227

Award Number: 9801227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart P. Hastings sph@math.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Terman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Simons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J.Bryce McLeod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. Bard Ermentrout  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hastings  9801227       The investigator and his colleagues organize an 
              interdisciplinary conference to bring together biologists and  mathematicians
              to discuss wave phenomena from their varying  perspectives.  The conference
              aims to give both biologists and  mathematicians insights into the types of
              models that can be used  for wave phenomena and the parameter ranges where such
              behavior  can be expected.  To this end, the conference includes both  general
              lectures and more technical talks where particular  techniques are explored
              more fully.  Of special interest in  techniques are continuation methods in
              models of long range  interaction, where integral equation models are involved.
                    One-dimensional traveling waves have long been of interest  to
              biologists, particularly in neurobiology where they describe  the propopagation
              of electrical signals down a nerve axon or as a  plane wave across a
              two-dimensional collection of electrically  active cells.  Related phenomena
              include spiral and other  patterns, such as those thought to be responsible for
              some  pathogenic behavior in cardiac tissue.  Similar patterns in the  brain
              are of current interest as well.  Such behavior is not  limited to
              neurobiology, and appears in a wide variety of  chemical and biological
              systems, such as the Belousov-Zhabotinsky  reaction, slime molds, and many
              others.  On the other hand,  mathematicians have studied basic questions about
              waves for a  variety of models, including biological and chemical settings. 
              One focus of mathematical work has been to prove the existence  and stability
              of traveling waves.  In this regard continuation  methods have become
              particularly interesting in models of long  range interaction, where integral
              equations are involved.  The  conference brings together biologists and
              mathematicians to  discuss wave phenomena from their different perspectives. 
              The  meeting fosters interactions between the two areas that should  lead to
              greater understanding of a variety of phenomena important  in  biology.
