Title       : Algebraic K-theory, Motivic Cohomology and Homology of Linear Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a9801655

Award Number: 9801655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Suslin suslin@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Andrei Suslin
98 01655

Professor Suslin will continue his investigation of
              the motivic cohomology of schemes, in particular its relationship with
              algebraic K-theory and with the Galois cohomology of fields.  In the area of
              mathematics this projects deals, many mathematicians have made informed guesses
              about how various things interconnect.  Professor Suslin hopes to establish the
              validity of some of these guesses once and for all.  He expects to be able to
              capitalize on the newly discovered connection between a conjecture of Bloch and
              Kato and another conjecture of Beilinson and Lichtenbaum to gain insight about
              them both.  The investigator also sees the opportunity to apply other recent
              results to the famous conjecture of Friedlander and Milnor.

This project
              involves mathematics on the borderlines of Algebra, Number Theory and Geometry.
               A powerful method in the modern approach to these fields begins by grouping
              things in rather simple ways.  This simple grouping is generalized to a more
              complicated but related regrouping.  This process is continued to build a tower
              of more and more complicated sequential groupings.  The higher stages in these
              towers are usually completely unmanageable.  Mathematicians have learned,
              however, to look at the interconnected whole rather than the individual parts. 
              Motivic cohomology, Galois cohomology, and algebraic K-theory are three
              apparently different versions of this method of grouping.  In fact, however,
              they are intimately related.  There are a lot of guesses or conjectures about
              the extent of the relations, but established facts are more elusive.  This
              project is devoted to the nailing down these facts.  If it succeeds, the
              results will have impact in all branches of mathematics.
 


