Title       : Superconductivity and Nonequilibrium Transport in MesoscopicMetals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9801841

Award Number: 9801841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman O. Birge birge@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801841 
              Birge    This  experimental  research project is concerned  with  coherent 
              electronic behavior in mesoscopic metal samples. It is focused on  two  topics.
              First is the study of nonequilibrium transport using  massive  reservoirs to
              cool the conduction electrons  and  tunnel  junctions  to probe their
              non-equilibrium distribution  function.  The  second  topic novel behavior
              associated with  the  proximity  effect  in  hybrid  samples with both normal
              and  superconducting  metals.  The work in one aspect is concerned with the
              fundamental  nature  of the electronic Fermi lquid in disordered metals.  This 
              research program is interdisciplinary in nature and has typically  involved 
              several  undergraduate and  graduate  students  in  its  activities.  These
              involvements are beneficial in the preparation  of  students  for  further 
              study and for  careers  in  industry,  government laboratories or academia. 
              %%%  This  experimental research project is concerned with  the  wave-  like
              nature of electrons in extremely small samples of metal. The  size  of the
              samples of interest is on the scale of micro-meters,  or  roughly the same size
              scale as active elements in some modern  computer  chips.  The electric charge
              carrying  current  in  such  small  samples move in ways governed by quantum
              mechanics.  These  motions  are different than the motions of familiar objects 
              like  tennis  balls,  and  the  differences are  important  to  further 
              advance   the   performance   of   computer   chips   and   other 
              microelectronic devices. This experimental work is carried out in  metal
              samples of controlled disorder and also involves the use of  an  applied 
              magnetic  field.  Modern  electron-beam  lithography  techniques  are  employed
               in part of  the  work.  This  research  program is interdisciplinary in nature
              and has typically involved  several  undergraduate and graduate students in 
              its  activities.  These  involvements are be neficial in the preparation of
              students  for  further  study  and  for  careers  in  industry,  government 
              laboratories or academia.  ***
