Title       : Electronic Properties of High Temperature Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9801990

Award Number: 9801990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen C. Almasan calmasan@physics.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801990 
              Almasan    This  experimental  research  project  is  at  the  forefront  of 
              transport  studies to clarify the unusual normal state properties  of 
              cuprates.  The  work  focuses  on  anisotropy  of  electrical  conduction   in 
              in-plane  and  out-of-plane  directions,   using  extremely high quality and
              well-characterized single crystals  of  doped  cuprates. The PI will measure
              the doping, temperature  and  magnetic  field  dependences of these
              conductivity  anisotropies.  The  data  will  be  analyzed  for information 
              about  electronic  structure   and   conduction  mechanisms.  Single   crystals
                of  YPrBa2Cu3O7  and  TlSr2LuCaCu2Oy  of  variable  dopings  will  be 
              investigated. C-axis transport mechanisms will be investigated by  comparing 
              behavior in systems with and without chains.  Evidence  will  be  sought  for a
              possible energy gap in the  normal  state  spectrum  of the CuO chains. Normal
              state conduction in  strongly  off-stoichiometry (under-doped and over-doped)
              cuprates  will  be  probed  by  suppressing superconductivity with  magnetic 
              fields.  Some  of  the  work  will  be carried out  at  the  NSF-supported 
              National  High Magnetic Field Laboratory in Tallahassee FL.  This  work  is 
              expected  to advance fundamental understanding  of  the  normal  state 
              conduction properties and electronic structure  in  the   cuprates.  More 
              broadly,  the  results  from  this   basic  investigation  may include
              fundamental new physical  effects  and  also  may  provide  insight into
              appropriate  doping  schemes  to  facilitate  applications of cuprates for 
              electronic  sensors  or  devices.  This highly interdisciplinary project
              strongly involves  minority-group  graduate students who pursue thesis 
              research  at  both   laboratory  locations,  and  receive  excellent   training
               beneficial  to  a  future  career  in  industry,  government   or  academia. 
              %%%  This experimental research project is concerns the  unusual  electrical
              properties and behavior of metallic oxides containing  copper oxide planes.
              Some of these materials are high temperature  superconductors, for example
              YBa2Cu3O7 which has a  superconducting transition temperature of about 92
              degrees on the  Kelvin scale. The "normal state" properties of these conducting
               oxides at high temperatures or when the superconductivity is  destroyed by an
              applied magnetic field, are the topics of this  research. There are suggestions
              that these materials, even in the  normal state,  conduct electricity in ways
              that are very  different from typical electrical conductors such as copper and 
              silicon. Clarifiying these novel electrical behaviors may  contribute to
              eventual applications of these materials in  electronic devices such as
              magnetic field sensors or even  computer logic devices. Some of the work will
              be carried out at  the NSF-supported National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in
               Tallahassee FL. This highly interdisciplinary project strongly  involves
              minority-group graduate students who pursue thesis  research at both laboratory
              locations, and receive excellent  training beneficial to a future career in
              industry, government or  academia.  ***
