Title       : Dissertation Research: A 2400-Year Genetic Record of Thomomys talpoides During
               Holocene Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9801704

Award Number: 9801704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8991               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Wayne rwayne@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth A. Hadly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Wayne  9801704    As climates warm, natural selection can favor individuals
              within a population that have superior adaptations for the warmer temperatures;
              as a result the population will change in character over time. Alternatively,
              migration from warmer areas may supply more appropriately adapted individuals
              and the original inhabitants may be less fit. Whether migration or natural
              selection on pre-existing variation fuels evolutionary change in populations is
              a fundamental question in evolutionary biology. The debate also is relevant to
              concerns about global warming as habitat fragmentation greatly limits the
              ability of migration to supply appropriately adapted individuals.     Research
              is proposed to assess if migration or genetic isolation has influenced
              evolutionary change over the last 3000 years in a population of pocket gophers
              (Thomomys talpoides) that were preserved in packrat middens in Lamar Cave in
              Yellowstone National Park. During this period, morphologic change has occurred
              in the population in response to changes in temperature. To assess if this
              change has occurred in genetic isolation, the investigators will use new
              molecular genetic techniques that allow for migration to be detected as the
              appearance of foreign mitochondrial DNA sequences.     Initial results show
              that ancient and modern samples collected near Lamar Cave share mitochondrial
              cytochrome b sequences that are absent from surrounding localities suggesting
              that the population persisted and did not receive female migrants from
              elsewhere for 3000 years.  The investigators will extend this analysis of Lamar
              Cave fossils to include a more extensive sampling of stratigraphic levels
              within the deposit. This analysis should definitively establish the degree of
              isolation of Lamar Cave and may be the first that directly assesses temporal
              isolation of a population over evolutionarily significant time periods. Results
              will be relevant to the debate about how rapidly and by which mechanisms
              populations respond to climate chang e.
