Title       : Studies on Pairing Symmetry and Normal-State Properties of Single-Layer
               T12Ba2CuO6+ Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9801834

Award Number: 9801834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Z. F. Ren   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jui H. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801834  Ren 
                This  GOALI experimental research project is concerned  with  new  basic
              experiments probing the nature of superconductivity in  the  simplest  cuprate
              high Tc superconductors, those  containing  one  CuO2  plane per unit cell. The
              project has two aspects, the first  being  growth  of  excellent epitaxial
              films of  Tl2201  on  tri-  crystal and other substrates. This will be
              performed by the PI at  SUNY Buffalo. The second task is a set of subtle
              measurements  to  be  made  at  IBM supervised by the IBM co-PI's in  the 
              project.  These   measurements  will  include  but  not   be   limited   to 
              measurements using a state-of-the-art scanning SQUID  microscope.  The  
              measurements  are  designed  to  clarify  the   nature   of  superconductivity 
              and  the symmetry of the  order  parameter  in  excellent  single  layer
              samples. This choice of  samples  avoids  complications  of  copper chains and
              interlayer interactions,  to  enable  more  transparent  tests of the  relevant
               theories.  The  research will involve a postdoctoral researcher who will 
              receive  excellent  training  at both locations, beneficial  to  a  future 
              career  in  industry,  government  or  academia.  This  work   is 
              interdisciplinary  in  nature and is supported  in  part  by  the  Office  of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical  and  Physics Sciences
              Directorate at NSF.  %%%  This  experimental research project is in the
              category  of  Grant  Opportunities  for Academic Liaison With Industry (GOALI),
               which  fosters    collaboration   between   academic   and    industrial 
              researchers.   This  GOALI  experimental  research   project   is  concerned  
              with  basic  experiments  probing   the   nature   of  superconductivity    in 
               the   simplest    cuprate    high    Tc  superconductors, those containing one
              CuO2 plane per  unit  cell.  The  project has two aspects, the first being
              growth of excellent  epitaxial  films  of Tl2201  on tri-crystal and other 
              substrates.  This will be performed by the PI at SUNY Buffalo. The second task 
              is  a set of subtle measurements to be made at IBM supervised  by  the  IBM 
              co-PI's in the project. These measurements will include  but  not  be  limited 
              to measurements using  a  state-of-the-art  scanning  SQUID  microscope.  The
              measurements  are  designed  to  clarify the nature of superconductivity and
              the symmetry  of  the  order parameter in excellent single layer samples. This
              choice of  samples  avoids  complications of copper  chains  and  interlayer 
              interactions,  to enable more transparent tests of  the  relevant  theories.
              The research will involve a postdoctoral researcher who  will receive excellent
              training beneficial to a future career  in  industry, government or academic
              teaching and research. This work  is  interdisciplinary in nature and is
              supported in part  by  the  Office  of  Multidisciplinary Activities in the
              Mathematical  and  Physics Sciences Directorate at NSF.  ***
