Title       : Quantum Transport and Quantum Devices in Novel Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a9801760

Award Number: 9801760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Melloch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9801760  Chang    This proposal by Prof. A.M. Chang of the Department of Physics
              of  Purdue  University describes an experimental research program  in  two 
              fundamental  areas of the behavior of  contemporary  quantum  solids,  namely
              the behavior of chiral Luttinger liquids  at  the  edge  of  fractional 
              quantum Hall fluids,  and  the  interaction  effects in the quantum chaos
              phenomenon, as well as contributions  to the development of Coulomb Blockade
              Single Electron Transistor  (SET) technology.  This research utilizes advanced
              crystal growth  and   nanolithography  techniques.   Devices  fabricated  by 
              the  Cleaved-Edge-Overgrowth technique developed  by  the  PI  play  a  major
              role in this work.  GaAs/AlxGa(1-x)As crystals will be used  to investigate
              unusual non-Fermi liquid tunneling characteristics  of chiral Luttinger
              liquids.  Further, the effects of interaction  on  quantum chaos will be
              studied in versatile, nanoscale  multi-  gate   quantum   dots.    Lastly,  the
                program   envisions   an  investigation of SET devices and logic circuitry
              lithographically  defined  on  the  conventional planar  as  well  as 
              cleaved-edge  geometries for functionality and optimization.  %%%  This
              proposal by Prof. A.M. Chang of the Department of Physics of  Purdue 
              University describes an experimental research program  in  two  fundamental 
              areas of the behavior of  contemporary  quantum  solids.   Special  crystal 
              growth techniques  developed  by  the  principal  investigator  will  be used 
              to  produce  the  crystal  materials  suitable  for this research.  This  will 
              be  done  in  collaboration   with   staff  scientists  at   the    AT&T/Lucent
               laboratories.   The  synergism  between  academia  and   industry  expressed 
              by  this  collaboration is a major advantage  of  this  program.  The results
              of the research will serve to clarify  many  issues of the properties of
              contemporary quantum solids and  will  assist in the development of improved
              technological devices.  ***
