Title       : Dissertation Research: The Importance of Tychoparthenogenetic Reproduction in
               Natural Populations of the Stenonema femoratum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9801568

Award Number: 9801568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond D. Semlitsch SemlitschR@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Semlitsch
9801568

One of the most fundamental yet largely unanswered
              questions in biology is why most organisms reproduce by mating (biparental
              reproduction) and not by self-fertilization or cloning (uniparental
              reproduction). The ideal study system with which to address this question is
              one in which both biparental and uniparental reproduction coexist within the
              same population. Tychoparthenogenesis is a type of parthenogenesis (production
              of offspring from unfertilized eggs) characterized by low hatching success of
              unfertilized eggs from females in normally sexually reproducing populations;
              therefore, both biparental and parthenogenetic reproduction occur within the
              same population. To use such a study system to address questions about why most
              organisms exhibit biparental reproduction, it is important to first determine:
              1) whether parthenogenetic capacity varies among populations; 2) the extent to
              which females utilize their parthenogenetic capacity under natural conditions;
              3) whether tychoparthenogenesis is genetically controlled. This research
              addresses these three criteria that will provide necessary information for
              further studies investigating the advantages conferred by biparental
              reproduction and therefore, why it occurs in most organisms. This research is
              addressing these criteria using an aquatic insect, the mayfly, Stenonema
              femoratum. Understanding the influence of biparental and parthenogenetic
              reproduction on populations of organisms is important because the way in which
              organisms reproduce can have significant impacts on the ability for populations
              to persist in the long-term. Long-term survival of aquatic insect populations
              is  critical for many important game fish that rely on aquatic insects as a
              food source.

