Title       : SGER: Decision-Based Engineering Design for a Low Vision Aid Using the Virtual
               Retinal Display
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9801294

Award Number: 9801294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159311             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Furness tfurness@hitl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Seibel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erik Viirre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Weissman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop engineering designs for an appliance that will help
              people with certain types of low, or impaired, vision to see.  The designs will
              be based on the principle that engineering design is a decision-making process,
              not merely a problem-solving one.  Thus, as an aid for the decision maker, a
              model will be built that defines concepts such as value, attributes, demand,
              time, price, and other factors, and utilizes a rational for optimization.  The
              project will have two main parts:  (1) the development of the decision-making
              model and its application to the design of the Low-Vision Aid (LVA) and (2) the
              development of LVA demonstrations that will illustrate the feasibility and
              importance of such a product for people with low vision.  Vision enhancement
              will be achieved by exploiting the unique attributes of the Virtual Retinal
              Display (VRD), a means of safely scanning image data directly onto the retina
              without intermediate image formation surfaces.  The VRD projects an image on
              the retina that is very bright, has high contrast, has highly saturated colors,
              and is projected into the eye via a very small exit pupil.  If successful, this
              research will lead to the development of easy-to-use vision enhancement aids,
              devices that will enable the visually impaired to read printed material (e.g.,
              books, magazines, newspapers, etc.), to watch TV, to interact with a computer
              monitor, and to navigate in the physical world. The impairments that this
              instrument will help overcome include corneal scars, keratoconus, presbyopia,
              and cataracts.  The optical characteristics of the VRD may also prove to be an
              aid for macular degeneration and amblyopia.  The development of engineering
              designs is the first step in the process of making the LVA available to people
              subject to these diseases.  The project will also provide an example
              application of decision-based engineering design.
