Title       : Geometry and Representation Theory from Coxeter Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9801045

Award Number: 9801045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew J. Dyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9801045
Dyer

This award supports a broad program to establish some of the
              basic properties of representation theories naturally associated to Coxeter
              groups and polyhedral cones, and to eventually bring them to bear on some
              important questions in Lie representation theory, geometry, and combinatorics. 
              The two main series of conjectures which together would give a proof of the
              Kazhdan-Lusztig conjecture in general, have been formulated and applied to
              prove by elementary means the non-trivial Kazhdan-Lusztig conjecture for
              homogenizations of simplicial polytopes.  These conjectures are the PSM
              conjectures and the IC conjectures.  The PSM conjectures describe analogues of
              principal series modules from Lie theory in terms of data related to shellings
              of the weight poset.  The IC conjectures assert that certain spaces arising
              naturally in the representation theory have properties closely analogous to
              those of the intersection cohomology spaces of complex projective varieties. 
              The main object of this research is to prove the PSM and IC conjectures in
              general.

Representation theory of Lie algebras and Lie groups, initially
              developed at the turn of the century, studies the structure of symmetries and
              their realizations.  This theory encompasses many areas in mathematics and has
              fundamental applications to theoretical physics.  In the past twenty years, the
              study of representation theory of a special class of affine Lie algebras and
              Lie groups led to many new unexpected discoveries in mathematics and
              theoretical physics, as well as to a synthesis of many established areas in
              both disciplines.  In particular, it yielded a pure mathematical description of
              a simplest quantum field theory -- a prototype theory of fundamental
              interactions.  It is expected that representation theory of new classes of
              infinite-dimensional Lie algebras and groups might substantially deepen our
              understanding of mathematics and theoretical physics during the next
              decade.
	

