Title       : Combinatorial Questions in Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9801410

Award Number: 9801410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72735              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nets H. Katz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9801410  Principal Investigator: Nets Katz    Abstract: The
              purpose of this project is to study directional maximal operators in the 
              plane. The major fact underlying this study is the existence of a Besicovitch
              set, which rules out the boundedness of maximal operators over all directions.
              When the set of directions is restricted, less is understood. Katz will work on
              unboundedness in all L^p spaces for maximal operators over Ahlfors regular sets
              of directions with dimension greater than zero. He will also try to work out
              Wolff's conjecture about sets that contain a d-dimensional set in each
              direction. Both of these problems involve finding elasticity in the known
              constructions of Besicovitch-like sets.    A large part of mathematics (as well
              as physics and signal processing) involves the interaction between time and
              frequency. In signal processing, time is a one-dimensional continuum and a
              signal is a function of time. Much depends upon what can be said about the
              instantaneous frequency of the signal at a given time. Time and frequency also
              occur as a metaphor in quantum mechanics. Position takes the place of time and
              momentum the place of frequency. The Heisenberg uncertainty principle limits
              how instantaneously we may specify a frequency. It says that a note requires a
              length of time to be heard -- its wavelength. In the quantum mechanical
              metaphor, there is no need for time -- now called position -- to be
              one-dimensional. Thus, neither is frequency so constrained. The relevant ranges
              needed to specify frequencies become rectangles oriented in various directions.
              To answer questions about this type of universe, it is necessary to understand
              the interaction between rectangles in different directions. The purpose of this
              project is to improve that understanding in the setting of two-dimensional
              space.
