Title       : Concurrent Surface-Based Direct and Satellite Cloud Observations for GLOBE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a9801936

Award Number: 9801936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404827             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Ruscher ruscher@met.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. LaHart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin A. Kloesel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global  Learning and
              Observations to Benefit the Environment Program  (GLOBE) this project is
              designed to meet GLOBE goals and  objectives of linking scientists and
              schoolchildren in a  global information network with the ultimate goal of
              better  understanding Earth's environment and changes that take  place within
              it.  This proposal consists of various segments  addressing GLOBE Program
              needs: support for existing  protocols, development of new protocols, and
              scientific  research with GLOBE data.  This proposal will support the  current
              set of GLOBE cloud protocols, add a new Relative  Humidity measurement, and
              continue development of the  teaching materials for both protocols.  This
              project will develop a protocol for the measurement of  atmospheric humidity,
              to be taken at the same time as the  daily temperature and precipitation
              measurements - within  one hour of local solar noon.  This measurement will
              enhance  the usefulness of the following GLOBE measurements:  cloud  type,
              fractional cloud cover, quality control of the  previous items.  The project
              also proposes to provide daily  visible and Infra-red satellite imagery via the
              Internet  from the GOES-8 and -9, GOMS, Elektro/Fen Yung 2B, and  Meteosat 6
              satellites in order to correlate cloud cover  observations with the location of
              the pixel covering the  observation site.  The direct scientific application of
              this data will be the  study of the relationship between sea breezes and soil 
              moisture, air temperature, and water body temperature at  various locations in
              the tropics and middle latitudes. Where  observations are dense enough, the
              formation of sea breeze  fronts will be studied.  %%%  In response to an
              Announcement of Opportunity for the Global  Learning and Observations to
              Benefit the Environment Program  (GLOBE) this project is designed to meet GLOBE
              goals and  objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a  global
              information network with the ultimate goal of better  understanding Earth's
              environment and changes that take  place within it.  This proposal consists of
              various segments  addressing GLOBE Program needs: support for existing 
              protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific  research with GLOBE
              data.  This proposal will support the  current set of GLOBE cloud protocols,
              add a new Relative  Humidity measurement, and continue development of the 
              teaching materials for both protocols.  This project will develop a protocol
              for the measurement of  atmospheric humidity, to be taken at the same time as
              the  daily temperature and precipitation measurements - within  one hour of
              local solar noon.  This measurement will enhance  the usefulness of the
              following GLOBE measurements:  cloud  type, fractional cloud cover, quality
              control of the  previous items.  The project also proposes to provide daily 
              visible and Infra-red satellite imagery via the Internet  from the GOES-8 and
              -9, GOMS, Elektro/Fen Yung 2B, and  Meteosat 6 satellites in order to correlate
              cloud cover  observations with the location of the pixel covering the 
              observation site.  The direct scientific application of this data will be the 
              study of the relationship between sea breezes and soil  moisture, air
              temperature, and water body temperature at  various locations in the tropics
              and middle latitudes. Where  observations are dense enough, the formation of
              sea breeze  fronts will be studied.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
