Title       : SBIR Phase II: Real-Time Spectroscopic Ellipsometer for Thin-Film Process
               Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9801032

Award Number: 9801032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shankar Krishnan shanky@containerless.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Containerless Research Inc
	      910 University Place
	      Evanston, IL  602013149    847/467-2678

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  Krishnan             This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project is aimed at the development of a real-time spectroscopic ellipsometer
              system for thin-film process control. The key technical challenge to realizing
              time-resolved ellipsometry is the development of a polarization measurement
              sensor that operates over a wide spectral range with high spectral resolution
              and no moving parts. This sensor, the Grating Division-of-Amplitude
              Photopolarimeter (G-DOAP) uses a diffraction grating to spectrally and
              polarimetrically disperse light into several orders which are detected
              simultaneously by linear array detectors. In the Phase I research, we
              demonstrated, for the first time, that it was feasible to operate the G-DOAP in
              the 400-1000 nm wavelength range. The Phase I research also identified design
              ideas relating to the geometric, spectral and polarimetric optical designs
              including the use of vertically-multiplexed arrays, order blocking filters, use
              of the zero order beam for alignment, minimization of polarizer sheets and high
              speed electronics. The Phase II program is aimed at: (i) complete mechanical,
              optical, electronics, and polarimetric design of a G-DOAP system, (ii)
              assemble, test and characterize the G-DOAP system, and (iii) apply the Phase II
              G-DOAP for characterizing coatings and materials in both in-situ and ex-situ
              applications. If successful, rapid commercialization of the G-DOAP will be
              achieved through collaborative and licensing arrangements with our commercial
              partners from whom we have a Phase III follow-on funding commitments.    The
              proposed G-DOAP based SE would be a low-cost, high speed system for real-time
              control of thin film deposition in the semiconductor industry in CVD, MOCVD,
              MBE, and PVD processes. Applications for the G-DOAP sensor also         exist
              in pharmaceutical, astronomy and research markets.  ***
