Title       : Mesoscale Studies of Convection, Tornadogenesis, and Fronts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2000   
File        : a9801720

Award Number: 9801720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $493417             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger M. Wakimoto roger@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9801720
Wakimoto
	 The Principal Investigator will pursue three research
              topics associated with severe local storms and mesoscale frontal structures: 1)
              tornadoes and tornadogenesis, 2) structure of bow-echo squall lines and
              squall-line initiation, and 3) mesoscale documentation of warm and cold frontal
              boundaries.  
There have been major advances in understanding of mid-level
              mesocyclones within supercell storms based on numerical simulations and
              observational studies.  However, knowl-edge concerning the genesis and dynamics
              of tornadoes has not progressed as rapidly.  This can be, in part, attributed
              to the difficulty of collecting high resolution data in the vicinity of these
              intense vortices.   Using unique data-sets collected during the Verification of
              Origins of Rotation in Thunderstorm Experiment, the Principal Investigator will
              pursue three outstanding questions that remain the focus of a considerable
              amount of research on tornadoes and tornadogenesis: I) What are the processes
              that lead to supercell tornadogenesis? 2) What is the relationship between the
              mesocyclone and the tornado? 3) Do supercell tornadoes descend from cloud base
              or build upward from the boundary layer?
An analysis of an intense supercell
              storm which did not spawn a tornado is currently underway.  Preliminary results
              suggest that a well-defined low-level mesocyclone developed on several
              occasions but did not lead to the initiation of a tornado.  Twenty-five passes
              of an airborne Doppler radar by the supercell are currently being synthesized. 
              A hypothesis to be tested is that vortex breakdown within the mesocyclone led
              to the development of an weak tornado.  
Two separate studies focusing on
              squall lines are currently underway.  First, a comprehensive data set on the
              structure of a bow echo is in the early stages of analysis. The bow echo is a
              radar signature that is often associated with downbursts and derechos. The
              present case provides an opportunity to examine the entire evolution of this
              echo from a linear structure to a bow-shaped.  A second study examines the
              initiation of an intense squall line as a result of the merger between a strong
              cold front and the dryline. Although the latter event is known to be a common
              initiation mechanism for the development of squall lines, there does not appear
              to be a study that has provided detailed measurements of this process.
During
              the winter of 1997, an international field experiment called FASTEX (Fronts and
              Atlantic Storm Track Experiment) was organized to study oceanic cyclogenesis. 
              The primary data platforms were several research aircraft which released
              dropwindsondes, recorded in situ measure-ments at flight level, and collected
              high-resolution radar reflectivity and Doppler velocity informa-tion using
              on-board radars. Preliminary radar syntheses have revealed unprecedented
              kinematic structure of cold and warm fronts. Examination of the along-frontal
              structure and an assessment of frontogenesis using a combination of the Doppler
              wind field combined with numerous dropsondes deployed at high altitudes are
              proposed using the FASTEX data set.
Successful completion of this research
              will add substantially to knowledge of severe local convective storms and to
              the mesoscale aspects of winter-time frontal structures.
***

