Title       : Globe Soil Moisture Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9801925

Award Number: 9801925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $553400             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Washburne jwash@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Elliot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Grazyna A. Zreda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global  Learning and
              Observations to Benefit the Environment Program  (GLOBE) this project is
              designed to meet GLOBE goals and  objectives of linking scientists and
              schoolchildren in a  global information network with the ultimate goal of
              better  understanding Earth's environment and changes that take  place within
              it.  This proposal consists of various segments  addressing GLOBE Program
              needs: support for existing  protocols, development of new protocols, and
              scientific  research with GLOBE data.  This proposal will the support  and
              development of support the current set of GLOBE soil  moisture protocols and
              learning activities.  Soil moisture data collected by GLOBE students represents
              a  unique and valuable resource to Earth scientists.  The GLOBE  student data
              have the potential to become the first readily  accesible, long-term, and
              consistent record of near-surface  soil moisture available on a global basis. 
              This soil  moisture data can be used to validate satellite microwave  derived
              soil moisture estimates and to validate this  component in GCM and mesoscale
              models.  The prospect for  direct validation of microwave data is limited by
              the  current launch schedule, but there is much that can be done  comparing
              these observations to seasonal patterns in forward  models of microwave soil
              response.  The area of weather and  climate model initialization, updating, and
              validation holds  more short-term promise, since the current parametrization 
              of soil moisture is crude.  Improving the representation of  land-surface
              hydrology is a major focus of this research.       In response to an
              Announcement of Opportunity for the  Global Learning and Observations to
              Benefit the Environment  Program (GLOBE) this project is designed to meet GLOBE
              goals  and objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a  global
              information network with the ultimate goal of better  understanding Earth's
              environment and changes that take  place within it.  This proposal consists of
              various segments  addressing GLOBE Program needs: support for existing 
              protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific  research with GLOBE
              data.  This proposal will the support  and development of support the current
              set of GLOBE soil  moisture protocols and learning activities.  Soil moisture
              data collected by GLOBE students represents a  unique and valuable resource to
              Earth scientists.  The GLOBE  student data have the potential to become the
              first readily  accesible, long-term, and consistent record of near-surface 
              soil moisture available on a global basis.  This soil  moisture data can be
              used to validate satellite microwave  derived soil moisture estimates and to
              validate this  component in GCM and mesoscale models.  The prospect for  direct
              validation of microwave data is limited by the  current launch schedule, but
              there is much that can be done  comparing these observations to seasonal
              patterns in forward  models of microwave soil response.  The area of weather
              and  climate model initialization, updating, and validation holds  more
              short-term promise, since the current parametrization  of soil moisture is
              crude.  Improving the representation of  land-surface hydrology is a major
              focus of this research.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
