Title       : Electronic Structure of Layered Conductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9801776

Award Number: 9801776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rong Liu LIU@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801776  Liu 
                This experimental research project uses the most advanced methods  of   
              synchrotron   source   high   resolution   angle   resolved  photoemission
              (ARPES) to probe specific aspects of the electronic  structure of layered
              compounds in the near vicinity of the  Fermi  energy.  The  materials to be
              studied are  various  polytypes  of  group  VB  transition-metal
              dichalcogenides MX2, where M=Nb,Ta,V,  and  X=S,Se.  These  materials have
              strong  quasi-two-dimensional  (2D) character and relatively simple crystal
              structures, and  yet  exhibit  very  rich  physical properties.  A  variety  of
               charge  density  waves  (CDW's) have been discovered in these  materials.  The
               mechanisms of the CDW's in quasi-2D and 1D systems  are  not  well  understood
               and  are  of current interest.  The  electronic  structure near the Fermi
              energy plays a central role in  the  CDW  formations  and  other physical
              properties. The energy  bands  of  these  materials near the Fermi energy
              involve metal  d-electrons  and are governed by strong electron-electron
              correlation. In this  project, the detailed electronic structure near the Fermi
              energy,  such as the band dispersions and the Fermi surface topologies  in  the
               normal state, and the momentum dependence of  the energy gap  in  the CDW
              state, will be thoroughly investigated. These studies  are  timely  because of
              the current interest in highly correlated  electron  systems, and the
              availability of ultra-high  resolution  (energy  resolution better than 8 meV,
              angular resolution  better  than  0.5  degrees) ARPES facilities. Much of the 
              work  will  be  carried out at the NSF-supported Synchrotron Radiation Center 
              at  Stoughton,  WI.  This  work is expected  to  advance  fundamental 
              understanding of the CDW mechanisms, and the electronic structure  in  high 
              correlated electron systems. More broadly, the  results  from  this  basic 
              investigation  may  include  fundamental   new  phys ical  effects  and  also
              may provide  insight  into  electron  behavior in other systems including
              semiconductor microelectronic  devices.  This highly interdisciplinary project
              involves graduate  students who pursue thesis research at both laboratory
              locations,  and  receive excellent training beneficial to a future career  in 
              industry, government or academia.  %%%  This experimental research project uses
              the most advanced methods  of surface physics to clarify the electronic band
              structure of  a  class  of  layered  materials. These  materials  to  be 
              sutdied,  including  tantallum diselenide, are important because  they  are 
              model  systems  of  nearly-two-dimensional  form,  which  exhibit  electronic
              phase transitions to correlated electron states  known  as  Charge  Density
              Waves (CDW's). The research  is  intended  to  clarify  why  these phase
              transitions occur, as  related  to  the  electron  bands in the compounds. The
              electron bands  essentially  define   electrical  properties  of 
              semiconductors  and  metals,  including such properties as electrical
              resistance, the speed  of  carriers  in  an applied electric field (the
              mobility,  which  is  very  important in making transistors with excellent
              performance)  and  others.  Electronic band structure in this project  will  be
               studied    in   detail   using   state-of-the-art   photoemission  techniques.
               In  this experiment, monochromatic light  of  chosen  wavelength  and
              direction falls on the sample, and leads  to  the  emission of specific
              electrons, which must have the right energy,  speed,  and direction in the
              material. These three properties  of  the  emitted  electrons are measured.
              Systematic measurements  of  this  type  are  the best experimental method of
              determining  the  electron   band  structure,  which  as  mentioned,  governs  
              the  electrical properties. The most advanced experiments of this type  are 
              carried  out a synchrotron light sources such  as  the  NSF-  supported 
              Synchrotron Radiation Center at Stoughto n,  WI,  where  this  project  will 
              be active. Synchrotron  sources,  which  are  related  to  high energy physics
              accelerators such as cyclotrons,  provide extremely intense beams of light
              including light of  very  short  wavelengths.The results from this basic
              investigation  may  include  fundamental new physical effects and  also  may 
              provide  insight   into  electron  behavior  in  other  systems  including 
              semiconductor     microelectronic    devices.     This     highly 
              interdisciplinary project involves graduate students  who  pursue  thesis  
              research  at  both  laboratory  locations,  and  receive  excellent  training 
              beneficial to a future career  in  industry,  government or academia.  ***
