Title       : Dissertation Research: Comparative Y Chromosome Diversity and Evolution in the
               Hominoidea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9801498

Award Number: 9801498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Hammer mhammer@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Hammer  9801498        The application of molecular tools to evolutionary and
              anthropological questions plays an important role in understanding human and
              great ape evolution. The past decade has fostered a tremendous amount of
              research into genetic variation within humans, accompanied by vigorous
              scientific debate about the significance of the levels and patterns of that
              variation. To increase our understanding of the historical context of human
              evolution and how it has been shaped over the last several million years, a
              comparative evolutionary framework that explores the genetic variation in
              humans as well as in our closest living relatives, the great apes, must be
              generated.  This study proposes to quantify the amount of paternally-inherited
              Y chromosome genetic variation and the geographic distribution of that
              diversity in common chimpanzees, pygmy chimpanzees, gorillas, and orangutans in
              order to (1) provide a comparative framework with which to better understand
              the significance of patterns and levels of diversity seen in modern humans, and
              (2) to better understand the evolutionary relationships and connections between
              populations that exist   within these endangered species for conservation and
              captive breeding purposes. Factors that can potentially affect levels and
              patterns of Y chromosome variation and subsequently the deduced evolutionary
              relationships of populations, subspecies, and species such as the congruence
              between sex-specific mating and migration behaviors and Y chromosome geographic
              structure will be investigated, as will hypotheses about the evolutionary
              processes itself.      Recent studies of maternally-inherited mitochondrial DNA
              have begun to quantify levels of genetic variation and the geographic
              distribution of that variation within and between humans and the great ape
              species.  Humans have been shown to have comparatively low mitochondrial
              genetic diversity in comparison to the great ape species (gorillas and
              orangutans in particular), suggesting some unique events i n human evolutionary
              history.  The historical relationships and levels of genetic diversity
              suggested by any one single genetic marker may accurately reflect both
              population and species history nor overall levels of genetic diversity,
              however.  Complementary studies of other genetic loci are needed to better
              understand the overall genetic variation and structure present in these groups.
               As an understanding of overall genetic variation of humans   is tied directly
              to an increased understanding of similarities and differences between the
              evolutionary histories of these groups, this comparative assessment of paternal
              genetic variation and population history will provide greater insight into the
              evolutionary history of humans as well as chimpanzees, gorillas, and
              orangutans.
