Title       : Auger-Photoelectron Coincidence Spectroscopy Studies of Surface Alloys,
               Ultrathin Metal Films, and Layered Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9801681

Award Number: 9801681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Bartynski bart@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801681 
              Bartynski    This  experimental  research project is  concerned  with  surface 
              analysis   using  Auger-Photoelectron  Coincidence   Spectroscopy  (APECS) 
              focusing  on  local  electronic  properties  of  surface  alloys,  ultrathin 
              metal films, and layered compounds.  In  this  technique, a core photoelectron
              and its associated Auger electron  are  detected in time coincidence. This
              method is used  to  probe  electronic structure with high surface specificity
              and  to  study  extremely  low  defect  concentrations  on  oxide  surfaces. 
              The  systems   under   study   include  surface   alloys   Ag/Cu(100), 
              Au/Ni(110), Pd/Cu(100 and Ag/Pd(100). The surface atoms intermix,  even  though
               the  components are immiscible  in  the  bulk.  Low  dimensional systems and
              interactions between molecular adsorbates  and  surface defects are also of
              interest. A large portion of the  work  is carried out at the National
              Synchrotron Light Source  at  Brookhaven   National  Laboratory.  This 
              research   program   is  interdisciplinary in nature and involves one or more
              postdoctoral  and   graduate  students,  who  receive  excellent  training   in
               preparation  for careers in industry, government laboratories  or  academia. 
              %%%  This  experimental  research project is concerned  with  advanced  methods
               to  study the outermost atomic layers of a sample.  Such  surface  analysis
              methods typically employ a light (photon)  beam  falling on the sample, which
              can lead to other electron(s) and/or  light  being ejected. In the present work
              the detected  particles  are an electron and a photon, which are coincident in
              time, which  is  an indication that they both come from the same atomic event. 
              This  method  of   "Auger-Photoelectron Coincidence  Spectroscopy  (APECS)"  is
               used  to  focus on local electronic  properties  of  surface alloys, ultrathin
              metal films, and layered compounds. The  systems   under   study   include 
              surface   allo ys   Ag/Cu(100),  Au/Ni(110), Pd/Cu(100 and Ag/Pd(100). The
              surface atoms intermix,  even  though  the  components are immiscible  in  the 
              bulk.  Low  dimensional systems and interactions between molecular adsorbates 
              and  surface defects are also of interest. A large portion of the  work  is
              carried out at the National Synchrotron Light Source  at  Brookhaven   National
               Laboratory.  This  research   program   is  interdisciplinary in nature and
              involves one or more postdoctoral  and   graduate  students,  who  receive 
              excellent  training   in  preparation  for careers in industry, government
              laboratories  or  academia.  ***
