Title       : Stongly Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1998        
File        : a9801751

Award Number: 9801751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro U. J. Schlottmann schlottm@phy.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9801751  Schlottmann  This is a grant for theoretical research on strongly 
              correlated electron systems.  The award is funded by the  Materials Theory
              Program in the Division of Materials  Research and by the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities  in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate.  The  NSF grant is coordinated with a similar one at DOE.   
              Properties of highly correlated electrons, in particular,  heavy fermion
              systems, mixed valent maganite compounds,  Kondo insulators and one-dimensional
              conductors are studied  theoretically.  In heavy fermions the main focus is on
              the  simultaneous treatment of Kondo screening and intersite  interactions,
              effects of correlations among the itinerant  electrons on the heavy electrons
              and the faint  antiferromagneticallly ordered magnetic moments observed in 
              some heavy-fermion compounds.  The quadrupolar (Jahn-Teller)  response of mixed
              valent manganese ions is studied within  the framework of manganese impurity
              models and a pair of  manganese ions.  The origin of bound-states in the gap of
               Kondo insulators and the difference of spin and charge gaps  are investigated.
               Methods employed are the Bethe Ansatz,  the Quantum Inverse Scattering Method,
              and slave boson  approaches.  %%%  This is a grant for theoretical research on
              strongly  correlated electron systems.  The award is funded by the  Materials
              Theory Program in the Division of Materials  Research and by the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities  in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate.  The  NSF grant is coordinated with a similar one at DOE.    A
              number of theoretical approaches will be taken to study  strongly correlated
              electron systems.  These systems include  the so-called heavy fermion systems,
              mixed valent maganite  compounds, Kondo insulators and one-dimensional
              conductors.  Both the systems to be studied and the techniques to be used  are
              at the forefront of modern condensed matter physics.  ***
