Title       : Motion of Interface Between Two Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9801094

Award Number: 9801094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62046              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sijue Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9801094  Principal Investigator: Sijue Wu    Abstract: Wu will
              study the long time behavior of water waves, as well as the motion of a general
              two-layered fluid flow. To understand the long time behavior of a water wave, 
              Wu would like to determine whether the free surface of such a wave remains
              non-self-intersecting and whether solutions of water wave problems exist for
              all time, given that the initial free surface of the water wave is a small
              perturbation of still water. To be more precise, she would like to characterize
              those initial free surfaces that guarantee the non-self-intersection of the
              free surface of a water wave for all time. She also wants to study the blow-up
              mechanism for those solutions of the water wave problem that fail to exist for
              all time. The methods used to tackle these problems arise from harmonic
              analysis and the theory of partial differential equations. They include: decay
              estimates, maximal principle arguments, and the construction of a self-similar
              solution to the problem. To understand the motion of the interface between any
              two superposed fluids, Wu intends to study such fundamental questions as the
              existence of solutions to the equation governing the motion and the singularity
              profiles of solutions. To achieve this goal, she hopes to adapt the methods in
              her earlier work on water waves to derive a quasilinear equation equivalent to
              the equation that describes the motion of the interface. The reason for this
              approach is that the equation which models the motion of a two-fluid interface
              is highly nonlinear. In general, one has a better understanding of quasilinear
              equations than of fully nonlinear equations. The proposed research is a
              continuation of the work started by Nalimov, Yosihara and Craig and later
              advanced by the principal investigator on the existence and uniqueness of
              solutions of water wave problems and the work of Sulem, Dochun and Robert,
              Caflisch and Orellana, and Ebin on the well-posedness of vortex sheet motion.  
                 Fluid waves, in  numerous guises, are present in some of the most familiar
              experiences of daily life, from the jarring impact of loud noises on our
              eardrums to the soothing ebb and flow of surf at a beach. The rich variety of
              phenomena associated with wave motion have provided generations of physicists
              and mathematicians with an important and challenging research subject. The
              general problem of motion of the free interface of two superposed fluids has
              applications to a wide variety of concrete physical problems. It has been used
              to understand the mixing of fluids, the separation of boundary layers, the
              generation of sounds, and coherent structures in models of turbulence. The long
              term objective of the proposed work is to understand wave-breaking in surface
              waves and the singularity mechanism in vortex sheets, both topics that have
              significant ramifications for physics and engineering.
