Title       : Partial Differential Equations and Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9801555

Award Number: 9801555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95665              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois J. Treves treves@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Proposal DMS-9801555  Abstract of the Research Project of Francois Treves    F.
              Treves plans to carry out his research in the coming years, in the   following
              three distinct areas: 1. Global parametrices for the time-dependent  
              Schroedinger equation on Euclidean space equipped with a non-Euclidean  
              Riemannian metric. This is joint work with S. Chanillo (Rutgers Univ.). The  
              first step is to construct a parametrix when there is no potential. The next  
              step is to do the same with a potential, whose derivatives are decaying at  
              infinity at a suitable rate (with similar contions on the metric). They  
              propose to use the parametrix to describe the critical set and the propagation 
               of singularities (in Lbesgue and Sobolev spaces), with special attention to  
              the presence of trapped geodesics. 2. Boundary values of Dolbeault cohomology  
              classes. Treves is completing a research program begun with P. D. Cordaro  
              (Univ. of Sao Paulo, Brazil) and S. Gindikin (Rutgers Univ.). The objectives  
              are several: to obtain integral formulas for the solutions of second-order  
              hyperbolic and ultra-hyperbolic partial differential equations; to define  
              spaces of generalized functions (actually hyperfunctions) well suited for the  
              representations of the classical groups which preserve those equations; to lay 
               the ground for the study of ``analytic extension" to domains more complicated 
               than wedges. 3. Analyticity of the solutions of second-order linear partial  
              differential equations of the form ``sums of squares of (analytic, real)  
              vector fields". Recently Treves has formulated a necessary and sufficient  
              condition for such a property to be valid; he plans to use microlocal analysis 
               to initiate a proof of the conjecture.    The solutions of the Schroedinger
              equation are the fundamental elements in the   ``wave description" of the
              states of particles in Quantum Physics. The   construction attempted by
              Chanillo and Treves is aimed at providing explicit   formulas for solving the
              Schroedinger equation  - formulas that make it possible   to describe very
              precisely the behaviour of the particles in the large (so as   to take into
              account distant ``radiation") and in ``curved" space (so as to   take into
              account special constraints on the trajectories of the particles).   The work
              of Treves on boundary values aims at forging new mathematicatools, and   again
              explicit formulas, that could be used in the theory of the Radon and   X-ray
              transforms (which lie at the theoretical foundations of tomography).   Finally,
              the differential equations of the kind ``sums of squares of vector   fields"
              describe, through their solutions, various kinds  of Brownian motion and of
              random processes (they have been extensively studied   by probability
              theorists). The analyticity of their solutions is a precise   mathematical 
              formulation of their great smoothness, as well as indicating the possibility  
              of computing some of their properties in finitely many steps.
