Title       : Infinite-Dimensional Banach and Operator Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9801153

Award Number: 9801153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Odell odell@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Odell
     

This project involves several open problems in
              geometric functional analysis.    1) Does there exist a distortable Banach
              space of bounded distortion?  2) If all spreading models of any block basis of
              a given basis for X are 1-equivalent to some  l_p  space does  X  contain  l_p?
               3) Must every Banach space admit a "nice" spreading model?  4) The study of
              the ordinal l_1(+) index of a Banach space.
     

In the usual geometry of
              space one can measure the distance between two 
points by means of a
              carpenter's tape measure (distance is measured "as 
the crow flies").  There
              are however other natural distances which a 
mathematician encounters.  For
              example the "taxicab distance" between 
two points on this surface would be
              the distance between the points as 
measured by a taxi that could only travel
              horizontally or vertically 
(imagine all roads run N-S or E-W). 
              Mathematicians must study the 
geometry of these different notions of distance
              in order to solve those 
problems from whence the geometry arose.  Furthermore
              many mathematical 
problems require one to work in spaces of higher than three
              dimensions, 
even infinite dimensional space (for example in quantum mechanics
              
differential equations,...).  This project concerns such problems.  
For
              example the author and Th. Schlumprecht proved that ordinary 
(tape measure)
              infinite dimensional space could have its geometry 
altered ("distorted") so
              as to be that one could not recapture the 
original geometry up to any given
              multiple in any infinite dimensional 
"slice".  This is false for the taxicab
              geometry. But it remains a famous 
open problem as to whether or not there
              exists a geometry which can be 
altered but not too badly.  Other problems of
              this project involve 
determining infinite dimensional substructures of a
              geometry given limited 
"asymptotical" (less than infinite dimensional but
              more than finite 
dimensional) information. 

