Title       : SBIR Phase II: Surface Modified Polypropylene and Ultra- High Strength
               Polyethylene Fibers and Their Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9801030

Award Number: 9801030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399590             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shalaby W. Shalaby Polymed@worldnet.ATT.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Poly-Med Inc
	      6309 Highway 187
	      Anderson, SC  29625    864/646-8544

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project objective is to
              complete the development and scale-up study of selected epoxy and cement
              composites. Phase II plans include (1) developing and up-scaling the
              phosphonylation of UHMW-PE and PP fibers; (2) developing and up-scaling UHMW-PE
              epoxy composites and cement composites based on UHMW-PE or PP fibers; (3)
              identifying and collaborating with a manufacturing partner in constructing
              pilot-scale surface activation facilities; (4) preparing and evaluating
              prototypes of sought products; and (5) preparing composite pilot plant full
              manufacturing plans at the conclusion of market analysis. Phase III activities
              will include pilot plant construction/production and field evaluation of
              composite systems. This project represents a continuation of two of the three
              segments completed in Phase I.  The latter was intended to and did determine
              the feasibility of using surface activated ultrahigh molecular weight
              polyethylene (UHMW-PE) fibers for reinforcing epoxy and acrylic resins and
              cement at very low loadings for improved tensile strength ad impact toughness. 
              Phase I results show that not only chemically activated UHMW-PE but also
              polypropylene (PP) fibers can improve the sought properties of epoxy resin and
              cement and, to a lesser extent, an acrylic resin at fiber loadings of about 0.3
              to 2.5% by volume. This, and the regulatory issues associated with acrylic
              composites for use as bone cement led to the focusing of Phase II study on
              epoxy and cement composites.   The subject composite technology is expected to
              lead to the creation of a new generation of high strength, impact-resistant
              cement composites with 1% or less (by volume) fiber loading and epoxy
              composites with 5-30% fiber contents. Potential application of these systems
              include their use as (I) epoxy, composites for armor plates, and appliances;
              and (2) cement composites for bridge rehabilitation, cement boards, and
              drainage conduits.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
