Title       : Structure and Chemical Interactions at Model Polymer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9801739

Award Number: 9801739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Allara dla3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9801739  Allara    The goal of this project is to provide an increased
              fundamental  understanding of the underlying behavior of the interfaces of 
              organic materials. While it is generally well appreciated that  the details of
              substrate structure and chemistry play a critical  role in determining the
              interface properties, the current  mainstream research in polymer interfaces
              has placed only a small  fraction of total effort here.  The proposed work is
              intended to  fill this important gap through studies of chains confined at 
              well-defined surfaces in controlled ways.  Based on new  developments in the
              past results from the principal  investigator's work, three parallel
              sub-thrusts are proposed: 1.)  morphological effects of surface confinement of
              polymethylene  (PM) nano-clusters on transition metal surfaces; 2.) interface 
              reconstruction effects in wetting of surface-grafted chain  assemblies; and 3.)
              structure and dynamics of adsorbed flexible  chains constrained at controlled
              architecture surface sites  and/or by secondary adsorbate species. In area 1
              the work will  probe deeply into confinement effects on structure and phase 
              transitions of PM on varied metal crystal faces.  Further, the  polymer will be
              varied by inclusions of side chains and limited  extensions will be made to
              prepare novel types of polymer nano-  composites.  In area 2 connected
              experimental and theoretical  studies will be made to develop a broader
              understanding of  wetting-induced reconstruction in surface-constrained chain 
              systems.  In area 3 the chain structure density distribution for  adsorbed
              polymers will be correlated with "tuned" substrate  pinning site patterns and
              topography, primarily made via  molecular self-assembly.  In addition, chain
              reorganization and  desorption dynamics will be studied via chemically-induced 
              interface perturbations and effects of chain confinement imposed  by
              chemisorbed molecular traps ("staples") on desorption kinetics  studied. 
              Overall these studies span flexible chain structure s,  ranging from solid
              nanocrystallites to disordered chain  assemblies, confined at chemically and
              topographically controlled  surfaces.  %%%  The results of the proposed work
              are expected to have impact in  areas ranging from polymer adhesion to
              microelectronics to  biocompatability.  They may provide an increased ability
              to make  quantitative models of the properties of complex organic  interfaces
              and thereby to enhance the ability to engineer  materials structures whose
              performance depends critically upon  the nature of these types of interfaces. 
              ***
