Title       : Dissertation Research: Courtship Pheromones, Female Receptivity, and Sexual
               Isolation in Plethodontid Salamanders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9801210

Award Number: 9801210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Kreitman mkre@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Nontechnical Abstract    Proposal #  9801210      Kreitman, M. / Rollmann, S.   
                  In terrestrial plethodontid salamanders, a male delivers chemicals 
              substances (pheromones) to the female during courtship.  These pheromones lead
              to an increase in female receptivity,  thereby reducing the time a pair spends
              in courtship.  These  pheromones may also be used by females to determine
              whether  or not the courting male is a member of her species.  This 
              possibility will be tested by observing the behavioral  responses of females to
              male pheromones from different  subpopulations within the same species and from
              males from  different species.  The behavioral experiments will be  accompanied
              by chemical analyses of the pheromone components  that influence female
              behavior.      Many vertebrates rely on chemical signals, such as pheromones,
              for  communication between potential mates.  Chemical  variation in these
              pheromones could lead to  discrimination against individuals from different 
              subpopulations and perhaps lead to complete  reproductive isolation of the
              subpopulations thereby  contributing to the formation of new species.  The 
              hypothesis that divergence in pheromones functions to  reduce mating has not
              been tested in a vertebrate  species and few vertebrate pheromones have been 
              isolated and identified.  Finally, until now, little  research has focused on
              the chemical variability in  pheromones or on the relationship between chemical
               differences and behavioral effects.  This research  breaks new ground by using
              the unique opportunity  offered in plethodontid salamanders to investigate 
              these issues.
