Title       : Dissertation Research: Origin and Evolution of Endemic Sideritis (Lamiaceae)
               from the Macaronesian Archipelagos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9801594

Award Number: 9801594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Jansen rjansen@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9801594  Jansen    Under the direction of Dr. Robert Jansen at the University of
              Texas, graduate student Janet Barber is studying the origin and evolution of
              the plant subgenus Marrubiastrum in the genus Sideritis (family Lamiaceae). 
              This group contains 24 perennial species  found only in the Macaronesian
              archipelagos of the Canary Islands and Madeira.  These plants display great
              variety in morphological form and, except for a few species, generally have
              highly restricted distributions on single islands.  Yet as a group they have
              exploited all of the diverse ecological zones present in the two archipelagos. 
              The subgenus exhibits extensive chromosomal aneuploidy, a type of change in
              chromosome number considered rare for perennial plants in general and island
              plants in particular.  Morphology of the group is well-understood due to a
              recent (1992) revision of the subgenus, but evolutionary relationships among
              the species are not known.  It has been suggested that the Macaronesian members
              of Sideritis are most closely related to species from the eastern Mediterranean
              region, but there is no phylogenetic support for this assertion.  In addition,
              it is not known whether the island taxa are derived from their continental
              relatives, or if the mainland species may have been reintroduced from the
              islands following Pleistocene glacial episodes on the continent.  The proposed
              study will develop a phylogeny for the subgenus using molecular markers.  This
              inferred evolutionary schema will show whether the island taxa form a cohesive
              evolutionary group, implying a single introduction to the region.  It will
              identify the closest continental relatives and will indicate the direction of
              migration.  It will also test the hypothesis of a biogeographic link between
              Macaronesia and the eastern Mediterranean. Mapping of chromosome number and
              geographical and ecological distribution onto the phylogenetic tree will permit
              interpretation of the roles of these factors in the evolution of the subgenus
              within the islands.   As the first study to apply molecular techniques to a
              group in the Lamiaceae of the Atlantic archipelagos, this work will complement
              studies in other plant families that have documented evolutionary patterns
              unique to Macaronesia and will make a significant contribution to understanding
              the origin and evolution of its flora.
