Title       : Soft X-Ray Spectroscopy Using Synchrotron Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9801804

Award Number: 9801804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Callcott tcallcott@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex Moewes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Ederer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric L. Shirley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rupert C.C. Perera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9166,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                      9801804  Callcott  This  project pursued
              by a Focused Research Group, six scientists  from  three  universities  T.A.
              Calcott, Tennessee; D.L.  Ederer,  Tulane;   A.   Moewes,  Louisiana  State  
              and   three   national  laboratories   E.L. Shirley, National Institute of
              Standards  and  Technology;  R.C.  Perera,  Lawrence  Berkeley  Laboratory; 
              L.J.  Terminello.   Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory ,    will 
              continue their long standing collaborative research in soft x-ray  spectroscopy
              by means of synchrotron sources using the techniques  of   soft  x-ray 
              fluorescence  (SXF)  spectroscopy,  soft  x-ray  absorption  (SXA) 
              spectroscopy,  and  soft  x-ray  photoemission  (SXPS) spectroscopy.  Three
              areas are targeted for investigation:  1) SXF and SXA will be used to study
              compounds containing 4d, 5d,  and  4f  elements;  2)  New experiments  combined
               with  a  major  emphasis  on theory will be directed to the study of SXF 
              spectra  excited  near  threshold which must be described  as  a  resonant 
              inelastic x-ray scattering process; and 3) SX spectroscopies will  be  used  as
               deep probes  for the study of bulk properties,  and  buried  structures  and
              interfaces, and to  explore  the  use  of  standing  wave  patterns  in x-ray
              reflecting  multilayers.   The  understandings obtained through these studies
              have bearing on the  problems    of   high   temperature   superconductivity,  
               giant  magnetoresistance,   and  piezoelectric,   electrostrictive   and 
              magnetostrictive effects, as well on the electronic properties of  matrix
              isolated nano-particles, the properties of interfaces  and  impurities 
              isolated  at interfaces in multilayer  systems.   The  facilities of the
              Advanced Light Source at the Lawrence  Berkeley  National Laboratory and the
              CAMD light source at Louisiana  State  University will be used in this
              research.   %%%  The  Focused Research Group composed of six scientists from
              three  universities   T.A. Calcott, Tennessee; D.L. E derer,  Tulane;  A. 
              Moewes,  Louisiana  State  and three national laboratories   E.L.  Shirley, 
              National  Institute of Standards and  Technology;  R.C.  Perera,  Lawrence
              Berkeley Laboratory; L.J. Terminello.  Lawrence  Livermore National Laboratory 
               will continue their long standing  collaborative  research in soft x-ray
              spectroscopy  by  means  of  synchrotron  light  sources using the techniques 
              of  soft  x-ray  fluorescence  spectroscopy, soft x-ray  absorption 
              spectroscopy,  and  soft  x-ray  photoemission  spectroscopy.  Among  the 
              areas  targeted  for investigation are the study of compounds containing 
              elements  which are characteristic components of those  materials  that  are 
              currently  at  the  forefront  of  investigations   to  ascertain  their 
              suitability in advanced technological  devices,  the  study  of bulk
              properties, buried structures and interfaces,  and  the exploration of  the use
              of standing wave patterns in  x-  ray  reflecting multilayers.  The
              understandings obtained through  these  studies  have bearing on the problems
              of high  temperature  superconductivity,  giant magnetoresistance,  and 
              piezoelectric,  electrostrictive and magnetostrictive effects, as well as on 
              the  electronic properties of matrix isolated nano-particles, and  the 
              properties of interfaces and impurities isolated at interfaces in  multilayer
              systems.  The facilities of the Advanced Light  Source  at  the Lawrence
              Berkeley National Laboratory and the CAMD  light  source  at  Louisiana  State
              University  will  be  used  in  this  research.  In addition to the named
              principal investigators there  is  a  large number of collaborators from other
              universities  and  research   institutions,  including  undergraduate  and 
              graduate  students   and   post   doctoral   research   associates.   These 
              collaborations  insure the wide dispersal of the results  of  the  research  to
               other  research groups in  industry,  academe,  and  national laboratories,
              and serve to train the next generation  of   research scientists.  ***
