Title       : Nonlinear Problems From Combustion Theory and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9801609

Award Number: 9801609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carlos Berenstein                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53295              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuan Lou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Yuan Lou
DMS-9801609

The investigator plans to study three classes of
              problems: 
first, the perturbed Gelfand problem and its related ones from
              
Combustion theory. The emphasis will be on the complete 
description of the
              exact number solutions of these nonlinear 
elliptic partial differential
              equations and the understanding 
of more complex combustion models; second,
              the investigator 
wants to pursue a better understanding of the classical
              
Lotka-Volterra models with diffusion. These models, though 
deceptively
              simple-looking, involve tremendous mathematical 
difficulty. The investigator
              has been trying to introduce 
new ideas and develop new methods to solve some
              open problems in 
this field; The third class of problem that the investigator
              
will study is the cross-diffusion system, which is a 
strongly-coupled
              nonlinear parabolic system. The investigator, 
in a series of joint work with
              Wei-Ming Ni, has introduced  
powerful new methods that can yield very
              detailed information 
about the steady-states of these systems. The
              investigator plans 
to study the global time existence of this cross-diffusion
              
system, along with the stability of various steady-states.  
The
              investigator hopes that the work on this cross-diffusion
system can be
              instrumental in understanding  general strongly-coupled 
reaction-diffusion
              systems. 


Mathematical problems from  biology and combustion theory
              are
not only mathematically challenging, but also practically important. 
To
              be illustrative, let us consider the following ecological problem: 
suppose
              that two different species originally live in two separate 
regions and both
              of them can survive. Now if we connect these two
regions and let these two
              species be mixed  together in the new region. 
Besides the existing
              competitions among the same species, there appears 
the new competition
              between two different species. A basic questions is: 
how can these two
              species manage coexistence under such new situation? If 
assuming that these
              two species are moving randomly, then the problem can 
be modeled by the
              classical Lotka-Volterra model, and this model is 
covered by  the second
              class of problems which the investigator proposes 
to study. On the other
              hand,  when two species are competing for 
resources to survive, it is not
              very reasonable to just add diffusion to 
the model since individuals are not
              moving around randomly. Instead,  
they are moving to places to their
              advantage, e.g., species prefer places 
with less population pressures created
              by competitors. Based on this 
second assumption, some biologists  proposed
              the cross-diffusion system, 
i.e., the third class of problems  which the
              investigator will pursue. The 
investigator hopes that such mathematical work
              not only yields interesting 
mathematical results, but also strengthens the
              understanding of real
world phenomena in various branches of science.

