Title       : Minimal Smoothness Questions for Inverse Problems and Boundary Value Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9801276

Award Number: 9801276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78477              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell M. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Russell Brown will pursue research in two areas: inverse problems for   partial
              differential equations and regularity for boundary value   problems in
              nonsmooth domains.    Many of the fundamental laws of nature are expressed as
              partial   differential equations. In an inverse problem, one attempts to
              recover   a coefficient in a partial differential equation from information  
              about solutions of the equation. This provides a mathematical model   for
              determining physical properties of an object (such as its   conductivity) from
              measurements (such as voltage and current at the   boundary). In the problem I
              will study, the inverse conductivity   problem, we consider exactly the example
              described above: determine a   spatially inhomogeneous conductivity from
              measurements of current and   voltage made at the boundary. The innovation in
              my research is to   attempt to determine the least restrictive hypotheses under
              which this   determination can be made.     The second area of investigation is
              related to boundary value problems   for various partial differential equations
              in nonsmooth domains. In   contrast to the inverse problem considered above,
              here we are   considering the more straightforward problem of obtaining
              solutions to   a partial differential equation given information at the 
              boundary. This is a mathematical model for the problem of (for   example) of
              finding the voltage potential in the interior from   knowledge of the potential
              at the boundary. The innovation in my   research is to establish minimal (and
              more realistic) hypotheses under   which the solution can be shown to exist.
