Title       : Dissertation Research: Longear Sunfish and their Acoustic Environment: Physical
               and Biological Effects on Signal Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9801041

Award Number: 9801041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Ryan mryan@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dawn L. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ryan  9801041    Few studies have examined the function of and natural 
              variation in acoustic signals in the 65 families of  coniferous fishes. This
              lack prevents scientists from  understanding patterns and processes in
              communication across  vertebrates. The structure, context, and variation of 
              acoustic signals of longear sunfish (Lepomis megalotis,  Centrarchidae), a
              relative of the largemouth bass, will be  studied to establish the basis for
              future work and  comparative studies. Calls of these fish will be recorded in 
              natural populations, analyzed using wavelet transforms, and  behavioral context
              videotaped to characterize the signal.  Hypothesized functions will be tested
              using playback  experiments. Acoustic signal variation at various levels  will
              be determined to verify that population differences are  not due exclusively to
              variation within an individual or  between individuals. Two possible sources of
              variation,  physical and species composition differences, will be  examined.
              The physical differences between sites in  underwater sound propagation and
              degradation will be  determined using playbacks of tem signals. Alternately,
              most  Lepomis species compete for acoustic space and produce  viable hybrid
              offspring, which may result in differences in  signals at sites with multiple
              species. The calls of hetero  specifics will be recorded, analyzed and compared
              to longear  sunfish calls to determine call parameter overlap.       The
              microgeographic variation in acoustic signals in  longear sunfish may indicate
              localized population  divergence. Understanding this variation may be important
              in  understanding the implications of habitat fragmentation and  degradation.
              Research on acoustic signals in natural  populations of sunfish will contribute
              to general knowledge  of acoustic signaling systems and the selection acting on
               them, as well as specific information on teleost acoustic  behavior and
              underwater sound propagation.
