Title       : The Effect of Dopants on Group IV Surface Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9801024

Award Number: 9801024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299955             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Crowell jcrowell@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9801024  Crowell    This project aims for a fundamental understanding of the
              effect  of dopants and alloying (additives) on the nanostructure and 
              nanochemistry of epitaxial deposition. Emphasis is placed on  determining the
              role of dopants in modifying the geometric,  electronic, and chemical
              reactivity of Group IV semiconductor  surfaces. The approach is to delineate
              the surface chemistry and  reactivity of Group IV precursor reagents in the
              presence of  additives and dopants on Si surfaces, to assess how nucleation 
              begins, and how differences in the local deposition chemistry  affect the
              growing films' nanostructure and morphology. The  research strives for a basic
              understanding of the changes in  bonding and electronic structure induced by
              dopants through  characterizing the vibrational structure of deposition and 
              etching intermediates, determining what effect additives and  dopants have on
              reaction mechanisms and on the surface  energetics; correlation of the
              deposition chemistry and the  geometric structure at the nanometer scale is
              expected to lead to  better understanding and process control. A broad range of
               spectroscopic probes will be used to characterize and correlate  the
              deposition chemistry with the surface growth morphology.  These studies will
              couple existing expertise and spectroscopic  capability with variable
              temperature STM and ultraviolet and  x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy studies. 
              %%%  The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of 
              materials science having high technological relevance. The  research will
              contribute basic materials science knowledge at a  fundamental level to
              important aspects of electronic/photonic  devices.  Experimental tools are now
              available to allow atomic  level observation of elementary surface processes
              which when  better understood will allow advances in both fundamental science 
              and technology. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from  the research
              is expected to contribute to improving the perform  ance and s tability of
              advanced devices and circuits by providing  a fundamental understanding and a
              basis for designing and  producing improved materials, and materials
              combinations.  An  important feature of the program is the integration of
              research  and education through the training of students in a fundamentally 
              and technologically significant area.  ***
