Title       : Quantitative Ergodic Theorems; Spectra of Transfer Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1999  
File        : a9801602

Award Number: 9801602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mate Wierdl mwierdl@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Wierdl    This proposal for research concerns questions of almost
              everywhere  and mean convergence in ergodic theory, and their connections with 
               harmonic analysis and probability theory. Also considered are   spectral
              questions for matrix-coefficient transfer operators.  Some of the convergence
              questions which will be addressed by Wierdl   concern the mean convergence of
              averages of measurements made on a   stochastic process at a random sequence of
              times that is chosen in   advance. Other questions concern subsequence ergodic
              theorems for   subsequences coming from members of Hardy fields, along bases
              for the   integers, and along sequences with big gaps. Results obtained by
              Wierdl in the previous grant periods suggest that in the context of Hardy
              fields, a meaningful characterization of the ``good'' sequences of measurements
              is possible.         Campbell and Wierdl will jointly consider another group of
              convergence   questions concerning upcrossings and related oscillatory behavior
              of   the ergodic averages. This line of research was initiated by Bishop,  
              Bourgain, Kalikow, B. Weiss and others.  Wierdl and his collaborators  
              discovered a fundamental connection between Ergodic Theory and   martingales. 
              This discovery---which often manifests itself as a   squarefunction of the
              difference between ergodic averages and certain   martingales---allows one to
              translate many of the results of   Martingale Theory, such as squarefunction,
              large deviation or   upcrossing inequalities, to ergodic theoretical results.  
                    The so called Ergodic Theorem (ET) is a theoretical description of a  
              certain statistical behavior of matter.  Loosely speaking, the ET   makes it
              possible to make a large class of physical measurements in   two entirely
              different ways, but arrive to the same result.  It is useful to have an
              illustration: suppose we want to find out the average speed of the water
              particles in a cup of water.  Well, we would have to measure the speed of each
              particle separately, and then  take the average of these measurements.  This
              method of calculating the average speed is called  averaging in *space* since
              we go to different points (particles) in space to make the measurement.  But
              the ET says, that we would arrive to the same result if we pick a *single*
              particle, and start measuring its speed at 1 second, at 2 second, at 3 second,
              etc, and after a long enough period of time take the average of these
              measurements.  This method of calculating the average is called averaging in
              *time*.      So the above is two very different ways of calculating average
              speed,   and the method to be chosen depends on the circumstance.  Having  two
              possibilities gives great freedom in experiments.  The problem with the ET is
              twofold: 1) It does not specify exactly *how many* times are we supposed to  
              measure the speed of the single particle; the ET just says "eventually" the
              time average gets close to the space average.  2) The measurements in time has
              to be made *exactly* at 1s, 2s, 3s, etc.  But in practice, one cannot make
              measurements so promptly.  The ET says nothing if the measurements are made at,
              say, 1.1s, 2.8s, 3.2s, ...Our proposal addresses the above two problems:   1)
              we propose various ways to determine how many times does one need   to make
              measurements in time to get close with prescribed accuracy to   the space
              average.  2) We examine various randomly generated times at which measurements
              made will still give an average approaching the space average.  (Note Randomly
              generated times are much more likely to model practical   situations.)
