Title       : Analysis of Mathematical Models in Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1998    
File        : a9801622

Award Number: 9801622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Waltman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Waltman  9801622       The chemostat (also called a continuous culture or a 
              bioreactor) is a basic model of an open system.  It is a model of  a simple
              lake, a laboratory version of the commercial  bio-reactor, and the starting
              point for models of waste water  treatment and models of the mammalian
              intestine.  Microorganisms  compete for an input nutrient in an exploitative
              manner.  The  equations governing the model take the form  of systems of 
              nonlinear ordinary or partial differential equations.  In this  project, the
              investigator adds new features to the basic model in  order to make it more
              realistic.  This complicates the equations  and hence the mathematical
              analysis.  Specifically, the effects of  wall growth, diffusion, transport,
              inhibitors (natural and  external), and plasmid dynamics on the outcome of the
              competition  are to be studied.  The goal of the mathematical analysis is to 
              identify the global asymptotic behavior of the solutions to these  equations in
              terms of the system parameters (measurable or  operational parameters).      
              Inhibitors occur naturally (for example, anti-competitor  toxins) or as
              pollutants.  Growth of microorganisms on the wall  (or other surface) can
              impede the efficiency of a biochemical  reactor or contaminate any flow
              process.  The asymptotic analysis  of such problems can lead to a better
              understanding of natural  phenomena or of reactor technology.  Knowledge of
              this behavior  allows one to predict the outcome of a fixed (i.e., natural) 
              environment or to control the outcome in the case of an  artificial
              (commercial) environment.  All of the effects mentioned  above come together is
              models of the mammalian intestine where  wall growth is essential to the
              process, inhibitors affect the  competition and where transport and diffusion
              cannot be ignored.  One of the objectives of the study is to provide a better
              model  of the human large intestine and a better understanding of the  relative
              effect of each of the phenomena involved.
