Title       : SGER: The Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal System: Links with Emerging Effortful
               Control and Self-Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9801292

Award Number: 9801292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19407              (Estimated)
Investigator: Grazyna Kochanska grazyna-kochanska@uiowa.edu   or        blagrawy@uiamvs  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award was made as a Small Grant for Exploratory Research. The project
              investigates a possible link between cortisol and inhibitory or effortful
              control in young children. The PI (G. Kochanska) studies effortful control,
              self-regulation, affectivity, and temperament in young children. The co-PI (M.
              Gunnar) studies the role of cortisol in behavioral adaptation and its impact on
              the central nervous system and behavior. The two investigators will link their
              programs of research to study whether dysregulation of the daily rhythm in
              cortisol, and/or elevated cortisol responses to stressors might be related to
              poor inhibitory control in preschool children. Repeated assessments of cortisol
              levels (derived from samples of saliva) will be related to childrens'
              inhibitory/effortful control, also measured repeatedly over time. Preliminary
              data indicate that children who score consistently low on inhibitory control
              competencies over the preschool years show a marked suppression of the first
              morning cortisol values compared to other children. As a result, the daily
              rhythm in cortisol production is dampened in these children. It is not known
              whether the childrens' poor inhibitory control abilities preceded or followed
              the alteration in their daily cortisol rhythm. This project is designed to gain
              further insight into this relationship between glucocorticoids and attention
              regulation and inhibitory control.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
