Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Carbon Fiber Reinforced Composite Membrane for Radio Telescope
               Reflector Surface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9801169

Award Number: 9801169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $469459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daron Giles dgiles@coi-world.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Connell  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Composite Optics Inc
	      9617 Distribution Avenue
	      San Diego, CA  921212307    619/621-5309

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  ***  9801169  Connell    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project will manufacture a 4 meter aperture membrane and demonstrate that the
              as-manufactured accuracy of the membrane can in fact be improved to the micron
              range by figuring on an array of adjusters.  The development of a lightweight,
              thermally stable reflecting surface for large radio wave telescopes and Ka-band
              ground segment antennas would greatly improve performance of these instruments.
               In the Phase I study, the feasibility of designing, fabricating, and figuring
              a reflective surface consisting of a single-piece carbon fiber reinforced
              plastic (CFRP) membrane for an 8 meter aperture millimeter wave radio telescope
              was established.  Although the technology under investigation in the Phase I
              study was somewhat general in nature, the antenna proposed for the U.S.
              National Radio Astronomy Observatory's (NRAO) Millimeter Array was used as the
              model system.  Achieving this objective will require further development of key
              support technologies that will be generally applicable to the design and
              manufacture of any size membrane. These technologies include: refined
              design/analysis approach, manufacture of accurate plaster tooling, proof of a
              CFRP backup structure concept, and resin infusion molding capability.   
              Potential commercial applications of this research include radio telescope
              applications in the millimeter wave portion of the spectrum where low mass,
              high precision, thermal stability, environmental endurance, and low cost are
              important factors.  Currently, the American, European, and Japanese radio
              astronomy communities all have plans to build millimeter wavelength radio
              telescopes, each consisting of an array of 40 to 60 large antennae.  In
              addition to radio astronomy, the ground segment antennae of Ka-Band
              communication satellite systems are also candidates for this technology.  The
              FCC is currently overwhelmed with requests from commercial and military sources
              to utilize the millimeter wave portions of the  spectrum, making it likely that
              this technology will find additional commercial application outside of radio
              astronomy.  ***
