Title       : The Fundamental Physics of Envelope Solitons - Microwave Solitons in Magnetic
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9801649

Award Number: 9801649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl E. Patton patton@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Patton
9801649
This condensed matter physics project is devoted to the study
              of dynamical magnetization behavior in thin magnetic films. The nonlinear
              physics of microwave magnetic envelope solitons will be investigated.  (1)
              Feedback techniques will be used both to self-generate pure eigenmode solitons
              and to form solitons from input pulses.  (2) The eigenmode, eigenvalue,
              amplitude, phase, decay, and velocity characteristics of these fundamental
              soliton excitations will then be investigated.  (3) Parametric techniques will
              be used to excite both solitons and modulational instability signals under
              short and long signal pulse conditions, respectively, and the fundamental
              connections between these key nonlinear processes and soliton properties will
              be investigated.  (4) The two dimensional spatial distributions and wave vector
              distributions of MME solitons and modulational instability response profiles
              will be investigated by Brillouin light scattering. The work aims at new
              insights into the behavior of nonlinear pulses which are of interest from
              fundamental viewpoints as well as technical applications in areas such as,
              optical communications, and radar signal processing. The project provides a
              state-of-the-art experience for undergraduate students, graduate students and
              post-docs. This provide fundamental training in basic physics, microwave and
              light scattering methods that have applications in data processing, high speed
              computation, mass data storage, and defense.
%%%
Thin single crystal ferrite
              films provide an ideal medium to investigate the properties of very high
              frequency pulses in nonlinear media. The nonlinear interactions lead to pulse
              narrowing and soliton formation.  Solitons are robust pulses which may be used
              for long range optical communications, microwave signal processing, and
              fundamental studies in nonlinear physics. This research will utilize feedback
              techniques, parametric excitation, and optical methods to probe these
              properties. The work aims at new insights into the behavior of nonlinear pulses
              which are of interest from fundamental viewpoints as well as technical
              applications in areas such as, optical communications, and radar signal
              processing. The project provides a state-of-the-art experience for
              undergraduate students, graduate students and post-docs. This provide
              fundamental training in basic physics, microwave and light scattering methods
              that have applications in data processing, high speed computation, mass data
              storage, and defense.

