Title       : Nonlinear Degenerate Parabolic Problems and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9801304

Award Number: 9801304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagiota Daskalopoulos pdaskalo@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9801304  P. Daskalopoulos    The abstact follows :   The major  objectives
              of this proposal are concerned with the study of certain quasilinear or 
              fully-nonlinear degenerate parabolic equations in connection   with  more
              complexproblems of  differential geometry, including the Ricci flow   and the
              Gauss curvature flow. These problems find physical applications in   such areas
              as  population dynamics, diffusion in porous media, and thin liquid film
              dynamics.  One specific area which will be investigated is the regularity
              question in free-boundary problems arising from the degeneracy of certain 
              non-linear parabolic equations, including the porous medium equation, the
              evolution p-laplacian equation and Gauss Curvature flow with flat sides. 
              Another specific area of the main objectives  concerns the study of  ultra-fast
              diffusion parabolic equations, which have received large  attention because of 
               their relationship to differential geometry topics, such as the Ricci flow and
              the Yamabe flow.  The  solvability of the Cauchy problem for these equations,
              the   study of the blow up profile of solutions, the nonradial structure 
              solutions, and   the  uniqueness of solutions, are among the problems which
              will be investigated   in this specific area.  The still  open question  of the
              uniqueness of sign-solutions   of the porous medium equation,   in connection
              with the continuity question for  a class of linear singular  parabolic
              equations falls under the proposed major goals to be studied.    The non-linear
              equations to be studied under this proposal form the basic concepts of many
              applications which deem to be important to technology and the society at large.
               The purification of materials, from chemicals to petroleum and even water, is
              often achieved by diffusion through filters.  The purification filters are the
              porous media described in the proposal.  Thin film dynamics and the Van der
              Waals forces operating between thin layers are described  by singular
              quasilinear  equations of ultra-fast d iffusion.  The dynamics of population
              growth, polymer chain growth, including cross linking and high rate growth of
              biomolecules, are also non-linear phenomena amiable to our basic studies.  The
              interesting problem  of the expanding universe and other cosmological phenomena
              seem to be goverened by nonlinear dynamics, which in certain cases are 
              applications of the more complex problems described here.
