Title       : GOALI: Three-Dimensional Josephson Junction Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9801825

Award Number: 9801825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Newrock richard.newrock@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Mast  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Doughty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801825 
              Newrock    This  GOALI  experimental  research  project  is  concerned  with 
              entirely  new,  three-dimensional arrays of Josephson  junctions,  which  will 
              be  fabricated  for the first  time  making  use  of  advanced
              microlithographic techniques and facilities. An entirely  new  domain  of 
              behavior  relating to phase  transitions,  model  systems  for high temperature
              superconductors, and vortex  motion  will  be made accessible in three
              dimensional arrays, rather than  the   previously  studied  two-dimensional 
              arrays  of  Josephson  Junctions. The steps in fabricating the novel device
              arrays  will  include  the deposition of multilayers, e-beam writing  and  mask
               fabrication  at the Cornell University Nanofabrication  Facility,  and
              electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) etching at PlasmaQuest  in  Richardson
              Texas. In measurements on the arrays, focus will be on  three-dimensional
              critical fluctuations in the conductivity,  the  susceptibility, and  the
              critical field. Other topics of interest  are modeling the three-dimensional XY
              Hamiltonian, the nature  of  frustration   in  3-d  spin  systems,  and  2-  to
               3-dimensional  crossover  effects  in the phase transition.  The  research 
              will  involve  graduate student and postdoctoral researchers  who  will 
              receive excellent training beneficial to their future careers  in  industry,  
              government  or  academic  research.  This   work   is  interdisciplinary  in 
              nature and is supported  in  part  by  the  Office  of  Multidisciplinary
              Activities in the Mathematical  and  Physics Sciences Directorate at NSF.  %%% 
              This  experimental research project is in the category  of  Grant 
              Opportunities  for Academic Liaison With Industry (GOALI),  which  fosters   
              collaboration   between   academic   and    industrial  researchers. This
              project is concerned with entirely new,  three-  dimensional  arrays  of
              Josephson junctions. Josephson  junctions  between  superconducting  electrodes
              are highly non-linear  device  elements  whose  behavior  is  strongly 
              influenced  by  magnetic  fields, even at the level of the single "flux
              quantum". For  this  reason Josephson Junctions are in fact used in sensitive
              magnetic  field detectors. Arrays of Josephson Junctions  are model systems 
              for  the motion of  magnetic flux in superconductors and also for  studying 
              phase transitions. An entirely new domain  of  behavior  relating to phase
              transitions, model systems for high temperature  superconductors,  and vortex
              motion will be  made  accessible  in  three dimensional arrays, rather than the
              previously studied two-  dimensional   arrays  of  Josephson  Junctions.  The  
              steps   in  fabricating  the novel device arrays will include the  deposition 
              of  multilayers,  e-beam  writing and  mask  fabrication  at  the  Cornell  
              University  Nanofabrication  Facility,   and   electron  cyclotron  resonance
              (ECR) etching at PlasmaQuest  in  Richardson  Texas.  Because  the systems to
              be studied are models  for  other  types  of physical systems, the information
              that will be obtained  may  be  of  value in other branches of science, for 
              example  in  engineering  where  coupling  of non-linear  oscillators  may  be 
              important.  The  research  will  involve  graduate  student   and  postdoctoral
               researchers  who will  receive  excellent  training  beneficial  to  their
              future careers in industry,  government  or  academic  research. This work is
              interdisciplinary in nature  and  is   supported   in  part  by  the  Office 
              of  Multidisciplinary  Activities  in the Mathematical and Physics Sciences 
              Directorate  at NSF.  ***
