Title       : Measures, Dynamics and Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9801583

Award Number: 9801583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176973             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Daniel Mauldin mauldin@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mariusz Urbanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Mauldin/Urbanski      The investigators will continue ongoing research
              involving measures of various kinds-Hausdorff, packing, conformal, Gibbs state,
              etc.; associated functions-capacities, pressure and associated dimensions. 
              These notions will be  studied from two interlaced viewpoints. One is that of
              various dynamical systems and the other is that of geometric measure theory as
              applied to recursively generated objects. These approaches naturally meld with
              one another and lead to some interesting mixtures of ideas. During the last few
              years we have developed a fairly extensive theory of the iteration of
              infinitely many uniformly contracting conformal maps(hyperbolic systems) and
              have made some applications of it to some well known problems. We would like to
              extend this theory to cover a more structured iteration of maps-whose governed
              by directed graphs or  substitutions and random iterations. We also wish to
              apply our theory to  geometric object obtained as limit sets of Kleinian groups
              or more generally a system of maps which are not uniformly
              contracting(parabolic systems). We intend to develop the tools necessary to 
              apply our theory to continue obtaining new results about the geometric
              structure of sets of continued fractions and relationships to classical
              arithmetic density results. We also plan to develop an appropriate multifractal
              formalism for our systems. We want to use these tools to describe some aspects
              of the geometry of the Julia sets of Collett-Eckmann rational functions.
              Finally, we want to obtain some approximation theorems which should be useful
              for obtaining analogues of known section and projection theorems concerning
              Hausdorff measures and dimension to packing measures and dimension and other
              mixed geometric measures. The specific problems of this proposal arise from
              many contexts and their solutions will involve a mixture of techniques from
              various areas: complex analysis, dynamics, functional  analysis-theory of
              positive operators of the Reulle-Perron-Frobeni us type(transfer operators),
              measure theory and probability, statistical physics-equilibrium states, and
              thermodynamic formalism.    This work arises from problems occurring in several
              diverse areas-statistical physics, thermodynamics, the theory of turbulence,
              geometry, algorithms or recipes for generating various geometric objects which
              are subject to random  errors and finally, to dynamical systems where the long
              term behavior of   the system is governed by some seemingly strange object. Our
              work focuses  on some common features of all of these systems. First, we intend
              to show  how, in a natural way, to produce measures associated with each
              system.  For some systems, these measures give us a means of measuring the long
              term behavior of the system. For some systems, it gives us a means of
              quantifying the fine scale geometric structure of the object produced or of
              stating what the geometric structure will be like on average. To each of these
              measures is associated a dimension, a number which might not be an integer-a
              fractal dimension. These dimension numbers can be computed or estimated by some
              basic  formulas which we have developed. This is useful for applications. This
              part can be carried out with the aid of computer studies and thus is of direct
              interest for pratical reasons.  We intend to continue to develop applicable
              formulas for determining these dimensions and from that how to produce the
              associated measures which yield so much information about the system.
