Title       : Algebraic Groups Actions and Non-Commutative Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9801675

Award Number: 9801675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Helen G. Grundman                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36120              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zinovy Reichstein zinovy@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              REICHSTEIN,  DMS 98-01675    The proposed research includes two related
              projects:  The purpose of the first project is to study the minimal  number of
              parameters required to describe all algebraic objects of   a certain type,
              e.g., field extensions, central simple algebras or  quadratic forms. This
              number can usually be expressed as a numerical  invariant of a naturally
              arising algebraic group. This invariant is called  the essential dimension. It
              has been computed in a number   of cases by J. Buhler and the PI;  additional
              results were recently   obtained by J.- P. Serre.  The PI will continue this
              line of   research through a combination of our geometric techniques and 
              Serre's cohomological approach.The second project focuses on the study of
              finite-dimensional algebras and their deformations. Such an algebra can be
              represented  by a set of structure constants, which can, in turn be identified 
              with a point of a certain algebraic variety. L. LeBruyn and the PI   recently
              described all smooth irreducible components of this variety,   answering, in
              particular, an old question of Seshadri.    A number of of fundamental objects
              of classical abstract algebra, such as field extensions,   division rings, and
              quadratic forms will  be investigated. Some of these and related  objects have
              recently found applications in areas ranging from coding theory to computer
              graphics. The aim of this project is to increase our theoretical understanding
              of   of the nature of these objects. In particular, the most   economical ways
              of representing them are sought. In this connection  the smallest number of
              parameters required to represent an object   of a given type are studied.  This
              number tells us how many objects of each   type are ``essentially different'',
              i.e., cannot be transformed into   one another by a change of coordinates.
