Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution of Offspring Size in the Trinidadian Guppy
               Poecilia reticulata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9801492

Award Number: 9801492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Reznick gupy@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Reznick 
9801492

Many features of an organism that are genetically based are
              also subject to environmental influences.  In humans, for example, taller
              parents tend to have taller children; yet if a child of tall parents is raised
              with poor nutrition, it will not grow to its full potential.  Why some traits
              can be altered by environmental conditions (i.e. are plastic) while others are
              invariant is a central problem in evolutionary biology.  One hypothesis is that
              plasticity is adaptive because the expression of the trait shifts to
              appropriately match the environmental conditions.  However, this adaptive
              plasticity is only expected if a population has evolved under a range of
              environmental conditions. Alternatively, if a population has evolved under a
              particular environmental condition, it is not expected that it will respond
              adaptively to range of environments it has never experienced.  Guppies
              (Poecilia reticulata) give birth to live young.  The size of these offspring at
              birth shifts plastically in response to the environmental conditions faced by
              the mother.  In addition, offspring size differs genetically across populations
              that experience different environmental conditions.  Using a series of
              laboratory and field experiments, we will test whether these genetic and
              plastic shifts in guppy offspring size are adaptive.  By examining the effect
              of offspring size on predation risk, growth rate and offsprings reproductive
              rate, we will determine to what extent offspring size variation is suited to a
              particular environment or range of environments.  By furthering our
              understanding of how both the plastic and fixed (genetic) features of a trait
              evolve, this study will enhance our ability to predict how organisms will
              respond to both short- and long-term environmental changes.

