Title       : Potentials, Polynomials and Weighted Polynomial Inequalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1998        
File        : a9801435

Award Number: 9801435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63493              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vilmos Totik totik@math.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The principal investigator  explores several problems in  approximation theory
              with special interest in applications  of potentials and in polynomials. One of
              these topics   is polynomial approximation with varying weights. Recently  
              several problems have lead to this type of approximation,   and the PI
              continues its study with the help of logarithmic  potentials in the presence of
              an external field. This  approximation problem is fundamental in proving
              different  types of asymptotics for orthogonal polynomials and  Christoffel
              functions with respect to varying weights.  These in turn are related to some
              mechanical models of  quantum physics, in particular to the  universality 
              hypothesis (saying that the distribution of energy levels in  small intervals
              is independent of the original (random)  distribution of the particles).
              Another related problem is  on orthogonal polynomials with respect to a measure
              with  compact support on the complex plane (bounds for  polynomials, regularity
              criteria, Szego's problem on  curves or disjoint intervals). Finally, the PI
              plans to  investigate polynomial inequalities with as general weights  as
              possible. Recently it has turned out that classical  polynomial inequalities
              are also true in weighted form, and  for a surprisingly wide class of weights,
              namely for so  called doubling weights, or for weights satisfying the  weakest
              of the Muckenhoupt A conditions. The PI further  investigates  weighted
              polynomial inequalities, as well as  their consequences in other areas.     
              This research project deals with some theoretical  questions of mathematical
              analysis with the aim of  using in more applied areas of mathematics and 
              theoretical physics. Some basic problems in approximation  theory are
              investigated with tools that have been  traditionally associated with classical
              physics (potential  theory). This novel application of potential theory  makes
              it possible to attack problems that resisted  classically applied tools, e.g.
              it makes possible to  find the behav ior of some nonclassical orthogonal 
              polynomials (Freud polynomials). A new impulse to the  research came in recent
              years when it has been found that  these orthogonal polynomials are related to
              some questions  of theoretical physics that are modelling the uncertain  nature
              of quantum systems by random mechanical models.  Another major area of research
              is on weighted inequalities  on polynomials. Polynomials are basic tools in
              replacing   complicated structures by simpler ones that can be  mathematically
              handled; and in this approximation process  one needs various inequalities that
              relate various  quantities of polynomials to one another.
