Title       : Linear Systems of Plane Curves With Assigned Singularities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9801465

Award Number: 9801465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97089              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucia Caporaso caporaso@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      Caporaso  9801465      The goal of this project is to solve the
              following classical conjecture in algebraic geometry: the linear system of
              plane curves of fixed degree having a given number of singularities at assigned
              general points in the plane has dimension equal to the expected value. Such an
              expected value can be computed naively, and the above problem has been an
              object of study since the beginning of this century.  Work that addresses this
              question would lead to a better understanding of the geometry of moduli spaces
              parameterizing plane curves, which are basic objects of study both in classical
              and modern algebraic geometry. The PI expects that degeneration techniques can
              be successfully used to approach these issues; in fact modern tools (such as
              semistable reduction and deformation theory) make degeneration methods much
              more powerful today than they were ever in the past. There are many open
              problems regarding the geometry of curves on algebraic varieties, of which the
              one described here is an example. It often happens that breakthroughs on one of
              them shed light on others. This project is an example of this fact, as the
              approach to be used here contains ideas that were used by the PI to prove
              results in the context of enumerative algebraic geometry.       This is
              research in the field of algebraic geometry. Algebraic  geometry is one of the
              oldest parts of modern mathematics, but  one which has had a revolutionary
              flowering in the past quarter-century. In its origin, it treated figures that
              could be defined  in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials.
              Nowadays the field makes use of methods not only from algebra,  but from
              analysis and topology, and conversely is finding  application in those fields
              as well as in physics, theoretical  computer science, and robotics.
