Title       : Inverse Problems, Layer Stripping and the Riesz Transform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9801068

Award Number: 9801068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82014              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sylvester sylvest@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator and collaborators have developed a 
mathematically
              rigorous and highly stable inverse scattering algorithm for 
a lossless
              stratified medium (1-D Helmholtz Equation), which has 
successfully treated
              experimental remote sensing data with high noise 
levels.  The method is a
              layer stripping method, based on a nonlinear Riesz 
transform, rather than a
              trace formula. It features a nonlinear Plancherel 
equality and some nonlinear
              Payley-Weiner theorems. Together with the Riesz 
transform, these allow us to
              develop a rather complete Fourier analysis, 
even in the presence of strong
              multiple reflections.  In this project, we 
plan to investigate the extensions
              of these methods to more complicated 
(e.g.  lossy and non-stratified) media.
              For a more detailed overview, see
              
"www.math.washington.edu/~sylvest/".



The fundamental task of science
              is to probe the world around us.  The most 
powerful method for accomplishing
              this goal is to direct energy, in the 
form of waves, at an object and to
              observe the waves after they have 
interacted with that object. For example, a
              conventional photograph is 
produced by directing light waves from the flash
              bulb to the object under 
study and recording the image formed by the
              reflected waves on film.

While the results of such an experiment can be
              readily understood by the 
human scientist (we can just look at the picture),
              results of analogous 
experiments using waves which penetrate more deeply into
              the medium under 
study (e.g. microwaves, X-rays, and some sound waves) are
              less directly 
meaningful.

A wave which penetrates deeply into a medium
              gives us the opportunity 
to see below the surface. However, the picture we
              obtain is a stack of 
images of the top surface and the various layers below
              it, all 
superimposed on the same "photograph". In addition, there are even
              more 
superimposed images, formed from internal reflections between layers
              
(multiple reflections).

This project continues development of a
              mathematical method for turning a 
"microwave photograph", made up of a stack
              of superimposed images, into a 
stack of individual photographs, each
              containing the image of a single 
layer of the medium. From these individual
              photographs, we see the true 
structure of the underlying medium.


