Title       : The Structure of Nuclear C*-Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1998  
File        : a9801482

Award Number: 9801482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67473              (Estimated)
Investigator: Huaxin Lin hlin@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Lin          The project is to study nuclear C*-algebras by studying  
              their homomorphisms, isomorphic types and their invariants,   and by studying
              extensions of C*-algebras. Continuous maps   between topological spaces are of
              fundamental importance in   topology. As their noncommutative counterparts,
              homomorphisms   are of fundamental importance in the theory of C*-algebras.  
              One part of the project is to determine when two   homomorphisms from one
              unital separable nuclear C*-algebra  to another C*-algebra are (stably)
              approximately unitarily   equivalent. It is always in  the  center of the
              theory of   C*-algebras to determine when two C*-algebras are isomorphic   and
              to describe their invariants. Another part of the project   is to classify
              (simple) nuclear separable C*-algebras   via their K-theory. These two parts
              are closely related and both   involve the general theory of C*-algebras,
              KK-theory, the   theory of automorphisms, the C*-algebra extension theory, the 
               group representations  as well as  algebraic topology.        Many important
              and significant problems in engineering, the  physical sciences, and social
              sciences require the knowledge   of linear algebras (or matrix algebras) to
              solve them.  Many problems in linear algebras, in particular asymptotic and  
              approximation problems in linear algebras are best described    in infinite
              dimensional linear algebras. The study of C*-algebras   is the study of
              infinite dimensional linear algebras. However  the   applications of
              C*-algebras range from linear algebras, operator   theory, group
              representations, dynamic systems, to model quantum   field theory and quantum
              statistical mechanics. For the development   of the theory of C*-algebras as
              well as for the purpose of   applications to other areas, it is primarily
              important to have a   better understanding of the structure of C*-algebras. It
              is the   ambitious goal of this project to determine the structure of  
              C*-algebras with fewest possible data.
