Title       : Field-Induced Instabilities and Bifurcations in Magnetic Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1998   
File        : a9801821

Award Number: 9801821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weili Luo Luo@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9801821
Luo

This condensed matter physics research project will investigate
              magnetic-field-induced instabilities in magnetic fluids, sometimes known as
              ferrofluids. The magnetic fluids contains suspensions of magnetic
              nanoparticles. When exposed to a magnetic field, the fluid surface, as well as
              volume elements, undergo topological distortions. The mechanism for the
              distortion is a non-uniform magnetic body force, arising from spatial
              inhomogenieties in the magnetic susceptibility of the fluids through either
              temperature or particle concentration gradients. A series of experimental and
              theoretical analyses will study the fluid behavior. Experiments will focus on
              (a) conditions responsible for the onset of the instabilities, (b) effects of
              external parameters on the patterns displayed by the fluids, (c) effects of
              boundary conditions, and (d) the role of thermal diffusion or the Soret effect
              on the instabilities. Linear and non-linear theories for the systems will be
              developed. The results of the research will have broad application in chemical
              reactions, biological pattern-formation, field-controlled heat-transfer
              devices, and crystal growth controlled by external forces. The project provides
              excellent training for graduate students in a highly inter-disciplinary
              research field.
%%%
This condensed matter physics research project
              investigates magnetic-field-induced instabilities in magnetic fluids, sometimes
              known as ferrofluids. A magnetic fluid consists of magnetic nanoparticles
              suspended in nonmagnetic solvent. Because each particle possesses a net moment,
              the fluid will respond to applied magnetic fields. Earlier research has shown
              that instabilities occur when the applied field exceeds a critical value. In
              this proposal, both experimental and theoretical work will be performed to
              explore the mechanisms responsible for these instabilities. Experiments will be
              focused on (a) conditions for the onset of instabilities; (b)effects of
              external parameters on pattern selection; (c) effects of boundary conditions;
              and (d) the role of thermal diffusion on these instabilities. Linear and
              nonlinear theories for this system are proposed. Results from this proposed
              work will have not only the fundamental significance in understanding the
              effects of symmetry breaking in physical systems in general, but also broad
              applications in chemical reactions, biological pattern-formation,
              field-controlled heat-transfer devices, and crystal growth controlled by
              external forces. The work on surface tension will result in applications in
              surface science. Further study on controlling instabilities involving gravity
              will be very useful in developing magnetic levitation in magnetic fluid
              environments. The project provides excellent training for graduate students in
              a highly inter-disciplinary research field.
***



