Title       : Intertwining Operators, Plancherel Measures and Automorphic L-functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a9801340

Award Number: 9801340
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79341              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              David Goldberg
DMS-98 01340

Professor Goldberg will work on four related
              questions in the local Langlands program.  He continue his work on Langlands
              conjecture about Plancherd measures for certain non-generic representations of
              some classical groups.  He will also attempt to determine the poles of standard
              intertwining operators attached to arbitrary parabolic subgroups of quasisplit
              unitary groups.  In addition, Professor Goldberg will study semisimple types of
              the special linear group of a p-adic field.  Finally he will test another
              conjecture of Langlands through the systematic study of R-groups.

One of the
              most important mathematical ideas of the second half of this century, is that
              analytic formula often encodes discrete information.  For example, one might
              want to count the number of solutions of a particular equation, but discover
              that the solutions are very hard to find.  On the other hand, you might want to
              count the number of solutions to a sequence of equations and consider the
              answers as a sequence.  Mathematicians call these kind of problems 'discrete'. 
              The functions that appear in calculus, and for which calculus works so well,
              are not 'discrete', but 'analytic.'  Amazingly, the right kind of analytic
              function can contain the answer or answers to the discrete examples above. 
              Actually the first examples of this were discovered a couple hundred years ago,
              but in the past thirty years, the subject has been systematized.  The Langlands
              program is a 25 year old project involving this systematization.  This project
              is an important part of the Langlands program.

