Title       : Investigation of Diamond-Forming Flames Using Advanced Laser Diagnostics and
               Laser Enhancement of the Deposition Rate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9801427

Award Number: 9801427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nick G. Glumac   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Lucht and Glumac      This is a detailed investigation, both
              experimental and theoretical, of the chemistry and transport processes in
              low-pressure diamond-forming flames.  The focus is on profiles of temperature
              and concentrations of radical species near the deposition substrate.  Extensive
              measurements of temperature and of the radical species H (atomic hydrogen), OH
              (hydroxyl), (atomic carbon), and CH (methyne) are performed for a range of
              flame pressures, stoichiometries, and total mass flow rates and are compared
              with numerical flame models.  The experimental work is performed in Dr. Robert
              Lucht's laboratory which has the necessary low-pressure flame apparatus and
              laser diagnostic equipment; the modeling is done in Dr. Rick Glumac's
              laboratory.  Temperature measurements are made using hydrogen coherent
              anti-Stokes Raman spectroscopy (H2  CARS).  The emphasis in the diagnostic
              studies is in resolving the gradients in the near-substrate region.  A flame
              model that has been applied successfully in other flame synthesis environments
              is used.  The flame temperature profile and process parameters are used as
              input, and the model predicts the species profiles; differences between
              experiment and computation are investigated with a sensitivity analysis to
              explore the influences of kinetic and transport rates.
