Title       : Dissertation Research: Song Dialects, Mating Success and Gene Flow in Mountain
               White-Crowned Sparrows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9801580

Award Number: 9801580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5949               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Coombs-Hahn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Non Technical Abstract      Song dialects, mating success and gene flow in
              mountain  white-crowned sparrows      Bird song is culturally transmitted; that
              is, young  songbirds learn species-typical song by copying adults.  Thus,
              geographic variations or song dialects (analogous to  human accents) often
              arise.  Several hypotheses  have been advanced to explain the evolutionary
              significance  of song dialects.  The predictions generated by these  hypotheses
              differ in the proposed role of song dialect in  male mating success and in the
              degree to  which dialect groups are genetically distinct.  The effects  of song
              dialects on male reproductive success, and the role  of dialects as barriers to
              mating, will be investigated in  mountain white-crowned sparrows  Zonotrichia
              leucophrys oriantha.  Molecular genetic  techniques will be used to measure how
              song dialects  produced by individual males affect their reproductive  success
              (the number of offspring males sire in their own  nests and in the population
              at large) and to assess  interbreeding within and among different dialect 
              populations.    This research will specifically increase our knowledge of  how
              song dialects affect mate choice and population  structure in songbird species.
               More generally, an exciting  link between cultural and biological evolution
              may be  demonstrated.  The effect of habitat fragmentation on  dialect
              persistence and population structure will also be  addressed, with possible
              implications for conservation  biology.
