Title       : SBIR Phase II: Rock Art Data Recording, Management and Analysis: An Integrated
               System Incorporating 3-D Laser and Digitizing, Geographic Information Systems,
               & Photogrammetr
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a9801160

Award Number: 9801160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299966             (Estimated)
Investigator: James I. Ebert jebert@ebert.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ebert and Associates
	      3700 Rio Grande Blvd. NW
	      Albuquerque, NM  871071109    505/344-2345

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000904   Science Information                     
              0100000   Special Interest                        
Program Ref : 1391,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9801160  Ebert  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II proposal
              from Ebert and Associates, Inc. seeks to develop a means of providing
              efficiently and accurately recorded, managed, analyzed, and visualized rock art
              data within a unified 3-dimensional database, accommodating a wide range of
              scales and resolutions for use by rock art researchers, conservators, managers,
              and other data users.  Phase I research indicated that the rock art profession
              and market needs an integrated system for rock art data recording, management,
              and analysis incorporating in-field 3-dimensional laser and contact digitizing,
              digital and conventional photography and the use of global positioning systems
              for data collection, digital photogrammetry and surface modeling for data
              reduction, CAD and geographic information systems technologies for data input
              and database management, and a number of other digital technologies for data
              analysis and display.  Phase II research objectives focus on the development of
              methods by which data collection, reduction, management, analysis and display
              technologies will be integrated into a coherent whole.  Appropriate rock art
              data recording, reduction, management and analysis/visualization subsystems
              components and integrative software and methods for their use together will be
              specified, and a prototype general total rock art system will be developed and
              assembled.  This hardware/software system will be tested in a number of
              different rock art situations.  The project has value for scientific research
              and education and for the preservation, conservation and management of cultural
              heritages.  Rock art researchers, archaeologists, anthropologists,
              conservators, cultural resource managers, and Native American groups--in the
              United States and worldwide--will benefit from the development of such a
              system.  In addition, there are other situations that share the problems
              inherent in the capture of rock art images to which a modified system could be
              applied, such as in the catalog uing of geologic formations and the
              cataloguing, management, and analysis of 3-D data at polluted sites.  ***
