Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Intelligent Prevention and Information System for
               Earthquake-Induced Urban Fires (IPIS EF)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9801436

Award Number: 9801436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean C. Bonney                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399829             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gui-Zhong Qi gzchi@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : InfraTech Inc
	      6 Valleyfield Court
	      Silver Spring, MD  20906    301/598-5101

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9801436
Qi
    This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project
              is to develop an Intelligent Prevention and Information System for
              Earthquake-Induced Urban Fires (IPIS-EF).  Earthquake hazards are serious
              threats and have caused heavy damages and casualties.  In addition to the
              ground shaking, fires that follow an. earthquake are usually the major cause of
              human casualties and property losses.  Therefore, the research and development
              of advanced technological countermeasures against earthquake-induced fires in
              urban regions is an essential aspect of effective earthquake hazard mitigation.
               The system to be developed consists of three principal subsystems:  (1)
              Automatic Shut-Off Subsystem (Auto-Shutoff) for gas lines and furnaces to
              prevent ignition of fires following earthquakes, (2) Advanced
              Tele-Communication Subsystem. (Tele-Communication) for prompt and accurate
              report of fires, and (3) Intelligent Expert Subsystem for Signal Process
              (Intel-Signal Process).  The technical, operational and economical feasibility
              of the IPIS-EF system and its three subsystems has been satisfactorily
              demonstrated in the Phase I study.  A triggering value determination model,
              satellite communication and a Cerebellar Model Arithmetic Computer (CMAC)
              network-based intelligent system are employed for the IPIS-EF system.  Further
              evaluation, laboratory and field testing of the assembled prototype system will
              be conducted in the Phase II research.  The end product,
i. e., complete
              IPIS-EF prototype would be a cost-effective, robust and commercializable system
              for both fire prevention as well as prompt and accurate report of the fires.   
              The potential commercial applications of IPIS-EF are quite broad. The users of
              the system include public agencies and private organizations responsible for
              safety at all levels of government, such as FEMA, urban fire departments, fire
              stations, and heavy equipment factories and plants.  Successful development of
              IPIS-EF for earthquake-induced fires including its h ardware can also be used
              for conventional fire prevention and extinguishment. The successful
              commercialization of IPIS-EF would not only enhance the competitiveness of U.S.
              businesses but also would contribute to protection of public lives and
              properties.  
