Title       : Vortex Pinning in Thin Film Superconductors by Controlled Pinning Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9801921

Award Number: 9801921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ivan K. Schuller ischuller@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terence T.-L. Hwa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801921 
              Schuller    This  experimental  research project  is  concerned  with  vortex 
              pinning  in  thin  film  superconductors  by  controlled  pinning  structures.
              It is a joint experimental/theoretical study  of  the  physics  of  vortices in
              low and high Tc thin  films  subject  to  artificial  pinning.  The pinning
              structure is  engineered  using  state-or-the-art lithography processes.
              Pinning structures  under  study  include regular and weakly disordered arrays 
              of  "holes",  and/or  "stripes"  made  of  normal or  magnetic  materials.  The
               pinning  characteristics of these arrays over  a  wide  range  of 
              temperature, field and materials parameters will be characterized  by 
              transport,  noise,  and  direct imaging  measurements.  Novel  pinning 
              patterns will be used to expand the pinned  phase  to  a  broad  range  of 
              magnetic fields, beyond  the  nominal  matching  field,  to enhance vortex
              pinning. They also provide new  "media"  in which a variety of new and
              interesting vortex phenomena can be  studied.  Theory  is  an  inherent  part 
              of  the  project.   New  fabrication methods and devices will be developed
              using state  of  the  art thin film techniques together with forefront
              lithography  processes. This research program is interdisciplinary  in  nature 
              and  involves several pre- and post-graduate researchers  in  its  activities.
              They will become familiar with research equipment and  methods applicable to
              condensed matter physics, microelectronics,  magnetic  recording  and  sensors,
              and  superconducitng  devices.  Their  training  will  be excellent preparation
               for  careers  in  industry, government laboratories or academia.  %%%  This 
              experimental  basic  research  project  is  concerned  with  increasing the
              current carrying capacity of superconducting  thin  films. The "critical"
              current of a superconductor in the presence  of  a magnetic field is influenced
              by "pinning centers" which act  as anchors fo r the magnetic flux lines
              (vortices) which penetrate  the  thin  film.  The  critical  current  can  be 
              increased   by  increasing the pinning. This study investigates vortex pinning
              in  thin film superconductors by controlled pinning structures. It is  a joint
              experimental/theoretical study of the physics of vortices  in  low and high Tc
              thin films subject to artificial pinning. The  pinning    structure   is  
              engineered   using   state-or-the-art  lithography  processes. Pinning
              structures  under  study  include  regular and weakly disordered arrays of
              "holes", and/or "stripes"  made of normal or magnetic materials. The pinning
              characteristics  of  these  arrays  over  a wide range of temperature,  field 
              and  materials  parameters will be characterized by transport,  noise,  and 
              direct imaging measurements. Novel pinning patterns will  be  used  to  expand 
              the pinned phase to a broad range  of  magnetic  fields,  beyond  the nominal
              matching field,  to  enhance  vortex  pinning. They also provide new "media" in
              which a variety of  new  and  interesting vortex phenomena can be studied. 
              Theory  is  an  inherent part of the project. New fabrication methods and
              devices  will  be  developed using state of the art thin  film  techniques 
              together  with  forefront  lithography processes.  This  research  program is
              interdisciplinary in nature and involves several  pre-  and post-graduate
              researchers in its activities. They will become  familiar  with  research 
              equipment  and  methods  applicable  to  condensed  matter  physics,
              microelectronics, magnetic  recording  and sensors, and superconducitng
              devices. Their training will  be  excellent   preparation  for  careers  in 
              industry,   government  laboratories or academia.  ***
