Title       : Computational Aspects of Hyperelliptic Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1998      
File        : a9801104

Award Number: 9801104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bjorn M. Poonen poonen@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Bjorn Poonen  University of California, Berkeley  98 01104    In
              this project, Professor Poonen will assemble a table of hyperelliptic curves
              whose Jacobians have small conductor. The table should include other data such
              as the structure and generators of the Mordell-Weil group of the Jacobian, the
              endomorphism ring of the Jacobian, and information about the primes of bad
              reduction. Unfortunately there are no known methods for calculating parts of
              the table, and producing such methods is the major part of the project.  The
              development of computer algorithms should shed as much light on hyperelliptic
              curves as the tables these algorithms are used to produce.      In one view,
              curves are shaped like the surface of a sphere with handles attached.  In this
              view, the simplest curves are like the surface of a sphere without a handle;
              elliptic curves have one handle, and more complicated curves have several.  The
              simple curves have been extensively studied since ancient times and are pretty
              well understood.  Elliptic curves have a very rich structure that is still
              rather mysterious. Today there are extensive systematic lists of elliptic
              curves tabulated with information about their most important features.  The
              main goal of this project is to start building tables for a class of more
              complicated curves. Hyperelliptic curves share many properties with elliptic
              curves, but have more handles.  Right now, mathematicians only know how to
              calculate some of the important features of hyperelliptic curves, but Professor
              Poonen has solid ideas about how to get at the more elusive parts.  His tables
              will be an important reference for mathematicians.
