Title       : Research and Education in Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9801539

Award Number: 9801539
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309366             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold P. Boas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Emil J. Straube  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9801539  Principal Investigators: Harold P. Boas, Emil Straube   
              Abstract: The L-2 Sobolev theory of the d-bar Neumann problem on pseudoconvex
              domains has seen dramatic progress in the 1980s and 1990s, notably through the
              work of Catlin and D'Angelo on subellipticity and finite type, of the principal
              investigators on global regularity on large classes of (weakly) pseudoconvex
              domains, and of Barrett, Christ, and Siu on failure of regularity on the so
              called "worm" domains. However, there is currently not even a conjecture about
              what combination of geometric and potential theoretic conditions might be used
              to characterize global regularity in the d-bar Neumann problem. The study of
              such conditions is one of the directions of this project. A related (and quite
              possibly more tractable) question is that of characterizing domains with
              compact d-bar Neumann operators. (This question also has repercussions in
              operator theory.) In addition, the principal investigators will study L-p
              estimates with gain for the d-bar Neumann problem on domains of finite type.
              Here, they will build on new insight gained from recent work concerning
              nonsmooth domains of finite type. These investigations are also of interest
              from the point of view of the Kaehler geometry associated with the Bergman
              kernel of a domain. (In addition to their intrinsic significance, Bergman-like
              kernels play a prominent role in a quantization scheme --Berezin quantization
              -- that has recently attracted much attention from both mathematicians and
              physicists). During this project, the principal investigators will train three
              graduate students, and they will supervise a young mathematician at the
              post-doctoral level (supported through a Group Infrastructure Grant at Texas
              A&M University) in his study of problems concerning polynomial hulls. (While
              intrinsically motivated, these questions have intimate connections to control
              engineering).    The study of analysis in several complex variables can be
              motivated by the centrality of the  subject within mathematics (thus making it
              essential, in the long term, for the well-being of the scientific and
              technological enterprise) or through a more direct appeal to its usefulness.
              For example, one of the basic laws of nature, causality, when transcribed via a
              mathematical device called the Fourier transform, immediately gives rise to
              analytic functions of several (in this case four) complex variables. Likewise,
              as indicated above, the work in this project will impact not only the core
              areas of several complex variables and partial differential equations, but also
              other areas of science through connections to operator theory, to mathematical
              physics, and to control engineering. Finally, the project will contribute
              significantly to human resources development in mathematics.
