Title       : SBIR Phase II: An Ultra-Fast Signal Integrity Analyzer for Multi-Layer
               Electronic Packages and Boards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9801161

Award Number: 9801161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Y. Chen chen@sigrity.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sigrity Incorporated
	      2105 Hamilton Avenue
	      San Jose, CA  95125    408/377-2180

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 4720,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  9801161  Chen  The aim of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project from SIGRITY is to develop an ultra-fast signal integrity analyzer for
              multi-layer integrated-circuit (IC) chip packages and printed circuit boards. 
              It has been demonstrated that electromagnetic fields in multi-layer electronic
              packages can be decomposed into several most significant modes, and each mode
              of field is solved with special fast algorithms.  The proposed signal integrity
              analyzer integrates a fast electromagnetic field solver with transmission line
              and circuit solvers so those interactions between packages and IC chips are
              automatically taken into account.  Ever increasing integrated-circuit
              transition speed and packaging density have posed severe challenges to the
              design of high performance electronic packages.  It is generally accepted today
              that package performance is one of the major limiting factors of the overall
              system performance. Accurate signal integrity analysis of electronic packages
              demands electromagnetic field simulation.  Existing commercial electromagnetic
              tools, however, are unable to provide timely and cost effective solutions for
              the design of practical package structures.  This project is anticipated to
              achieve a prototype signal integrity tool that would be orders of magnitude
              faster than present commercial tools.  In this Phase II project, simulation
              schemes will be further developed and implemented in the prototype software
              tool to handle various issues in practical packages.  These issues include the
              modeling of loss metal planes and signal conductors; computation of
              electromagnetic radiation from packages; simulation of nonlinear devices
              described in Input/Output Buffer Information Specification (IBIS) format; and
              loading package geometry descriptions from data files of standard formats. 
              Fast and accurate signal integrity tools should significantly benefit the
              electronic packaging design necessary to advance the U.S. electronics industry.
               The proposed research will lea d to commercial signal integrity tools that can
              provide timely and cost-effective means for accurate evaluation and design of
              electronic packages and printed circuit boards.  These signal integrity tools
              are essential for the design of future high-speed electronic systems.  ***
