Title       : Transport Studies of Novel Electronic and Magnetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9801738

Award Number: 9801738
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Zettl azettl@physics.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801738 
              Zettl    This  experimental  research project focuses  on  the  electronic 
              transport  properties of novel collossal magnetoresistance  (CMR)  manganite 
              perovskite materials. Emphasis is on  the  electronic,  thermal  and  magnetic
              properties studied by means  of  transport  annd  magnetic measurements. Much
              of the study will focus on  the  use  of  high  pressures to which the CMR
              effect is  particularly  sensitive.  Both  teflon-seal and diamond  anvil 
              cells  will  be  employed.   Isotopic   substitution  will  also   be  
              performed,  independently and in conjunction with the pressure  studies.  The 
              aim  of  the research is to clarify the fundamental interactions,  such  as 
              polaron  formation and dynamics,  responsible  for  the  unusual   transport 
              and  magnetotransport  behaviors  of   these  scientifically intriguing and
              potentially very useful  materials.  Other  materials of interest using the
              same experimental  methods  are  perovskite superlattices and fullerene
              polymers. The  latter  system  displays  a  pressure-induced insulator-metal 
              transition  similar  to  that  seen in CMR systems, although  the  underlying 
              physics  is  expected to be different. This research  program  is 
              interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  involves   several   graduate  students, 
              who  receive  excellent training  in  preparation  for  careers in industry,
              government laboratories or academia.  %%%  This  experimental  basic research
              project focuses  on  the  high  sensitivity  of  the electrical resistance of a
               class  of  oxide  materials  to  a  magnetic field. This effect, which  has 
              become  known  as  "colossal magnetoresistance" (CMR)  is  scientifically 
              interesting and potentially of importance in improved technology.  In  this
              situation, the electrical resistance of the material  is  changed by an applied
              magnetic field, and such effects, which are  usually  very  small, in these
              materials are usefully  large.  An  attra ction  of  a  magnetoresistive sensor
              is  that  it  is  more  easlily minaturized, simpler, and cheaper to produce,
              than,  say,  the  coil  of  wire in many traditional magnetic pickup  devices. 
              Magnetic sensors are well known in computer hard drives, magnetic  tape 
              recorders  and  other  electronic  applications,  but   are  actually 
              widespread in simpler applications like rotation  speed  sensors  (tachometers)
               and many others. This  experimental  work  focuses  on CMR materials in the
              manganite perovskite class,  and  seeks  to  clarify  the  physical  basis  for
               the  effect.   The  experiments   concern  the  electronic,  thermal   and  
              magnetic  properties   studied   by   means  of  transport   and   magnetic 
              measurements.  Much of the study will focus on the  use  of  high  pressures to
              which the CMR effect is particularly sensitive. Both  teflon-seal  and  diamond
              anvil cells will be employed.  Isotopic  substitution  will  also  be 
              performed,  independently  and   in  conjunction  with  the  pressure  studies.
               Other  materials   of  interest  using  the  same experimental  methods  are 
              perovskite  superlattices and fullerene polymers. The latter system  displays 
              a  pressure-induced insulator-metal transition  similar  to  that  seen  in CMR
              systems, although the underlying physics is expected  to  be  different. This
              research program is interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  involves  several 
              graduate  students,  who  receive  excellent  training  in  preparation  for 
              careers  in  industry,  government laboratories or academia.  ***
