Title       : Low-Volume Questions for Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9801736

Award Number: 9801736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65100              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Robert Meyerhoff robert.meyerhoff@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9801736  Meyerhoff       The 3-dimensional Universe in which we live has
              very nice geometric  properties.  For 2000 years, it was believed that the
              geometry involved  was Euclidean geometry.  But, at the beginning of the 19th
              century, C.  F. Gauss and N. Lobachevskii independently speculated that the
              Universe  might have a non-Euclidean geometric structure (this geometry is 
              obtained by negating Euclid's fifth postulate, and it is generally called 
              "hyperbolic geometry").  Further, they took measurements to determine if  their
              speculations were correct.  Gauss's measurements came from surveys  on the
              earth, while Lobachevskii's measurements were astronomical and  used the
              parallax for the star Sirius.  Their measurements were  inconclusive, but this
              year, a variety of astronomical studies have  provided substantial evidence
              that the Universe has a hyperbolic  geometric structure.  Just as Gauss and
              Lobachevskii speculated, the  Universe is a hyperbolic 3-dimensional object,
              technically, a hyperbolic  3-manifold.       There are many, many different
              types of hyperbolic 3-manifolds.  Which one of these types is our Universe? 
              Answering this question is a  daunting task, but there appears to be one
              significant simplification:  some theoretical and esthetic information
              indicates that if geometric  measurements could be made, it would turn
              out---after a re-scaling  related to the expansion of the Universe---that the
              Universe is "small"  in size, that is, it is a hyperbolic 3-manifold of low
              volume.  Thus, we  want to understand all hyperbolic 3-manifolds of low volume.
               This is a  hard problem, and for many years progress was slow, but recent
              research  has provided powerful new tools for attacking the problem.  Some of
              the  tools involve the use of rigorous computer programs to analyze parameter 
              spaces and to study configurations of natural geometric objects in  hyperbolic
              space.  This project will use these tools and develop new  ones to lead us
              towards the goal of definitively identifying the   low-volume hyperbolic
              3-manifolds.  Coupling this theoretical  information with data from the planned
              MAP (microwave anisotropy probe)  space project could lead to the determination
              of precisely which  hyperbolic 3-manifold the Universe is.  ***
