Title       : Dissertation Research: The Roles of Local and Metapopulation Forces in
               Determining Regional Scale Aphid Population Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9801089

Award Number: 9801089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Morris wfmorris@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Morris
9801089

The range of many organisms consists of collections of
              populations in suitable habitat patches connected through migration.  Such
              collections are called metapopulations.  In order to understand and predict how
              metapopulations will behave over time it is necessary to understand both
              processes affecting each of the populations separately (e.g. predator-prey
              relations) and processes affecting migration between patches.  Preliminary
              studies on the aphid, Aphis lugentis, reveal that both predation pressure and
              patch distribution affect metapopulation dynamics.  Observational and
              experimental data collected over two years is being used to fit a simulation
              model describing the A. lugentis system.  The model will be used to predict the
              results of large-scale manipulations of predator density and patch arrangement
              which will be carried out in the field.  The proposed manipulations will be the
              first explicit experimental test of the role of migration in controlling
              metapopulation dynamics.  When the simulation model is able to accurately
              predict the results of the large-scale manipulations it will be used to answer
              two closely related questions. First, under what conditions do factors
              affecting migration between patches play an important role in metapopulation
              dynamics?  Second, under what conditions do within patch processes become so
              important as to mask the affects of migration in determining metapopulation
              dynamics? This study will provide crucial experimental evidence for the
              importance of migration in determining metapopulation dynamics.  While a great
              deal of theory predicts a critical role for migration rates in determining
              metapopulation dynamics that theory has gone largely untested. Nevertheless
              metapopulation models are widely used in species management and conservation
              plans.  Beyond providing experimental evidence that migration does indeed play
              an important role in determining metapopulation dynamics, this study will
              explore how the relative importance of within patch processes and migration
              change under a variety of conditions.  In so doing it will take a large step
              towards predicting when large-scale population dynamics can be predicted based
              on information about within patch processes alone, migration and extinction
              rates alone, and when more detailed information at both scales is necessary.   
              

