Title       : Types and Hecke Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9801131

Award Number: 9801131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46212              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Roche   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Alan Roche  Purdue University  DMS-98 01131       Professor Roche
              will study the complex representation theory of a reductive p-adic group by
              restricting to compact open subgroups. Building on an idea due to Bushnell and
              Kutzko known as the method of types, the investigator expects to be able to
              connect precisely components of the Bernstein decomposition of a reductive
              p-adic group with data from the open compact parts of the group.  Professor
              Roche also more fully understand associated Hecke algebras using theses new
              methods.    One of the most important mathematical ideas of the second half of
              the century, is that analytic formula  often encodes discrete information. For
              example, one might want to count the number of solutions of a particular
              equation, but discover that the solutions are very hard to find. On the other
              hand, you might want to count the number of solutions to a sequence of
              equations and consider the answers as a sequence. Mathematicians call these
              kind of problems 'discrete'. The functions that appear in calculus, and for
              which calculus works so well, are not 'discrete', but 'analytic.'  Amazingly,
              the right kind of analytic function can contain the answer or answers to the
              discrete examples above.  Actually the first examples of this were discovered a
              couple hundred years ago,  but in the past thirty years, these examples have
              been systematized into a branch of number theory called the Langlands program. 
              This project is an important part of the Langlands program.
