Title       : Dissertation Research: Analysis of Fitness Determinants in a Natural Hybrid Zone
               Between Rana blairi and Rana sphenocephala: The Evolutionary Potential of
               Natural Hybridization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9801125

Award Number: 9801125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond D. Semlitsch SemlitschR@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Semlitsch
9801125 

Natural hybridization has played a prominent role in the
              evolution of many species groups.  Serving as a mechanism of genetic change,
              natural hybridization has the potential to produce novel and relatively fit
              hybrid genotypes which, in turn, can affect the pattern of evolution between
              hybridizing species.  Contemporary hybrid zone studies emphasize experimental
              determination of the relative fitness of hybrid and parental genotypes and
              measurements of the interactions between the environment and genotype.  The
              distributions of two amphibian species, Rana blairi and Rana sphenocephala,
              meet and hybridization occurs in a zone extending from Missouri to Texas. 
              Hybridization frequently occurs between these two species in Missouri, but is
              more limited in Texas populations.  It is only through experimental analysis of
              relative parental and hybrid fitness from these two unique geographic areas
              that we can understand if different evolutionary processes are structuring the
              hybrid zone in these two areas.  Preliminary experimental evidence from
              Missouri localities suggests that certain hybrid genotypes posses equivalent or
              higher levels of fitness compared to parental genotypes.  Thus, certain hybrid
              genotypes may maintain a relative fitness advantage over parental genotypes in
              some environments, potentially leading to the replacement of parental genotypes
              with recombinant ones.  Empirical approaches to hybrid zone analyses provide
              direct methods of measuring important components of lifetime fitness for both
              parental and hybrid genotypes.  These methods are critical for understanding
              the effect that hybridization can have on patterns of hybrid zone structure and
              evolution.

