Title       : Subsurface Charge Accumulation Imaging of the Quantum Hall Liquid and Mesoscopic
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a9801919

Award Number: 9801919
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond C. Ashoori ashoori@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801919 
              Ashoori    This  experimental research project focuses on application  of  a 
              new  imaging  method,  the Subsurface Charge  Accumulation  (SCA)  microscope 
              to  the  new  physics in  low-dimensional  electronic  systems.  A primary
              example of such a system is the quantum  Hall  effect  occurring in a buried
              two-dimensional electron  gas.  The  SCA   microscope  permits  very  high 
              resolution,    about   0.1  micrometer,  examination  of  such  systems  which 
               are   inside  materials. The research topics being pursued include the 
              quantum  Hall  effect, the 2D metal-insulator transition and  also  single 
              impurities and electron traps in semiconductors. A key element of  the  ongoing
               work  is to determine the correlation  between  the  structures  seen  in SCA
              images of the quantum  Hall  liquid  and  features in the transport properties
              of the 2D system. A topic of  interest  also  is the behavior of spin textures 
              or  "skyrmions"  which  exist around the n=1 Hall plateau. Estimates of the 
              sizes  for  skyrmions and a possible skyrmion crystal place them  easily 
              within  the  range of SCA measurements. This research program  is 
              interdisciplinary in nature and involves graduate  students,  who  receive  
              excellent  training  in  preparation  for  careers   in  industry, government
              laboratories or academia.  %%%  This  experimental basic research project
              focuses on  application  of a new imaging method, the Subsurface Charge
              Accumulation (SCA)  microscope  to  the  new  physics in  low-dimensional 
              electronic  systems.   The  new microscope allows imaging of electron  charge 
              distributions on a scale of about 0.1 micrometer. This resolution  does  not 
              allow  atoms to be seen, but does  allow   imaging  of  broader  distributions 
              of  buried  charge,  which  is  of  great  importance in many semiconductor
              situations. A primary example of  such  a  system is the quantum Hall effect
              occurring in a  buried  two-dimensiona l  electron gas. The SCA  microscope 
              permits  very  high  spatial  resolution examination of such systems  which 
              are  inside  materials. The research topics being pursued include  the  quantum
               Hall effect, the 2D metal-insulator transition and  also  single  impurities 
              and electron traps in semiconductors.  A  key  element  of  the  ongoing  work
              is to determine  the  correlation  between  the  structures seen in SCA images
              of the  quantum  Hall  liquid and features in the transport properties of the
              2D system.  A  topic  of  interest also is the behavior of spin  textures  or 
              "skyrmions" which exist around the n=1 Hall plateau. Estimates of  the  sizes 
              for  skyrmions and a possible skyrmion crystal  place  them  easily within the
              range of SCA measurements. This  research  program  is  interdisciplinary in
              nature  and  involves  graduate  students,  who  receive  excellent training 
              in  preparation  for  careers in industry, government laboratories or academia.
               ***
