Title       : Growth and Properties of III-VI Based Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9801302

Award Number: 9801302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349415             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie A. Olmstead olmstead@phys.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fumio S. Ohuchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9801302  Olmstead    This project focuses on the heteroepitaxial growth of
              III-VI  based semiconductors and on interrelated structural and optical 
              properties. The III-VI materials comprise two principal classes:  layered
              materials, such as GaSe and InSe, and cubic materials  such as Ga2Se3 and
              In2Se3, which are being investigated as  prototype systems for heteroepitaxy of
              dissimilar materials and  as possible novel materials for electronic or
              optoelectronic  devices. Both classes of III-VI materials have bandgaps in the 
              optical range and chemical compatibility with more traditional  electronic
              materials. The structure of III-VI semiconductors  gives them highly
              anisotropic transport, mechanical and optical  properties and large non-linear
              susceptibilities. Specific goals  are: to determine growth mechanisms for GaSe,
              Ga2Se3 and related  materials by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE); to determine the
              role  of substrate interactions and surface bond character in  controlling the
              nucleation and growth of GaxSey compounds; to  establish an experimental and
              theoretical framework for  determining the appropriate growth conditions to
              obtain optimal  structural, electronic and optical properties in III-VI 
              materials; to evaluate the feasibility of using these materials  for novel
              opto-electronic applications through analysis of  fundamental structural,
              electronic and optical properties. The  approach is to concentrate on the
              nucleation and growth of GaSe  and Ga2Se3 on Si, GaAs, CaF2 and A1203, and on
              the properties of  the resultant thin films. A combination of in situ and ex
              situ  experimental probes including photoelectron spectroscopy and 
              diffraction, electron diffraction, optical spectroscopy, atomic  force
              microscopy, and high resolution transmission electron  microscopy in
              combination with kinetic modeling of the growth  process will be employed. The
              role of ionicity in the substrate,  the degree of surface passivation, and the
              inherent lattice  mismatch with the overlayer will be varied among t he four 
              materials.  %%%  The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of  materials science having high potential technological relevance.  The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at  a fundamental
              level to new aspects of electronic/photonic  devices.  Experimental tools are
              now available to allow atomic  level observation of elementary surface
              processes which when  better understood allow advances in fundamental science
              and  technology. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the 
              research is expected to contribute to improving the performance  and stability
              of advanced devices and circuits by providing a  fundamental understanding and
              a basis for designing and producing  improved materials, and materials
              combinations.  An important  feature of the program is the integration of
              research and  education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
               technologically significant area.  ***
