Title       : Low Frequency Electrodynamics of Correlated Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2000   
File        : a9801816

Award Number: 9801816
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Gruner gruner@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9801816
Gruner
In  this  research Professor G. Gruner of the Department  of
              Physics of the University of California at Los Angeles  will investigate the
              behavior of some heavy fermion compounds and organic  conductors in the
              millimeter and microwave  regions of  the  spectrum  under  varying conditions 
              of  frequency, temperature  and  magnetic  field.   The  purpose  of  these
              studies  is  to  investigate the possible breakdown  of  the Landau  theory  of
              fermi liquids.  Previous  experiments  on uranium platinate  gave  results 
              that  suggest   that   a systematic  search for such breakdown would be 
              appropriate. This  topic  is of high current interest and stands  at  the
              forefront  of contemporary research in solid state  physics. The Landau theory
              has been very successful in describing the behavior  of  metals  but  it  may 
              not  apply  to systems characterized	by   strongly  correlated 
              electron-electron interactions.  These are believed to active in systems  that
              exhibit	 high-temperature   superconductivity,    colossal magnetoresistance, 
              and  others.   The  objectives  of	the
research  are therefore:  to test the
              validity of the  Fermi liquid  theory  of  the metallic state  with  heavy 
              fermion metals;  to determine the nature of the correlation  gap  in heavy 
              fermion  insulators; to explore the  various  quantum states  in quasi
              one-dimensional metals; and to examine  the Mott-Luttinger  gap  in these
              insulators.   The  experiments will  be  done  on  the  heavy fermion compounds
               CeAl3  and CeRu2Si2,  and others.  Also, experiments will be  performed on 
              linear  chain  metal compounds, the so-called  Bechgaard salts, to explore the
              anisotropic electrodynamics.  Here the reason  for  these experiments is the
              recognition  that  for strictly   one-dimensional  metals  with  
              electron-electron interactions, the ground state is not that of a Fermi liquid
              and  that a magnetic field can change the dimensionality  of the  system.  The
              experiments will be performed with high  Q resonant  structures in which the
              samples form part  of  the structure.
%%%
This  research will investigate the
              behavior of  some  heavy fermion  compounds and organic conductors.  The 
              purpose  of thses  studies is to investigate the possible  breakdown  of the 
              Landau theory of fermi liquids.  This topic is of  high current interest and
              stands at the forefront of contemporary research  in solid state physics.  An
              important  feature  of the  program  is the integration of research  and 
              education through training of graduate students in a fundamentally and
              technologically important area.
***

