Title       : Studies of Liquid Interface Dynamics Using a Highly Characterized System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9801844

Award Number: 9801844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249189             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian D. Maynard maynard@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                       9801844  Maynard    This is a low temperature physics research project
              that makes use  of liquid helium, a highly characterized quantum liquid. 
              Innovative acoustic and optical techniques are used to study  liquid interface
              (surface) dynamics, including liquid  coalescence, bubble entrainment, droplet
              impact, and similar  phenomena. The experiments are designed to test or extend 
              theories of the behavior of liquid surfaces currently being  developed in
              condensed matter physics. The main focus is on fluid  droplet impact and the
              mechanisms of entrainment gases in the  mode believed responsible for
              generation of underwater noise.  While most existing measurements and
              theoretical models have been  for water, the proposed experiments will make use
              of liquid  helium, whose high purity and ability to be precisely and 
              accurately controlled over a wide range of parameters make in  uniquely suited
              for quantitatively testing current fluid dynamics  theories. Drops will be made
              to collide with the bulk liquid  interface, and the rapidly changing stress
              field occurring at the  interface rupture will radiate sound waves which will
              be detected  with a temporal resolution of 10 ns, approaching rupture time 
              scales at the molecular level. The research program will provide  unique
              training opportunities for graduate students in methods of  acoustics, an area
              often overlooked in contemporary physics, and  involving special, often-subtle
              experimental methods. This is a  fundamental project but the results are
              potentially relevant to a  range of practical situations including industrial
              processes  involving foams and emulsions, in commercial blenders and  sprayers,
              application of ultrasound in medicine, generation of  underwater noise by rain,
              which is important in military and  environmental monitoring, etc.  %%%  This
              is a low temperature physics research project that makes use  of liquid helium,
              a highly characterized quantum liquid.  Innovative acoustic and optical
              techniques are used to study  liquid  interface (surface) dynamics, including
              liquid  coalescence, bubble entrainment, droplet impact, and similar 
              phenomena. The experiments are designed to test or extend  theories of the
              behavior of liquid surfaces currently being  developed in condensed matter
              physics. The main focus is on fluid  droplet impact and the mechanisms of
              entrainment gases in the  mode believed responsible for generation of
              underwater noise.  While most existing measurements and theoretical models have
              been  for water, the proposed experiments will make use of liquid  helium,
              whose high purity and ability to be precisely and  accurately controlled over a
              wide range of parameters make in  uniquely suited for quantitatively testing
              current fluid dynamics  theories. Drops will be made to collide with the bulk
              liquid  interface, and the rapidly changing stress field occurring at the 
              interface rupture will radiate sound waves which will be detected  with a
              temporal resolution of 10 ns, approaching rupture time  scales at the molecular
              level. The research program will provide  unique training opportunities for
              graduate students in methods of  acoustics, an area often overlooked in
              contemporary physics, and  involving special, often-subtle experimental
              methods. This is a  fundamental project but the results are potentially
              relevant to a  range of practical situations including industrial processes 
              involving foams and emulsions, in commercial blenders and  sprayers,
              application of ultrasound in medicine, generation of  underwater noise by rain,
              which is important in military and  environmental monitoring, etc.  ***
