Title       : Dissertation Research: Chemical Ecology in the Chiroptera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1998       
File        : a9801137

Award Number: 9801137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7866               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Kunz kunz@bio.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Johanna M. Bloss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Kunz  9801137    Bats are highly social mammals, and for species with complex
              social  structures, individual recognition is important. Among bats, a
              combination  of visual, auditory, tactile and olfactory cues are used to assess
               individuals, roost sites, and colony members. While auditory and visual 
              systems have been well studied, interestingly the olfactory system of  mammals
              has received little attention. The purpose of the present study is  to
              establish the importance of olfactory communication in bats, and to  apply this
              knowledge for conservation and pest management.        Behavioral tests will
              identify the role of olfaction in kin  recognition in little brown bats (Myotis
              lucifugus) and big brown bats  (Eptesicus fuscus). Females often roost in large
              colonies in which they  must identify their own pups. Y-maze test will present
              females with choices  between kin and foreign scents to establish whether
              olfaction plays a role  in mother-pup recognition in these species. Behavioral
              assays will set the  stage for the investigation of the role of olfaction in
              the social  interactions of bats.        Chemical analysis of odors from
              selected bats will be collected to  assess whether odor chemistry mirrors the
              evolutionary history among  related species and will be used to test the
              potential use of human  olfaction as a probe into chemical communication in
              bats. Constituents of  odors will be analyzed using gas chromatograpahy
              olfactometry (GCO). GCO  coupled with behavioral tests is expected to emerge as
              an important tool  for investigating mammalian behavioral ecology and provide
              important  avenues for research into the attraction of bats which are
              economically  important as pollinators and predators of insect pests.
