Title       : Web Personalization and Mining Using Robust Fuzzy Clustering Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9801711

Award Number: 9801711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163713             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anupam Joshi joshi@cs.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is an inter-institutional collaborative project carried out by Anupam Joshi
              at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County and Raghu Krishnapuram at the
              Colorado School of Mines. The goal of this research is to develop scalable
              robust techniques to model noisy data sets containing an unknown number of
              overlapping categories, and apply them to create a software tool for web
              personalization and mining. Personalization has two components: (1) tailoring
              the content delivered to the user from a web site; and (2) exploring the
              available web pages and categorizing them. The approach consists of developing
              new practical clustering algorithms by combining fuzzy methods, robust
              statistics, with Monte Carlo/bootstrapping techniques to model an unknown
              number of overlapping sets in the presence outliers. Since many web objects
              such as URLs, IP addresses, and web pages cannot be represented by numerical
              features, new techniques to handle web objects with linguistic and textual
              features, as well as to categorize or cluster them by using suitable similarity
              measures between such objects, are being explored. A software tool for web
              personalization and mining, which incorporates the algorithms developed into a
              software architecture, is being created and validated. The results of this
              project will generate new theoretical results and efficient algorithms for
              simultaneously estimating the parameters of an unknown number of overlapping
              categories from noisy data sets, as well as a web personalization and mining
              tool that will be made available on the web. Thus, this project is expected to
              have a significant impact on the way documents are searched for and delivered.
              It will directly influence the usefulness and spread of the Internet and WWW,
              and in general, will contribute to the digital library technology.    
              http://www.cecs.missouri.edu/~joshi/web-mine/
