Title       : Problems in Analysis Related to Symmetrization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1998      
File        : a9801282

Award Number: 9801282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82391              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Baernstein al@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9801282  Principal Investigator: Albert Baernstein II    Abstract:
              Professor Baernstein is writing a book on the theory and practice of
              symmetrization, in which particular symmetrization tools such as inequalities
              for Dirichlet integrals and convolutions will be obtained in a unified way from
              certain "main inequalities." The tools will then be applied to prove a number
              of results in real and complex analysis and in partial differential equations.
              Baernstein is also investigating particular extremal problems in which
              symmetries of various kinds play a role. Examples include finding the exact
              values of the Bloch and Landau constants in complex function theory,
              determining L-p norms of k-plane transforms, and investigating a conjectural
              integral inequality for gradients of vector fields in the plane whose truth
              would tell us the L-p norm of a singular integral operator related to
              quasiconformal mappings, and whose falsity would confirm a conjecture of C.B.
              Morrey in the calculus of variations which asserts that rank-one convex
              functions need not be quasisconvex.    The prototypical result on which
              Baernstein's project is modelled is the isoperimetric inequality. In simplest
              form, this inequality asserts that if a plot of land is to be enclosed by a
              fence of specified length, then to make the area inside the fence as large as
              possible, one should lay out the fence in a circle. Each of the unsolved
              problems mentioned in the first paragraph can be interpreted as an "extremal
              problem" of the same flavor as the isoperimetric inequality, in that the
              expected extremals are the competitors which appear to have the most symmetry.
              The challenge to the researcher is to devise mathematical tools which enable
              one to prove in a rigorous fashion that the expected extremals really are
              extremal, or to discover "counterexamples" which show that the established
              guess for the extremals was wrong. The problems mentioned above come from
              mathematical fields with connections to various domains of application .
              Phenomena encountered in the search for exact Bloch and Landau constants are
              related to crystallography, k-plane transforms occur in tomography, and
              quasiconformal mappings are related to elasticity theory and to problems about
              optimal mixtures of materials.
