Title       : Complex Analysis and Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9801605

Award Number: 9801605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leticia Barchini leticia@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger C. Zierau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                 Project Abstract 
       Complex Analysis and Representation
              Theory
            Leticia Barchini and Roger Zierau
     
     
In this
              project we will study irreducible unitary representations of 
semisimple Lie
              groups. We propose to give realizations of irreducible 
representations as
              holomorphic sections on a Stein
extension of the Riemannian symmetric space
              G/K.  The advantage of 
this approach is that it gives realizations of
              irreducible representations 
in a purely holomorphic setting, thus allowing
              methods from complex 
analysis such as Hardy space techniques.  Let us call
              such a Stein extension 
M.  The important properties M should possess are: (a)
              M is a
Stein domain in a complexification of G/K,  (b) M depends only on the
              
group G, and (c) A large number of representations should occur as spaces
              
of holomorphic sections on M.  This project has two separate parts.
First we
              will realize irreducible unitary representations using Szego 
kernels.  The
              representations occur as spaces of
holomorphic functions on M and the boundary
              values and inner product will 
be described in an explicit and natural way. 
              We will also determine the 
proper space M.  If G is of hermitian type then
              G/KxG/K is the correct 
choice for M .  Otherwise there are some candidates
              for M, namely a 
parameter space of maximal compact subvarieties of an
              appropriate flag domain 
and the maximal domain in the complexification of G/K
              for which the Szego 
kernel extends holomorphically.  These two candidates may
              turn out to be 
essentially the same (as in the known cases).  We will need a
              simple 
explicit description of M and its boundary.
Our second project is to
              study the indefinite quantization of elliptic 
coadjoint orbits.  The goal is
              to explicitly give the unitary structure 
on the representations occurring in
              the Dolbeault cohomology of an elliptic 
coadjoint 
orbit.  This is
              continuation of previous collaborations.
     
Symmetries play an fundamental
              role in mathematics and physics.  Semisimple 
Lie groups provide a technical
              tool for studying such symmetries.  For 
example a  quantum mechanical system
              is, in part, a Hilbert space
on which the group of symmetries acts.  This is a
              representation of 
the group.  Other representations occur very naturally in
              many areas 
of pure mathematics, such as number theory, classical analysis
              and
probability.  A fundamental problem is to classify all irreducible unitary
              
representations.  Along with this classification is the problem of
              constructing 
the representations.  Our project is concerned with constructing
              
unitary representations in a very natural way.  Such an understanding 
of
              representations will lead to more applications of the theory to 
concrete
              physical problems as well as other areas of pure math.
     
     

