Title       : On the p-adic Geometry of Modular Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9801389

Award Number: 9801389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207138             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Coleman coleman@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  ABSTRACT    Robert Coleman  University of California, Berkeley  98 01389   
              Professor Robert Coleman plans to continue his study of classical modular forms
              with particular attention to the Mazur-Gouvea conjecture.  The project revolves
              around a recent discovery of the investigator's of a new geometric structure on
              certain modular forms.  Coleman's "eigencurve" provides a new view of some of
              the most studied mathematical objects in modern number theory. If only a part
              of the planned project is completed, it could change the face of 150 year old
              branch of Number Theory.  The experts are eagerly awaiting the first reports
              from this work.    When mathematicians first used the techniques of calculus to
              study modular forms, they were interested in their interesting analytical
              properties. Modular forms were first seen as mathematical functions with
              incredibly strong symmetries. While these aspects of modular forms are still of
              intense interest, modern number theorists are mainly interested in the
              arithmetical information that modular forms contain.  Modular forms encode
              information about the size of other mathematical constructions that at first
              (and even second) glance are totally unrelated.  Numbers you can obtain from
              modular forms have a meaning quite separate from the forms themselves. 
              Basically, modular forms count things.  A large part of Number Theory in the
              second half of the twentieth century has been devoted to understanding why and
              how this strange counting works.  Professor Coleman has some very new ideas
              about modular forms that should increase our understanding of a major
              mathematical mystery.
