Title       : Size Effects on Optical and Electrical Properties of Ferroelectric Thin Films
               and Nano-Crystalline Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9801759

Award Number: 9801759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ram S. Katiyar rkatiyar@upracd.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9801759  Katiyar  This project addresses basic relationships between
              processing,  structure, and properties of ferroelectric thin films and 
              nanocrystalline materials. Greater understanding of how growth  conditions
              affect film structure (phase, strain, grain size, and  inhomogeneity) and
              dielectric and FE properties is sought. New  information will be acquired on
              film thickness/FE behavior,  interfacial bonding, film orientation, FE
              fluctuations and phase  transitions, stability of the perovskite phase, and
              order-  disorder behavior relationships to phase transition dynamics.  Studies
              of size effects on optical and electrical properties of  perovskite-type
              ferroelectric (FE) thin films and  nano-crystalline materials, such as PbTiO3,
              BaTiO3, Pb(Zr,Ti)03,  (Ba,Sr)TiO3, (Pb,Ba)TiO3, (Pb,La)TiO3 are planned.
              Properties of  these materials are strongly dependent on microstructure and 
              grain size; hence FE nano-crystalline materials with different  grain sizes
              will be prepared using Sol-Gel and conventional  ceramic processing techniques.
              Grain size variation will also be  studied by annealing samples at different
              temperatures and time  durations. Deposition/growth of FE thin films with
              different  thicknesses and substrates will be carried out using sol-gel, RF 
              Sputtering, and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) techniques.  Characterization
              will include several microscopies--XRD, XPS,  SEM/TEM, EDX, and AFM, along with
              laser Raman confocal microprobe  and FTIR microspectroscopy. Dielectric,
              hysteresis,  piezoelectric, pyroelectric, electro-optic, and differential 
              thermal measurements on films will be carried out to  quantitatively assess
              opto-electronic and related physical  properties.  %%%  The project addresses
              basic research issues in a topical area of  materials science having high
              potential technological relevance.  The materials to be studied possess large
              dielectric,  pyroelectric, piezoelectric, and nonlinear optical coefficients 
              that can be usefully exploited in opto-electronic and  microe lectronic
              technologies (e.g., memories, smart microsensors  and actuators, multi-layer
              capacitors, and electro-optical  modulators). The research will contribute
              basic materials science  knowledge at a fundamental level; the new knowledge
              and  understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute  to
              improving the performance and stability of advanced devices  and circuits by
              providing a firm basis for designing and  producing improved materials, and
              materials combinations. An  important feature of the program is the integration
              of research  and education through the training of graduate and undergraduate 
              students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.  ***
