Title       : Transport and Magnetic Properties of NS Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9801982

Award Number: 9801982
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Chandrasekhar v-chandrasekhar@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                         9801982  Chandrasekhar    This  experimental  condensed  matter 
              physics  project  addresses  the  fabrication  and characterization of normal
              metal (N) - superconductors  (S)  structures  whose  dimensions are comparable 
              to  the  fundamental  coherence  lengths  in such materials. The electrical 
              conductance  and  other  properties of these nanostructures are predicted, and 
              observed,  to  display  non-classical and surprising behavior.  This 
              experimental  project  will  extend  our  knowledge of the superconducting 
              proximity  effect  by conducting the first measurements of the thermoelectric 
              and  magnetic  response of NS structures. In the first part of the  project, 
              the  energy  and  length  dependence of the electrical  conductance  of  normal
               wires in contact with a superconductor will be investigated  in  order  to 
              verify fundamental predictions of the theory of NS  devices.  The  second part
              of the project is devoted to measuring the thermopower  of  so-called Andreev
              interferometers, which are loops in which one arm  is  fabricated from a
              superconductor and the other from a normal metal.  In  the  last  part of the
              project, the magnetic response  of  isolated  Andreev  interferometers will be
              measured using dc SQUID magnetometers.  These  last two properties have not
              been extensively studied, and their  measurement  should  further  our 
              understanding  of  the  correlations  induced  in the normal metal by its
              proximity to a superconductor.  The  samples  for  these experiments will be
              patterned and fabricated  using  electron-beam  lithography. Their low
              temperature transport  properties  will  be  investigated by linear and
              nonlinear multiprobe  differential  resistance  measurements  as  a function of
               temperature  and  magnetic  field.  The low temperature magnetic properties
              will be measured  using  ultra-sensitive  dc SQUID magnetometers. Post-doctoral
               associates  and  graduate  students trained on this project will be exposed 
              to  a  wide  variety  of  experimen tal techniques which will  be  useful  in 
              future  careers in either industry or academia.  %%%  This  experimental 
              condensed  matter  physics  project  addresses  the  fabrication  and 
              characterization of ultra-small normal  metal  (N)  -  superconductors (S)
              structures. Superconductors have unusual electrical  and magnetic properties at
              low temperatures, the best known being their  ability  to  carry  an 
              electrical current  without  resistance.  These  properties  form  the basis
              for a number of practical devices  such  as  very  high  field  magnets. When a
              superconductor  is  placed  in  good  contact  with a conventional normal metal
              such as copper or gold,  some  of the superconducting properties "leak" a very
              small distance into the  normal  metal.  With modern lithographic techniques
              borrowed  from  the  semiconductor  industry, it is now possible to probe the
              properties  of  normal  metals on these very small size scales. The aim of this
              project  is   to   investigate  the  electrical,  thermoelectric  and  
              magnetic  properties of such small normal metals placed in close proximity  to 
              a  superconductor.  In  the  first part of this  project,  the  electrical 
              properties of normal metal wires in proximity to a superconductor  will  be 
              studied to verify and further our current theoretical understanding  of  the
              nature of the superconductivity induced in the normal metal. In  the  second 
              and third parts of the project, the consequences  of  this  induced
              superconductivity on the thermoelectric and magnetic properties  of  the 
              normal metal wires will be explored. These last two properties  have  not  been
              yet been studied experimentally, and these measurements  will  help  us  gain 
              further  insight  into  the  interaction  between  superconductors  and  normal
               metals on very  small  size  scales.  The  samples  for  these  experiments 
              will  be  fabricated  using  advanced  electron-beam  lithography techniques,
              and measured using sophisticated  resistance  and  magnetic sensors a t
              temperatures near  absolute  zero.  Post-doctoral associates and graduate
              students trained on this  project  will  be  exposed to a number of
              experimental techniques which will  be  useful in future careers in either
              industry or academia.  ***
