Title       : SBIR Phase II: Recycling Process for Scrap Automative Plastics and Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9801189

Award Number: 9801189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Allred adherenttech@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adherent Technologies, Inc
	      9621 Camino del Sol NE
	      Albuquerque, NM  871111522    505/822-9186

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1473,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***  9801189   Allred    This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
              project will investigate the design, fabrication, and operation of a
              pilot-scale reactor and associated subsystems and the economics of recycling
              automotive feedstock.  A need exists for a cost-effective method for recycling
              scrap automotive plastic and composite materials. A promising approach for
              these complex mixtures is tertiary recycling. The tertiary recycling process
              cracks polymers into a mixture of low molecular weight hydrocarbons that are
              removed as a gas.  The gas is then condensed into liquid chemicals, monomers,
              and fuels. Remaining metals, fibers, and fillers are further separated for
              reuse.  An economic model for tertiary recycling of auto shredder residue
              prepared in Phase I shows the process to be highly profitable with an internal
              rate of return of 58%.  Conversion products and potential markets will be
              identified and separation processes developed. Throughout the Phase II program,
              data for a refined economic model of the overall recycling process will be
              collected, including scrap volumes and locations, processing costs, product
              markets and locations, and product values. The final tasks will incorporate the
              results of the Phase II program into a design for a commercial recycling plant
              and an estimate the economics of the process on a commercial scale.  An
              economic analysis of the process for recycling of scrap automotive plastics and
              composites to be used in the commercial development of the system in Phase II
              will conclude the Phase II project.    Successful results will lead to an
              economical, large-scale commercial tertiary recycling system for scrap
              automotive materials that are currently landfilled. These machines will also
              find worldwide use by municipalities, government installations, and industry
              for processing other plastic waste streams such as municipal plastic waste,
              scrap electronics and medical wastes.  ***
