Title       : Arithmetic of Modular Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9801497

Award Number: 9801497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel J. Madden                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84262              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred I. Diamond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Fred Diamond  Rutgers University  98 01497    Eichler Shimura theory
              and its generalizations associate objects from algebraic geometry, such as
              elliptic curves and Galois representations, to modular forms.  The
              Shimura-Taniyama-Weil conjecture predicts that all elliptic curves defined over
              the rational numbers occur through such an association.  This means that the
              arithmetic of elliptic curves can be studied using tools from modular forms.
              There has been a substantial progress very recently building on A. Wiles
              celebrated proof that the Shimura-Taniyama-Weil conjecture holds for a large
              class of elliptic curves.  Professor Diamond will continue his successful
              investigations along these lines.  He will attempt to prove certain Galois
              representations arise from modular forms and to study related questions about
              special values of L-functions and congruences between modular forms.      This
              is research in the area of mathematics known as number theory, and in
              particular the study of elliptic curves.  Many important problems in number
              theory involve finding the solutions to certain equations using only ratios of
              integers. These equations can be associated with their graphs and thought of as
              curves.  Geometrically curves can be classified by a number called the genus. 
              The simplest curves have genus zero and their rational solutions have been
              studied since ancient times, to the point where mathematicians consider them
              well understood.  About 15 years ago, G. Faltings showed that any curve with
              genus greater than one could have only finitely many rational solutions.  The
              remaining curves have genus one and are called elliptic.  The collection of
              rational solutions to an elliptic curve can be finite or infinite, and always
              has a interesting mathematical structure in its own right. In his recent proof
              of Fermat's Last Theorem, Andrew Wiles also gave mathematics a powerful new
              tool for the study of the arithmetic of elliptic curves.  In this project
              Professor Diamond will further develop this  new method.
