Title       : Zeta Values and Infinite Dimensional Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9801502

Award Number: 9801502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218139             (Estimated)
Investigator: Spencer J. Bloch bloch@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Bloch will study relations between zeta functions and representations
              of infinite dimensional Lie algebras and function groups. He will focus on
              relations with values of zeta and L-series, quasi-modularity and related
              modular properties extending known modular properties for characters in one
              variable and relations with mirror symmetries.  The investigator will also
              attempt to discover a Riemann Roch theorem for vector bundles with flat
              connections, using algebraic Chern Simons character classes.

This is a
              project in both representation theory and geometry. It is a common occurrence
              in mathematics that a investigation will produce an infinite sequence of
              numbers representing basic information about the objects under study.  Such a
              sequence can appear to form quite randomly, even though it is actually
              completely determined by the way it was identified.    Certain mathematical
              functions, zeta and L-series, have long been known to contain important
              information about the distribution of numbers in such sequences.  Important
              examples of zeta and L-series are often connected to the concrete
              representations of the abstract mathematical constructions, algebras and
              groups. Unfortunately, mathematicians do not fully understand either the
              connection between number sequences and these series or the connection between
              the series and the representations.  If both of these connections were
              regularized,  mathematics would have a powerful new method of discovery. This
              project will investigate the second set of these connections.  

