Title       : Limits and Deviations for Interacting Random Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1998       
File        : a9801085

Award Number: 9801085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62076              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timo Seppalainen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9801085
Seppalainen

This project develops precise mathematical understanding
              of certain macroscopic phenomena that result from the interaction of a large
              number of microscopic components.  There is randomness in the behavior of the
              microscopic components, so the models are stochastic in nature.  The project
              covers several models of current interest:  longest increasing subsequences,
              moving interfaces, Hammersley's process, the exclusion process, models with
              frozen disorder, and the random-cluster model.  The investigation addresses two
              basic questions:  (1) Is there predictable macroscopic behavior that does not
              depend on the particularities of the random microscopic motions?  The answer
              sought can be the numerical value of an interesting quantity, a function that
              describes the shape of an interface, or a differential equation that describes
              the macroscopic evolution.  (2) What are the chances that the microscopic
              evolution deviates noticeably from the macroscopic description? Answers to this
              question are large deviation theorems and central limit theorems, and may
              involve finding an entropy function that the system seeks to maximize or
              minimize.

In many situations macroscopic behavior of a system depends on
              interactions of microscopic components.  The microscopic components can be of
              many types, depending on the model under study: vehicles on a freeway,
              customers in a sequence of queues, or fluid particles in a pipe or in a porous
              medium such as soil.  The outcome of this project is a better understanding of
              the overall behavior of such a complex system.  For example, in the traffic
              model the investigator seeks to describe two distinct situations, a low density
              phase and a high density phase, with qualitatively different patterns in the
              movement of vehicles.  In a queueing model one seeks a description of the flow
              of customers through the network, to understand whether the system can become
              dangerously clogged and unstable.  Such models form part of the theoretical
              underpinnings of modern communication technology.  For a model of a moving
              interface the interesting properties are the speed, the eventual shape, and the
              roughness of the interface.  These models and their relatives are intensely and
              concurrently studied by mathematicians, physical scientists, and engineers.  In
              many cases simulations have not yielded conclusive pictures of the behavior. 
              Consequently there is great need for basic mathematical work to aid the more
              applied scientists' understanding of such phenomena.

