Title       : Dissertation Research: Linking Ecology to Phylogeography: The Desmognathus
               Salamander Assemblage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9801305

Award Number: 9801305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry M. Wilbur hmw3q@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9801305 Wilbur  To conserve biodiversity it is essential to understand and
              document patterns of genetic variation in natural populations.  Much work by
              community ecologists has shown that species interactions can influence spatial
              variation in population sizes and dispersal rates, two factors known to impact
              the magnitude of genetic variation in populations.  Population geneticists,
              however, have given less emphasis to how species interactions influence levels
              of population differentiation and speciation.  There is a need to bridge this
              gap by utilizing a system in which a mechanistic understanding of the factors
              influencing movement patterns and population sizes can be developed.  The
              salamander genus Desmognathus in the eastern United States is a model system
              for examining species interactions and their possible role in the evolution of
              terrestriality.  The southern Appalachians support the world center of
              salamander diversity.  Streams commonly support four Desmognathus species that
              form an ecological continuum from a large, more fully aquatic species to a
              small, predominately terrestrial species.  The Eastern Continental Divide
              separates streams that contain D. quadramaculatus from those that do not.  The
              mere presence of this large, predaceous salamander is known to affect the
              distribution and abundance of the other more terrestrial Desmognathus species. 
                In this doctoral dissertation research, Henry M. Wilbur and student Leslie J.
              Rissler will utilize modern genetic techniques employing mitochondrial DNA
              markers to address the spatial scale of genetic variation within these
              Desmognathus species.  Work emphasizes the contributions of both ecological and
              genetic tools to determine (1) the major biogeographic boundaries for each of
              the four Desmognathus species which exhibit varying degrees of terrestriality
              and (2) the influence of species interactions in structuring the extent of
              genetic variation in populations.
