Title       : Multi-Scale Analysis for Nonlinear and Partial Differential Equations and
               Interacting Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a9801769

Award Number: 9801769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155042             (Estimated)
Investigator: Markos A. Katsoulakis markos@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1339,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9801769  Markos     ABSTRACT    A. Technical description of the project.    
               In this project we study  problems in nonlinear parabolic and hyperbolic
              partial differential   equations and interacting particle systems, with  common
              underlying theme the presence and interrelation of multiple scales. We  address
              the following topics: (a) interacting particle systems with multiple scales,
              giving rise to discrete velocity models at a mesocopic level, and to hyperbolic
              conservation laws or nonlinear diffusions, at a macroscopic one, (b) existence
              and stability of periodic and solitary waves for hyperbolic conservation laws
              in the presence of relaxation mechanisms, (c) relaxation models and related
              numerical  schemes for front propagation problems, and (d) Monte-Carlo methods
              and random effects in the macroscopic limit of Ising models to geometric
              evolutions.  In addition to the analytical aspects of the project, one of the 
              objectives in (c) is the development of new  computational tools, through 
              relaxation models, for interface tracking applications; furthermore in (d),
              numerical experiments based on stochastic Ising models are employed, in an
              attempt to understand  from a microscopic point of view the effect of random
              perturbations on  interfacial evolutions.      B.Non-technical description of
              the project.    Phenomena involving multiple, interacting scales are widespread
              in areas as diverse as material science, chemical engineering, biology,
              atmospheric and environmental sciences,   communication networks and economics.
               A typical example is the derivation of macroscopic properties of a material,
              for instance conductivity, from  its microscopic-molecular   or even
              atomic-structure. The challenges these problems present to scientists and
              engineers are formidable at many  levels: in experiments, modelling,
              mathematical analysis of models, construction of effective algorithms,
              simulation and verification of the models. The inherent  mathematical
              complexity of multiscale problems and our limited  understanding of their 
              nature so far, require a  methodical and detailed analysis both of the actual
              problems, as well as of   (carefully) simplified ones, that  illustrate in a
              clearer way a particular aspect of the phenomenon under study. The proposed
              research addresses mainly the mathematical analysis of some paradigms in
              multiscale processes and  touches upon the development of new computational
              tools, suggested by the mathematical theory. The motivation of the work   stems
              from phase transitions problems in material science, chemical engineering
              applications such as adsorption processes and  water waves and gas dynamics.
