Title       : Symposium: Subtypes of Muscarinic Receptors, Danvers, MA, August 25 - 29, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9801873

Award Number: 9801873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Levine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                       LAY SUMMARY                                            
                       Proposal IBN 98-01873                                   "CONFERENCE:
              Symposium on subtypes of muscarinic receptors"                                 
                                    Ruth Levine, P.I.    This award is for partial support of
              an international  conference on the diversity of form and function found among 
              complex molecules of the membrane of living nerve, muscle  and other cells
              controlled by the nervous system.  The  functional contacts between nerve cells
              are called synapses,  and the biochemical compounds that carry signals between
              the  cells  at the synapse are called neurotransmitters.  The  transmitter 
              molecules are captured on the surface of the  cell membrane of the  target cell
              by molecules called  receptors.  Classes of  transmitters, like particular
              amino  acids, or particular  catecholamine compounds, were known to  have
              particular receptor  types that triggered particular  responses in the
              post-synaptic  cell.  More recently,  subtypes of receptor molecules have been 
              found, often with  different chemical binding affinities, molecular 
              arrangement, and coupling mechanisms.  This symposium covers  recent  advances
              at the molecular level in understanding the  subtypes of  the particular
              receptors called muscarinic  receptors, which  modulate the responses of nerve
              and muscle  cells to a widespread  neurotransmitter called  acetylcholine. The
              program will bring together eminent  scholars and junior scientists with
              interests in these  receptors, to allow them to exchange data and the latest 
              ideas on these important molecules. Such goals are important  to our
              progressively better understanding of how the brain  an organism's body. 
              Support is to help cover  some travel  costs of young investigators in the
              field to enable them to  attend and deliver their own research results at this 
              meeting.   This support will have an impact on fostering the  career 
              development of young neuroscientists, and t he  symposium  presentations will
              have an impact on muscle and  cardiovascular  research as well as neuroscience.
