Title       : Dissertation Research: Using Genealogical Portraits of Speciation to Understand
               Diversity Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9801284

Award Number: 9801284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9940               (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Futuyma futuyma@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Futuyma       9801284      The proposed research uses molecular analyses to
              gain insight into the origin of species in the relatively recent geological
              past, and into the biological consequences of major changes in climate.  The
              mountains of western North America constitute an unusual archipelago of sky
              islands for high-altitude species.  Closely related species, including
              Melanoplus grasshoppers as well as other animals and plants, occupy different
              mountain ranges and peaks, in a pattern that suggests recent evolutionary
              diversification.  It as often been suggested that such species originated by
              isolation and colonization during the Pleistocene glaciations that ended  about
              10,000 years ago. However, it is not certain which regions remained free of
              ice, or how habitats such as grasslands were distributed during the alternating
              glacial and interglacial periods.  Thus the exact history by which organisms
              came to occupy different mountain ranges and differentiated into distinct
              species is very uncertain.  For instance, species may have colonized
              progressively more northern areas from southern refuges as the glaciers
              retreated.   Alternatively, ancestral species may have persisted at low
              altitudes, and have given rise to new species, as their habitats became
              restricted to isolated mountaintops when the climate became warmer.    The
              proposed research uses Melanoplus grasshoppers to determine more fully the
              history by which biodiversity has originated in the western mountains. 
              Comparisons of DNA sequences among populations and species from different
              mountain ranges can provide dates for divergence, and thus test the hypothesis
              that many species formed during or since the Pleistocene glaciations. 
              Evolutionary relationships among species as reconstructed from DNA sequences,
              will be used to determine whether species formed by fragmentation or by
              progressive northward colonization. This research will provide one of the few
              comprehensive views of an evolutionary radiation.  Using modern phylogenetic 
              techniques and population genetic models, it will test hypotheses about species
              formation, and thus provide insights into the origin of diversity.  And it will
              cast light on how past changes in climate have affected the distribution and
              diversity of organisms - information that may help to predict effects of future
              global changes in climate.
