Title       : Dissertation Research: Vocal Behavior at Subspecies and Dialect Boundaries in
               the Bronzed Cowbird
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9801490

Award Number: 9801490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Ryan mryan@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Non Technical Abstract    Proposal #:  98001041    PI:  M. Ryan  /  P. Warren   
                The last three years of research on the bronzed cowbird 
              (Molothrusaeneus)have uncovered a social system that differs  in many important
              ways from other birds.  This project will  attempt to determine what effects
              these differences have on  their evolution.  Songs of male bronzed cowbirds
              will be  recorded and compared among different populations.  Songs  will also
              be played back to male cowbirds to determine what  variation in song means to
              the birds.    As brood parasites, cowbirds possess an unusual form of 
              reproduction;  the female cowbird lays her eggs in the nests  of other bird
              species who then raise her offspring as if it  were their own.  The effects of
              brood parasitism on the  cowbirds' host species have been much publicized and
              much  debated.  But what are the evolutionary consequences for the  cowbirds
              themselves?  One consequence is that male cowbirds  do not have the 
              opportunity to learn their songs until they leave their  foster parents and
              join their own species.  Thus, their  opportunities for learning are
              constrained in a way unlike  that in other species.  What role does song
              learning play in  evolutionary processes like speciation?  To address this 
              problem, this study asks whether groups of cowbirds which  have been separate
              from one other are likely to split into  different species.  It is hoped that
              information gathered on  this little-studied species of cowbird will contribute
              to a  general understanding of its behavior, its use of habitat,  and therefore
              its potential to impacts on other species.
