Title       : Hydrologic Investigations within the GLOBE Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a9801929

Award Number: 9801929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $740877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger C. Bales roger@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia Henzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katrina L. Mangin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha Conklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9801929  Bales  In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global 
              Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment Program  (GLOBE) this
              project is designed to meet GLOBE goals and  objectives of linking scientists
              and schoolchildren in a  global information network with the ultimate goal of
              better  understanding Earth's environment and changes that take  place within
              it.  This proposal consists of various segments  addressing GLOBE Program
              needs: support for existing  protocols, development of new protocols, and
              scientific  research with GLOBE data.  This proposal will support the  current
              set of GLOBE hydrology protocols, develop a new set  of protocols for
              freshwater macroinvertebrate biodiversity  data collection, strengthen the
              metadata submission  standards, and carry out research in seasonal variation in
               pH and alkalinity due to snowmelt runoff, climate  variability, and land use
              change.  Calibration and  validation of remotely sensed data on water
              transparency  will also be pursued.  This proposal will also support the 
              development of materials for education that will include  hydrology in the
              context of Earth Systems Science.  Scientists, students, and the general public
              will be able to  better understand the role of water in ecosystems and their 
              role in the care of our natural resources.       In response to an Announcement
              of Opportunity for the  Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the
              Environment  Program (GLOBE) this project is designed to meet GLOBE goals  and
              objectives of linking scientists and schoolchildren in a  global information
              network with the ultimate goal of better  understanding Earth's environment and
              changes that take  place within it.  This proposal consists of various segments
               addressing GLOBE Program needs: support for existing  protocols, development
              of new protocols, and scientific  research with GLOBE data.  This proposal will
              support the  current set of GLOBE hydrology protocols, develop a new set  of
              protocols for freshwater macroinv ertebrate biodiversity  data collection,
              strengthen the metadata submission  standards, and carry out research in
              seasonal variation in  pH and alkalinity due to snowmelt runoff, climate 
              variability, and land use change.  Calibration and  validation of remotely
              sensed data on water transparency  will also be pursued.  This proposal will
              also support the  development of materials for education that will include 
              hydrology in the context of Earth Systems Science.  Scientists, students, and
              the general public will be able to  better understand the role of water in
              ecosystems and their  role in the care of our natural resources.  ***
