Title       : Electron Density Waves at Metal Surfaces: From Friedel Oscillations to Charge
               Density Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9801830

Award Number: 9801830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Ward Plummer eplummer@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801830 
              Plummer    This  experimental  research project  focuses  a  wide  range  of 
              surface  physics  techniques to probe electron density  waves  at  metal 
              surfaces.  A central topic is the surface transition  from  Friedel  
              oscillations   to   Charge   Density   Waves.   Friedel  oscillations  at  the 
              surface will be  imaged  with  a  variable  temperature STM and compared to
              measurements of the energy  bands  (high-resolution ARPES) and to the response
              function at the Fermi  energy determined with momentum-resolved electron
              scattering. The  atomic structure of the surface as a function of temperature
              will  be  determined  by  combining surface  x-ray  scattering  (simple 
              analysis) with LEED (for surface sensitivity). The presence of  a 
              metal-to-nonmetal transition is observable in inelastic  electron  scattering. 
              Surface phonon dispersion will be measured  by  high  resolution  inelastic
              electron scattering, and, in collaborations  with  Hulpke  (Germany), using
              inelastic helium  scattering.  All  work  will  be done in close collaboration
              with theorists  around  the  world.  Topics of specific interest are: a)  the 
              transition  from  Friedel  oscillations to a CDW, b) wavelengths  of  Friedel 
              oscillations for a non-free-electron band structure, c)  role  of  many-body  
              effects   in   Freidel   oscillations   and   surface  transitions, d)
              difference of surface screening due to long range  Friedel  oscillations,  via 
              the temperature  dependence  of  the  surface  phonon  dispersion,  and e)  the
               temperature  dependent  surface  structure  driven by the temperature 
              dependent  surface  response function. This research program is
              interdisciplinary  in  nature and involves several pre- and post-graduate
              students,  who  receive   excellent  training  in  preparation  for  careers  
              in  industry, government laboratories or academia.  %%%  This  experimental
              research project is devoted  to  the  distinct  behavior  of   the  atoms at
              the surface of  a  crystalline  metal  compared  to  atoms  located in the bulk
              of  the  crystal.  These  differences  are subtle and difficult to measure, but
               they  have  practical  importance. Surface properties of metals are important 
              for  example  in chemical catalysis, where the chemical  reagents  involved 
              come  into contact only with surface atoms.  In  modern  laboratories  advanced
               techniques  are  available  which  reveal  specifically the properties of
              atoms at the surface.  Several  of  the  techniques are the Scanning Tunneling
              Microscope, Low Energy  Electron  Diffraction, Angle Resolved Photoemission 
              Spectroscopy  and  high resolution inelastic electron scattering. All of  these
               techniques  are  employed in this basic  research  project.  This  basic
              research will add to the understanding of atomic properties  at  surfaces,  and
               could  indirectly  lead,  e.g.,  to  improved  catalysts. This research
              program is interdisciplinary  in  nature  and involves several pre- and
              post-graduate students, who receive  excellent  training  in  preparation  for 
              careers  in  industry,  government laboratories or academia.  ***
