Title       : Tunneling and Transport Studies of Strongly Disordered Ultra-Thin Films of
               Metals and Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9801983

Award Number: 9801983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Valles valles@physics.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801983 
              Valles  This   experimental  research  project  is  concerned  with   the 
              mechanism   of   the   superconductor-insulator   quantum   phase  transition
              exhibited in ultra-thin quench condensed metal  films.  Such a transition may
              occur for a disordered superconducting film  so  thin that its normal
              resistance per square is on the order of  h/4e2,  and  the  insulator like
              state  is  also  promoted  by  a  magnetic field. The research project involves
              in-situ evaporation  of  ultra  thin  layers  onto cryogenic substrates,  and 
              in-situ  measurements    of   magnetotransport,   STM    topography    and 
              spectroscopy. The goals are to establish correlations between the  macroscopic 
              transport  exhibiting the  SIT  transition  and  the  microscopic properties as
              revealed by the STM measurements. A key  issue  to  resolve  is  the  relative 
              importance  of  phase  and  amplitude fluctuations of the superconducting order
              parameter  in  the  vicinity  of  the  transition.  This  research  program  
              is  interdisciplinary  in nature and has typically  involved  several 
              undergraduate  and  graduate students in  its  activities.  These  involvements
               are beneficial in the preparation of  students  for  further   study   and  
              for  careers  in   industry,   government  laboratories or academia.  %%%  This
               experimental research project is concerned with  electrical  conduction  in 
              extremely  thin layers  of  metal,  at  very  low  temperature.  If the metal
              is a superconductor,  like  lead,  the  usual  behavior is a transition between
              a metallic  state  and  a  superconducting state, that is the resistance of the
               metal  film  will go to zero below a transition temperature. However, when the
               films  are  only a few atomic layers thick, an entirely different  behavior
              can be observed, in which a transition occurs between an  insulating  state 
              and  a  superconducting  state.  This  unusual  behavior is the focus of this
              project.  The experimental apparatus  allows  vacuum  deposit  of a metal layer
              onto  a  liquid-helium-  temperature substrate, so called quench condensing,
              which permits  the  ultra thin and even-thickness films that show the effect 
              of  interest.  The  experimental  apparatus  is  set  up   to   allow 
              electrical resistance measurements of the film to be made in  the  same
              apparatus, and also scanning tunneling microscope topographs  and electrical
              measurements to be made without disturbing the  as  deposited metal film. The
              temperature and magnetic field can also  be  varied. The goal of this basic
              research is to understand  the  mechanism  of  the  unusual
              insulator-superconductor  transition.  Such  understanding  will  add to the 
              overall  understanding  of  electrical  conduction in materials and also  in 
              microelectronic  and other devices. This research program is interdisciplinary 
              in  nature  and  has  typically  involved several  undergraduate  and  graduate
               students  in  its activities.  These  involvements  are  beneficial in the
              preparation of students for further  study  and  for careers in industry,
              government laboratories or academia.  ***
