Title       : Special Program Support for the Second Computer Supported Collaborative Learning
               (CSCL '97) Conference, December 1997, Toronto, Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2000   
File        : a9801296

Award Number: 9801296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49515              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Koschmann   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Hawkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry J. Fishman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              LoriLee Sadler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9801296  Koschmann    The CSCL conferences were introduced to provide an
              international forum for research into the ways that technology might be used to
              enhance collaborative forms of instruction as well as more fundamental research
              into how people learn in collaborative settings.  CSCL '97 will take place in
              December of this year and will be hosted by the University of Toronto and the
              Ontario Institute for Studies in Education.  Special program support is sought
              to address three concerns relative to the conference-the need for
              capacity-building within the research community, the need to construct a bridge
              to the teaching community, and the need to provide a community memory aid that
              will document what is accomplished at the meeting.  To address these concerns,
              three programs are proposed: the Doctoral Consortium, the Teacher Participation
              Program, and the CSCL '97 Virtual Conference.  The Doctoral Consortium is
              planned as a pre-conference activity.  It will bring together Ph.D. students
              from a variety of institutions to discuss their planned dissertation projects
              with a selected set of faculty members drawn from the various fields related to
              educational technology.  The Teacher Participation Program will have two major
              components-Classroom Visitations and the Teachers' Panel.  The Classroom
              Visitations are one-hour immersive experiences designed by classroom teachers
              to acquaint conference attendees with the ways that CSCL technologies have been
              used in actual classrooms.  Five Classroom Visitations are planned over the
              course of the conference.  The five teachers who develop the Classroom
              Visitations will also participate in the Teachers' Panel, a plenary event
              designed to foster discussion among teachers and researchers about the
              direction of future CSCL work.  The CSCL '97 Virtual Conference is designed to
              create an archival "community memory" of the conference, focusing in particular
              on some of the special and emergent events.  The intent is to create a montage
              of digitized images, video, a udio, and text, which will be available following
              the conference both through the conference website, and on a CD-ROM.
