Title       : Enumerative Geometry of Moduli Spaces of Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9801257

Award Number: 9801257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carel Faber cffaber@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        Faber  9801257        The proposal consists of three parts. Part I (to
              be carried out by the P.I.) focuses on the intersection rings of the moduli
              spaces of curves, thereby restricting attention to the tautological classes.
              The central subject is the P.I.'s conjecture describing the tautological ring
              in the case of smooth curves; the case of stable curves will be studied also.
              In Part II, the P.I. and post-doc I. Ciocan-Fontanine will try to relate the
              various approaches available for the calculation of  Gromov-Witten invariants
              in the case of varieties with torus actions. In Part III, Ciocan-Fontanine will
              study a recently proposed conjectural  construction of mirrors for complete
              intersections in partial flag  manifolds. It is based on a surprising heuristic
              link with mirror symmetry for complete intersections in toric varieties. A
              proof of a weaker conjecture would lead to the calculation of virtual numbers
              of rational curves on complete intersection Calabi-Yau threefolds.       This
              is research in the field of algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry is one of
              the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but one which has had a revolutionary
              flowering in the past quarter-century. In its origin, it treated figures that
              could be defined in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials.
              Nowadays the field makes use of methods not only from algebra, but from
              analysis and topology, and conversely is finding application in those fields as
              well as in physics, theoretical computer science, and robotics.
