Title       : SBIR Phase II: Phytoremediation of Surface and Ground Waters Using Sequential
               Rhizosphere - Thin Film and Periphyton Filters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2000      
File        : a9801336

Award Number: 9801336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396195             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. DeBusk azureainc@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Azurea, Inc.
	      PO Box 561178
	      Rockledge, FL  329561178    407/631-0610

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0208000   Water Resources                         
Program Ref : 1182,9104,9189,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9801336  DeBusk  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project
              describes a study plan to optimize sequential thin-film rhizosphere systems
              (TFR) and periphyton filters (PF) for removal of excess nutrients and trace
              elements from surface and ground waters. Our Phase I research of this concept
              established the technical feasibility of using TFR-PF systems to remove
              phosphorus (P), lead (Pb) and copper (Cu) to low (ca. 10ug/L) levels.  The
              combination of high loading capacity and high contaminant tolerance of wetland
              macrophytes cultured in a TFR configuration with the higher affinity of
              periphyton for nutrients and trace elements provide key components of a
              sequential process train that will effectively and economically treat large and
              variable volumes of water.  Our Phase II research goal is to refine this
              phytoremediation technology to remove trace elements from contaminated waters
              (e.g, urban and agricultural runoff, eutropic lake waters) to levels typical of
              natural ambient surface waters.  Optimization parameters to be studied include:
              appropriate hydraulic retention time (HRT) of the TFR and PF unit processes for
              effective removal of P, Cu, nickel (Ni) and cadmium (Cd); use of foliar
              nutritional sprays to support macrophyte growth in TFRs that are treating
              contaminated, but nutrient-deficient waters; and, investigation of appropriate
              sequencing of TFR-PF to maximize treatment efficiency.  Macrophyte and algal
              biomass production rates and elemental composition will be measured routinely
              to define acceptable strategies for handling harvested biomass.  We expect that
              successful development of this phytoremediation technology will provide a cost
              effective, rugged and broadly useful capability to remove trace element
              contaminants from moderately contaminated ground and surface waters.   
              Successful completion of Phase II research efforts will result in, for the
              first time, an operationally simple, reliable and relatively low maintenance
              technology to remove specific element contami nants from surface and ground
              waters.  Not only will we optimize our proposed phytoremediation process during
              the Phase II research, our strategic alliance with the one of the largest U.S.
              technology companies will permit us to quickly and cost-effectively penetrate
              existing and new water treatment markets.  ***
