Title       : Dissertation Research: Functional Morphology, Ontogeny, and Evolution of New
               Hard Tissue, Trabecular Cartilage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9801636

Award Number: 9801636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5005               (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth L. Brainerd brainerd@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam P. Summers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Brainerd  9801636    In spite of having an entirely cartilaginous skeleton, the 
              sharks and rays can boast of the fastest fish, the Mako  Shark; the largest
              fish, the Whale Shark; and a fish which  can crush clams and crabs, the Cownose
              Ray. particular type  of cartilage in the skeleton of sharks and rays is called
               prismatic cartilage, and it is composed of a soft core  surrounded by plates
              of calcium crystals that serve to  stiffen the skeletal elements. Despite this
              surface  mineralization, prismatic cartilage is less stiff and strong  than
              bone, and this should preclude the use of the jaws to  crush hard prey.
              Preliminary results for this proposal  indicate that the Cownose Ray,
              Rhinoptera bonasus, stiffens  its jaws with a newly described type of prismatic
              cartilage,  "trabecular cartilage". In trabecular cartilage, struts of  hard
              mineral run through the cartilage core in a pattern  that prevents deformation
              of the surface of the jaws. This  study will investigate several key aspects of
              trabecular  cartilage. The biomechanical function of trabeculae will be 
              determined using techniques borrowed from materials  engineering. The
              development of the struts will be examined  to determine how mineral is
              deposited deep within a  cartilage that contains no blood vessels. Finally, the
               evolutionary history of this proposed adaptation for  crushing hard prey will
              be determined.
