Title       : Solutions and Spectrum of Schrodinger Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9801530

Award Number: 9801530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67438              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Kiselev kiselev@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9801530  Principal Investigator: Alexander Kiselev    Abstract:
              The research will focus mainly on two objectives. The first is to study the
              general relationships between the behavior of solutions of the generalized
              eigenfunction equation, spectral properties and quantum dynamics of
              Schroedinger (and more generally elliptic) operators on infinite domains in any
              dimension. The second objective is the investigation of spectral and dynamical
              properties of concrete quantum mechanical systems. The goal is the development
              of a new spectral analysis technique for studying fine structure in the
              essential spectra of Schroedinger operators (that is, the decomposition of the
              essential spectrum into absolutely continuous, singular continuous and pure
              point components). In addition to spectral information, the new methods may
              yield valuable results about quantum dynamics of various systems via new
              relations between the behavior of solutions of generalized eigenfunction
              equation, spectral measures, and quantum dynamics. This technique may have
              potential applications to and will provide further insight into many important
              problems, in particular such as models of quasicrystals, the Anderson model and
              other models involving random or ergodic potentials, and Schroedinger operators
              with slowly decaying potentials.       The spectral and dynamical theory of
              Schroedinger operators is the cornerstone of Quantum Mechanics. This theory
              describes the laws which govern the behavior of quantum particles, such as
              electrons, atoms and molecules. Much of the fundamental scientific knowledge
              about many important physical processes (such as, for example, chemical
              reactions or conduction properties of various materials) comes from the theory
              of Schroedinger operators. This proposal focuses on the development of the new
              methods in spectral and dynamical theory of Schroedinger operators which may
              allow a new approach to some long-standing problems in Quantum Mechanics. These
              problems concern, in particular, the cond uctance properties of materials with
              impurities and of quasicrystals, and have direct applications to modern
              engineering devices, wave guides and transistors to name two.
