Title       : Regularity for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a9801374

Award Number: 9801374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127851             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lihe Wang lwang@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                DMS-9801374  Lihe Wang     This proposal is directed in the study of
              regularity theory of bi-harmonic maps, level surfaces of solutions of partial
              differential equations, problems  of geometric flows and degenerate equations.
              Regularity of weakly bi-harmonic maps are established. Bi-harmonic maps are
              expected to play an important role in the theory of four manifolds. The level
              surfaces are the central subject   of study in the theories of phase
              transitions, geometric evolutions and free boundary problems. Some special
              level surfaces appear as the boundary of crystals and the wave fronts of shock
              waves in many practical problems.   We plan to develop some new ideas which
              help to understand the nature, stability and regularity of these level
              surfaces. The mathematical existence of flow of crystals and the regularity of
              the boundary of the crystals are also established.    Since Newton discovered
              the second law of physics, progress in mathematical   physics has relied on the
              partial differential equations, from fluid mechanics, relativity to quantum
              mechanics. Although partial differential equations describe nature quite
              precisely, they have many challenges. The major difficulty is due to their
              nonlinearity. Another big source of the complications comes from the
              singularities of some of the physical quantities. Physically these came from a
              phenomenon like that of the formation of a black hole or other physical
              phenomena such as explosion, phase transition or even super-conductivity.   We
              try to understand these singularities by studying the structure and the
              configuration of the singularity set. A class of this kind of problems comes
              from crystal growth and free boundary problems. The motion of the boundary of
              the crystal is the geometric flow problem. Here the boundary of the crystal,
              such as in the case of melting ice, is a level surface of the temperature
              function. The whole dynamical process of the crystal growth is studied from  
              This point of view.
