Title       : Krein Space Operator Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1998      
File        : a9801016

Award Number: 9801016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35310              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Rovnyak jlr5m@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rovnyak.Abs    Abstract    Proposal: DMS-9801016  Principal Investigator: James
              L. Rovnyak    Topics in operator theory and function theory will be pursued in
              several directions that involve Krein spaces and indefinite inner products (as
              opposed to Hilbert spaces). The project will continue previous work on the
              theory of generalized Schur and Nevanlinna functions. Following Krein and
              Langer, these are defined as meromorphic functions whose associated
              Pick-Nevanlinna kernels have a finite number of negative squares. One topic is
              interpolation theory. In the definite case, a theory of boundary interpolation
              including problems of Loewner type was given by Rosenblum and Rovnyak, and
              analogous problems will now be studied for generalized Schur functions.  A
              unifying tool is the theory of canonical coisometric, isometric, and unitary
              realizations for generalized Schur functions. Related problems on the structure
              of state spaces and the difference-quotient transformation will also be
              studied. The theory takes its most concrete form for scalar-valued functions,
              and work of Sarason and his colleagues in the definite case suggest other
              directions for development. Related problems for Krein space operators will
              also be investigated.    The project will study several topics that extend
              classical problems in operator theory and function theory. The work is
              mathematical, but the topics are in areas that support mathematical engineering
              and the theory of linear systems. One topic is interpolation theory, where it
              is required to reconstruct a function with prescribed properties when only some
              of its values, the data of the problem, are known.  In linear system theory, a
              similar problem is to reconstruct a system with prescribed input-output
              characteristics; some state is input into the system, the system (itself
              described by an unknown state) acts upon it, and a new state is output. In the
              classical theory, distances between states are "definite," that is, positive in
              the usual sense of Euclidean space.  Mathem atical models in which distances
              are "indefinite," that is, sometimes positive and sometimes negative, have been
              known for a long time and occur, for example, in relativity theory.  In fact,
              the mathematics of linear system theory is a powerful tool for interpolation
              theory and will be used in the project.  The project uses "indefinite" as
              opposed to "definite" notions of distance, and it seeks to explore new
              phenomena that arise when the classical theories do not apply. Questions to be
              investigated include existence of solutions, uniqueness, explicit construction,
              and properties of the state space. The budget includes support for one
              undergraduate student in an REU summer research project each year.
