Title       : Magnetized States of Quantum Spin Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9801742

Award Number: 9801742
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel H. Reich dhr@pha.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Collin L. Broholm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9801742  Reich    This is an experimental research program designed to
              characterize  magnetized   states  of  quasi--one--dimensional   quantum   spin
               systems, and the critical properties associated with the magnetic 
              field--induced  T  = 0 phase--transitions into such  states.  The  goals of
              this work are to (i) determine whether magnetized states  of  spin  chains 
              share an incommensurate length scale  which  is  inversely  proportional to
              magnetization as predicted  by  theory  and  (ii)  to provide an experimental
              counterpart to the  growing  body  of  theoretical  results about quantum
              critical  phenomena.  This  work  involves  a series of detailed experiments 
              on  well-  characterized  model systems where the spin  Hamiltonian  can  be 
              varied  reproducibly through the application of a magnetic field,  and where
              disorder can be introduced in a controlled fashion.   A  number  of different
              quasi-one-dimensional antiferromagnets  will  be investigated, including linear
              chains with spin S=1/2 and S=1,  linear  chains  with  bond alternation,  and 
              spin  ladders.  The  research  involves both graduate and undergraduate 
              students  who  obtain   a  broad  education  in  experimental  condensed 
              matter  physics,  from  sample  preparation  through  various  types   of 
              experiments and analysis to the dissemination of results.  %%%  The goal of
              this research is to increase the understanding of the  fundamental behavior of
              many-body quantum physics through  detailed experimental studies of simple
              magnetic systems. Quantum  spin chains are magnets in which the atomic-scale
              magnetic  interactions are strong only in one direction in the material.  This
              one-dimensionality coupled with quantum mechanics produces  systems with novel
              and beautiful properties where highly  sophisticated theoretical concepts can
              be put to rigorous  experimental tests. The research involves both graduate and
               undergraduate students who obtain a broad education in  experimental condensed
              matter physics, from materials pre paration  and a variety of cutting-edge
              experimental techniques to  sophisticated data analysis and the dissemination
              of results.  ***
