Title       : Dissertation Research: Expression and Inheritance of a Life History Polymorphism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9801458

Award Number: 9801458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond D. Semlitsch SemlitschR@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Semlitsch
9801458

A life cycle, or a life history pathway, is the succession
              of distinct stages an organism passes through from its origin to its expiration
              or death. Life cycles may be simple, like those exhibited by most conspicuous
              animals; birds and mammals that at hatching or birth, resemble their parents in
              most regards save for size and proportion. However, most animals (insects and
              other invertebrates) have complex life cycles, where there are at least two
              radically different phases of life (for example, moths and butterflies that
              begin life as wingless, soft-bodied caterpillars). The overwhelming majority of
              organisms have a single life cycle, be it simple or complex. The mole
              salamander (Ambystoma talpoideum) is an exception to this general rule. Many
              individuals exhibit complex life cycles, which is common among amphibians. They
              begin life as aquatic larvae then undergo a  transformation (metamorphosis) to
              become terrestrial adults. Some individuals, however, are able to skip the
              transition from the aquatic larval stage to the terrestrial adult stage and
              instead become aquatic adults. Although it is known that the propensity for an
              individual to adopt one or the other of these life history pathways is
              determined by a combination of genetic and environmental factors, the relative
              contribution of these is not well understood. The proposed research
              investigates the underlying causes of this life cycle polymorphism using
              experimental techniques. The results will be interpreted in light of both the
              short-term  (individual) and long-term (population) effects of alternative life
              history pathways.

