Title       : Nonlinear Wave Progatation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9801558

Award Number: 9801558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70401              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sun Yung A. Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Markus R. Keel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 proposal 9801558  NONLINEAR WAVE PROPAGATION  PROJECT SUMMARY  Markus Keel  A
              difficulty common to many interesting  nonlinear evolution equations   is
              so-called L-p ill-posedness.  That is, the corresponding  linear time
              evolutions cannot be effectively   compared at each fixed time to the initial
              data   using a single L-p space (Lebesgue space with exponent p)   when p is
              not equal to 2.  (When p = 2, there is often a conservation of   energy which
              provides just such an estimate.)         This obstacle is present in equations
              ranging from   classical field theory to the higher dimensional analogues of  
              hyperbolic systems dealt with in 1 space dimension by Glimm's method.   We
              propose to study two analytical methods developed to deal with  L-p
              ill-posedness in the context of nonlinear wave equations and   nonlinear
              Schrodinger equations.  The first is space-time estimates  for the
              corresponding linear problems.  We propose to study in collaboration   with T.
              Tao the endpoint  Strichartz estimates  for the Schrodinger and wave equation
              in   space dimensions 2 and 3, respectively.  This would be an extension of  
              previous work by Tao and the author.    We propose second to study generalized
              Sobolev estimates and the   method of conformal compactification.  We will be 
              looking, in   collaboration with C. Sogge and H. Smith, at the   specific
              problem of global in time existence for a   system of quasilinear wave
              equations  with small initial data   in the exterior of an obstacle.   
              Finally, we would like to bring these techniques to the question of   how the
              choice of gauge affects regularity of the solution in the   context of the
              hyperbolic Yang-Mills equations.     The physics behind many interesting
              systems currently   being investigated (for example, fluid flow or the   LIGO
              gravitational wave detectors) leads scientists to  a number of very difficult
              questions in nonlinear mathematics.   When we consider the nonlinear partial
              differential  equations arising in fluid mechanics and general  relativity,
              some   natural questions are "how big is a solution at long times" or even  
              "does a solution exist for all times". We have only very incomplete   answers
              to these questions.   The present proposal aims to further understand promising
              techniques   in nonlinear hyperbolic pde which might eventually be brought to  
              physical systems.  For example, the question above   regarding endpoint
              Strichartz estimates may shed light  on the decay properties of waves.  The
              obstacle problem mentioned   above is a toy model for the stability of the
              Schwarzschild space   in general relativity.
