Title       : Discrete Subgroups of Lie Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9801136

Award Number: 9801136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86815              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leticia Barchini leticia@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dave Witte  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Witte

One focus of this project is the study of tessellations of
              homogeneous 
spaces.  Namely, if G/H is a non-compact, simply connected
              homogeneous space 
of a connected Lie group G, the question is whether there
              is a properly 
discontinuous subgroup D of G such that the orbit space D\G/H
              is compact. 
Some special cases have been studied by L. Auslander, Y. Benoist,
              G. A. 
Margulis, R. J. Zimmer, H. Oh, and others.  If there is a compact
              subset C of G with CHC = G, then we say that H is a Cartan-decomposition
              subgroup, and it is easy to see that G/H does not have a tessellation.  The
              project will use Cartan-decomposition subgroups as a starting point in a study
              of tessellations of homogeneous spaces of semisimple groups of real rank two. 
              The other main focus of this project is generalizing the PI's theorem that
              arithmetic groups of Q-rank at least two have no interesting continuous actions
              on connected one-manifolds.  (In algebraic terms, the theorem asserts that no
              central extension of any such arithmetic group is right orderable.)  The PI
              conjectured that the 
assumption on Q-rank can be replaced by the same
              assumption on the real 
rank, and this leads to interesting questions about
              the algebraic structure 
of arithmetic groups.
     
Many important
              materials are crystals.  The atomic structure of such a 
material is very
              symmetric, and a first step toward understanding the 
physical properties of
              the material is to study the group formed by all the 
symmetries of the
              structure.  This project investigates the symmetry groups 
that arise from
              crystals in mathematical spaces other than the 
3-dimensional universe we live
              in.  A basic problem addressed by this 
project is to understand which spaces
              do contain crystals.  Also, this 
project will study the structure of the
              symmetry group of the crystals that 
do exist.  For example, the PI and others
              have shown, in many cases, that 
crystals in two different spaces cannot have
              the same group of symmetries. 
However, it is often still not known whether
              the group of symmetries can be 
the same as the symmetries of a
              one-dimensional non-rigid (and, hence, 
non-crystalline) structure.

