Title       : SBIR Phase II: Design of a New and Improved Print Reading Machine for the Blind
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2001      
File        : a9801554

Award Number: 9801554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oleg Tretiakoff  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deane B. Blazie deane@blazie.com  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Blazie Engineering, Inc.
	      105 East Jarrettsville Road
	      Forest Hill, MD  21050    410/893-9333

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9801554  Blazie  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              from Blazie Engineering, Inc. will conduct research leading to the development
              of three working prototypes of a new print reading machine for the blind.  As
              of early 1996, the only existing device in the world that can produce a tactile
              image of print from a small hand held camera, the Optacon, is no longer being
              produced by its manufacturer.  In Phase I, the researchers demonstrated the
              feasibility of incorporating new technology in a new print reading machine
              which make it easier to use, quicker to learn, less expensive, and attractive
              to a larger market.  A new tactile screen was designed which should
              significantly reduce costs and provide a clearer tactile image.  A new camera
              design coupled with built in synthetic speech would make the device easier to
              learn and use and, with the proper accessories, the device would appeal to a
              larger market.  The Phase II effort includes the following: detailed design,
              construction and user testing of the new tactile array; research and design of
              a new camera to produce a better tactile image; built-in speech synthesis and
              capability for training programs; development of software to allow tactile
              imaging of a PC screen; and design of hardware that allows for future expansion
              (including multi-purpose interface for additional cameras/scanners, hardware
              features to allow built in training features, and communications ports and
              universal serial bus for future expansion to market).  The Optacon print reader
              enables blind individuals to have access to the study of mathematics and
              science.  If this research is successful an improved, lower-cost commercial
              product incorporating new technology will result which make such access not
              only possible but also more attractive to a wider population.  This new print
              reader for the blind will increase their employment opportunities and
              self-sufficiency to perform household management tasks as well as their ability
              to interface with print material s.  ***
