Title       : Classification of Optimal Linear Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9801581

Award Number: 9801581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55669              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Jaffe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          9801581  Jaffe      This award supports research on a project
              involving the search for and implementation of alogorithms for classifying
              optimal linear codes, with an emphasis on the binary case. Included here is the
              problem of discovering new optimal linear codes and describing them in a
              meaningful way. All of this is part of the ongoing development of a computer
              language Split, which facilitates the mechanical verification of proofs about
              linear codes.      This research concerns optimal error-correcting codes, which
              play a ubiquitous role in modern technology, because they make possible the 
              transmission of information across noisy channels.  For example, such codes 
              facilitate earth-satellite communications (in spite of atmospheric 
              disturbances), and such codes facilitate the reading of compact disks (in spite
              of dust and damage to the disk's surface). Codes are abstract mathematical
              objects.  Those that are are most effective for transmitting information are
              called optimal.  It is an open mathematical problem - and the subject of this
              research - to determine just how effective a code can be.  This problem can be
              converted into a computational problem called "linear programming", which is
              also used by many industries (such as the airline industry) to optimize their
              use of resources.  As existing linear programming software is not good enough
              to answer the problems arising from coding theory, new software will be
              developed.  In addition, software which allows for the  mechanical verification
              of assertions about codes will provide a "front end" to  these linear
              programming calculations.  All such software (including source  code) will be
              made freely available to the public.
