Title       : Inverse Problems for Anisotropic Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9801664

Award Number: 9801664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carlos Berenstein                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lizabeth V. Rachele   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Liz Rachele (DMS-9801664)

This proposal concerns inverse problems for
              anisotropic media, in particular, 
questions on stability, global uniqueness,
              and boundary determination.  In the first project (joint with A. Sa Barreto)
              the PI will study the continuous dependence of a smooth Riemannian metric g
              (defined on a bounded, n-dimensional domain) on the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map
              associated with the wave equation for the Laplace-Beltrami operator, up to the
              pullback by a diffeo-morphism that fixes the boundary.  The second project is
              concerned with global uniqueness
for a certain class of anisotropic media. 
              Techniques developed here will be 
applied to an inverse problem for
              elastodynamics with initial stress.  The aim of the third project is to
              describe conditions under which the coefficients of the operator for
              elastodynamics with initial stress are determined to infinite order at the
              boundary by the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map. 

Arising in diverse settings,
              inverse problems stand out as compelling examples 
of the potential for
              application of mathematical techniques to practical problems. Inverse problems
              involve describing internal properties, such as the conductivity of an airplane
              wing, the elasticity of subterranean ore deposits, or the density of human
              tissue, given only measurements made externally.  For objects studied via an
              inverse problem in elasto-dynamics, for example, it is known in some cases that
              the density and elastic properties of the objects are uniquely determined by
              measurements made at the surface.  That is, if two
objects with the same size,
              shape, and orientation respond in the same way to 
certain tests made only at
              the surface, then it is guaranteed that they do, in fact, have the same density
              and elastic properties throughout.  In the second and third projects mentioned
              above the PI will consider elastic objects with initial stress.  Events in the
              past may have built up an initial stress in the object, for example, through
              welding or seismic fault activity.  Some error is inherent in any real
              measurements, though, and so the aim of the first project mentioned above is to
              show that only certain ambiguities must be taken 
into account in order to
              reconstruct properties of the object arbitrarily 
accurately from approximate
              surface measurements.


