Title       : GOALI: Fundamental Investigation of the Synthesis, Characterization, and
               Performance of a NiAl Diffusion Coating Doped with a Reactive Element by
               Chemical Vapor Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a9801042

Award Number: 9801042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282356             (Estimated)
Investigator: Woo Young Lee wlee@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ram Darolia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9801042  Lee    Thermal barrier coatings (TBCs) consist of a strain-tolerant 
              ceramic layer and a metallic bond coat, which provides  oxidation protection to
              metal alloys.  The dominant failure  mode observed in these material systems is
              the progressive  fracture of the interface region between the bond coat 
              surface and its oxide scale upon exposure to oxidation.  One  potent avenue for
              improving the scale adhesion at the bond  coat surface is to incorporate one or
              more reactive  elements, such as Hf or Zr, into a NiAl diffusion coating 
              formed by aluminizing the surface of a Ni-based superalloy.  This grant results
              from recent manufacturing advances in  aluminizing by chemical vapor deposition
              (CVD).  In contrast  to the close-batch pack cementation and gas phase pack 
              methods traditionally used for aluminizing, the dynamic  nature of the
              open-flow CVD technique offers the promise of  proactively controlling dopant
              concentration and  distribution in the coating matrix.  Previous studies with 
              bulk alloys and intermetallics have shown that, in order for  the beneficial
              effect to be operative, a reactive element  must be present in a
              well-controlled level and distribution  in the matrix material.  Stevens
              Institute of Technology in  collaboration with General Electric Aircraft
              Engines (GEAE)  is exploring the synthesis, characterization, and  performance
              issues associated with the CVD doping concept.  This is accomplished under the
              NSF-GOALI concept, which is  ideal for long-term exploration by collaborative
              university-  industry research activities.  This research project  effectively
              integrates Stevens' strengths in conducting  kinetic experiments, coating
              characterization, and  mathematical modeling with GEAE's expertise as a leading
               aircraft engine manufacturer with unique characterization  and test
              facilities.  The Division of Materials Research and  the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities jointly fund  this grant.  %%%  Extending the
              surface functionality of advanced metallic and   ceramic materials has been a
              vital area of research and  development for high temperature structural
              applications.  Currently a strong technological need exists to improve the 
              performance of "traditional" structural materials, such as  Ni-based
              superalloys, via surface coating and modification  approaches.  ***
