Title       : Dissertation Research: Synergistic Epistasis of Random Mutations: Experimental
               and Theoretical Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9801639

Award Number: 9801639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Bull bull@bull.zo.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Hillis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bull  9801639    Mutations are always accumulating in an organism's genome.
              These mostly disadvantageous effects can only be removed by selection, that is,
              by the death or sterility of the individuals carrying the mutations. The
              genetic health of a population therefore depends in part upon how strongly
              natural selection is acting.    If the genetics of an organism has a certain
              property, selection can become much more efficient at weeding out deleterious
              mutations. This study is attempting to see whether or not the genes of a very
              simple organism show this property, called synergistic epistasis. The term
              epistasis refers to the presence of an interactive effect between mutations. In
              this case, the effect of two mutations together is different than would be
              expected from merely adding the effects of each mutation by itself. Synergistic
              epistasis refers to the condition where the effect of two mutations is worse
              than the sum of the individual effects of each. (The opposite effect, where two
              mutations are less detrimental than the sum of their individual effects, is
              called antagonistic or diminishing returns epistasis).    Synergistic epistasis
              has been postulated as a general property of genetic systems. It has been
              implicated as a possible driving force leading to the evolution of sexual
              reproduction, and has broad implications for the efficiency of natural
              selection.    This study will look at a very simple organism, the bacteriophage
              PhiX174, to see if mutations behave synergistically or not. The advantages of
              using such a simple model system revolve around the fact that it is otherwise
              very difficult to know exactly which mutations are present, and how they
              interact. The proposed system will avoid this and other problems faced by
              previous studies that have looked for evidence of synergism.
