Title       : Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9801626

Award Number: 9801626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $472725             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Kohn kohn@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:DMS-9801626  Principal Investigator: Joseph J. Kohn    Abstract: Kohn
              will continue to do research in the theory of several complex variables,  
              partial differential equations and related topics. In particular, he is
              interested in: global regularity, hypoellipticity, Holder and L-p estimates,
              domains with piecewise smooth  boundaries, and embeddings of CR manifolds. Kohn
              is currently working on the subject of hypoellipticity both for boundary
              behavior in several complex variables and for differential and
              pseudodifferential operators. His interest is in finding qualitative (be they
              geometric or algebraic) conditions under which hypoellipticity holds. The
              technical  part of much of this research is connected with estimates which do
              not "gain"  smoothness, so the error terms are of the same magnitude as the
              object one is trying to estimate. Kohn is developing techniques to deal with
              this type of difficulty.      Since Cardano's work on the cubic equation in the
              sixteenth century it has been known that complex numbers are needed, as an
              intermediary step, to find real solutions of certain problems even when such
              numbers appear neither in the statements nor in the solutions of the problems
              themselves. Thus, by the middle of the last century, it was recognized that
              complex analysis is deeply intertwined with many fundamental problems of
              mathematics, science, and technology. One of the most spectacular instances of
              this is the use of "Dirichlet's principle" (which arises in fluid mechanics) to
              understand the foundations of the theory of functions of one complex variable
              and, in turn, the use of complex analysis in the study of fluid flows. In
              recent times much of the research in complex analysis has focused on functions
              of several complex variables, where the counterpart of the Dirichlet principle
              appears in what is known as Hodge theory and in the so-called d-bar Neumann
              problem. Kohn is doing research in this area, research that also involves work
              in partial differential equations, harmonic a nalysis, and geometry. Kohn is
              currently working on problems of "smoothness" and "propagation of
              singularities" that arise in the study of partial differential equations.
