Title       : Geometric and Analytic Problems in Several Complex Variables and Partial
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a9801258

Award Number: 9801258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289467             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda P. Rothschild lrothschild@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Salah Baouendi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9801258  Principal Investigators: Linda P. Rothschild, Salah M.
              Baouendi    Abstract: The principal investigators will study the geometry of
              real submanifolds in complex space and the holomorphic mappings which send one
              such manifold into another. In particular, they will attempt to categorize
              those manifolds for which such mappings are determined by finitely many
              derivatives at a given point. They expect that this study will lead to
              discovery of new geometric, analytic, as well as algebraic invariants of these
              manifolds. A basic geometric and analytic problem is whether a holomorphic
              mapping defined on one side of a real hypersurface embedded in complex space
              extends to the other side of that hypersurface. More generally, one can
              consider smooth mappings between manifolds of higher codimension in complex
              space whose components satisfy the boundary Cauchy-Riemann equations. The
              principal investigators will study such mappings, in particular when the
              manifolds are given globally by polynomial equations, and will try to determine
              when such mappings extend holomorphically to the complex space. They will also
              study the relationship between algebraic and holomorphic equivalence of such
              manifolds.    Complex numbers and functions of complex variables have been,
              since the 19th century, important tools in many fundamental problems in
              mathematics and its application to other areas of science and engineering. The
              solutions of some of these problems depend on a better understanding of these
              tools and their basic properties. For instance, the four dimensional space-time
              used in relativity theory can be considered as a two dimensional complex space.
              The quantitative and qualitative study of the transformations of geometric
              objects in complex spaces planned in this proposal may lead to new
              understanding and solutions of problems in control theory (e.g., motion of
              objects in space under certain physical constraints). Complex analysis also
              plays an important role in finding solutions to differenti al equations which
              model physical problems. Results of the research planned in this proposal could
              lead to the discovery of new properties of solutions of these equations and
              hence a better understanding of the related physical problems.
