Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Comparative Research on Dispute Resolution and
               Gender Dynamics in Worker Cooperatives and Matched Hierarchical Businesses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9801948

Award Number: 9801948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Suchman suchman@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Prior research in traditional workplaces has demonstrated that men and women
              manage disputes differently. However, these findings have not been replicated
              in more egalitarian workplaces. Worker cooperatives, in which all members both
              own and co-manage the workplace, are ideal sites for examining the generality
              of the previous findings. Existing theories offer conflicting predictions. Some
              assert that women will raise grievances as frequently as their male co-workers,
              being empowered by an egalitarian ideology. Other approaches argue that women
              will raise fewer grievances, being more affected than men by the cooperative
              ethos. Still other theories hold that women will raise more grievances, lacking
              the power to resolve disputes through anything other than formal action. This
              project will examine these hypotheses by investigating four sets of businesses.
              Each set consists of one worker cooperative and one traditional business, both
              in the same industry and with similar employee demographics. These sets range
              in their gender composition from mostly male to mostly female. Data are
              provided from interviews with a number of individual members of each
              organization, and hypotheses will be tested using a combination of qualitative
              and quantitative methods. In addition to examining the generality of prior
              research in more traditional organizations, the results should be vital to an
              understanding of the issues of gender, grievance resolution, and workplace
              dynamics in the non-hierarchical workplace. 
