Title       : Dissertation Research: Measuring Emotion in Chimpanzees Using Cognitive Tasks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9801464

Award Number: 9801464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frans B. M. de Waal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Nontechnical Abstract    Measuring Emotion in Chimpanzees Using Cognitive
              Tasks      This project aims to establish a new, pioneering direction  of
              research to measure the subjective experience of emotion  in chimpanzees, the
              closest living relative of humans.  The  technique combines experimental    and
              physiological techniques to provide an objective measure  of emotional
              responses in a nonverbal animal.  Changes in  psychophysiological responses,
              such as changes in electronic  conduction of facial muscles and skin will be
              measured when  subjects view emotion-eliciting videos, and when required to 
              categorize these videos according to their emotional  valence.  Categorization
              involves matching positive,  negative and neutral facial expressions with
              videos of  social scenes presented on a computer monitor by contacting  them
              with a joystick-controlled cursor.      Traditionally, students of nonhuman
              primates have  investigated social behavior and social cognition while 
              ignoring the emotional aspects. Emotion is considered  inaccessible in a
              nonverbal species. Psychophysiological  responses, such as those noted above, 
              have an inherent  correlation with autonomic nervous system functions that 
              have been  associated with the experience of emotion in humans.  Measuring
              psychophysiological parameters in nonverbal  organisms will provide an
              objective measure of what are  often covert, unconscious responses. Applying an
              objective,  empirical measure of emotion to chimpanzees will broaden an 
              understanding of the evolution of emotional responses and  empathy in humans.
