Title       : GOALI-Technologies Joint Research Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9801139

Award Number: 9801139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yilu Liu Yilu.Liu@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9801139  Liu    Virginia Tech and BWX Technologies propose to investigate
              the electromagnetic interactions between a superconducting coil and the power
              electronics interface for FACTS/Energy storage applications through industry
              presence at Virginia Tech.  The project will have the support of BWXT, Virginia
              Tech, and the NSF GOALI program.    The objective of this research project is
              to develop an integrated electromagnetic model of the superconducting coil, the
              power electronics and power systems using the EMTP (Electromagnetic Transient
              Program).  The modeling will involve a detailed representation of a multi-MW
              voltage source inverter and the DC-DC chopper including controls and
              protection.  The superconducting coil will be represented by distributed
              inductances and capacitances derived from a finite element electromagnetic
              analysis performed by BWX Technologies.  The transients, surges, and ripples
              superimposed to the DC voltages need to be controlled to avoid exciting
              resonances within the coil which can provoke voltages exceeding the
              capabilities of the coil electrical insulation.  The study will investigate the
              efficiency of multi-phase choppers, higher switching frequencies and protection
              measures to guarantee the proper operation of the integrated system.  Also
              external and internal faults will be simulated and investigated for their
              potential consequences, and protection measures will be proposed.    The
              outcome of the study will be a complete and integrated EMTP model for
              representing the power electronics, power systems (to the utility point of
              common coupling) and superconducting coil.  The study will determine the worst
              transient conditions and propose remedial and protective solutions.  Most
              importantly, through this process, we hope to bring industry's perspective and
              integrative skills to academe and exchange new ideas and knowledge.  Without
              this joint effort, neither VT or BWX would be able to carry out the proposal
              research alone.
