Title       : An Abstract Formulation of Wavelets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9801658

Award Number: 9801658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104033             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence W. Baggett baggett@euclid.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Baggett

Recently, a kind of internal fine structure of wavelets has
              been discovered. That is, each wavelet
has associated to it a "multiplicity
              function" that appears to carry some information about the
redundancy, in the
              frequency domain, of the wavelet.  Such redundancies should lead to
              more
reliable reconstructions of signals from their wavelet transforms.  This
              research focuses on the
theoretical nature of these multiplicity functions. 
              That is, we will study the properties of this
multiplicity function, try to
              determine exactly which kinds of functions occur in this way, and
attempt to
              classify wavelets according to their multiplicity functions.

The way in
              which an unknown signal (radio wave, seismic shock, astronomic
              vibration,
etc.) is typically analyzed is  by numerically comparing it to a
              set of fixed standard signals.
For instance, the signal can be reproduced
              (relatively accurately) from these numbers;  it can be stored in a computer and
              re-examined later;  or it can be designated as a "new" standard itself.  The
              new idea that comes from Wavelet Theory is that this important set of fixed
              standards can be described in terms of a single standard, together with several
              expansions and shifts of it.  This simplifies greatly the technology for making
              the comparisons with an arbitrary signal.  Various of these single fixed
              standards (wavelets) are known,  but their comparative virtues in signal
              analysis are still being developed.  This research project deals with a newly
              discovered property of wavelets.  Each one has associated to it a notion of
              "redundancy" of frequencies.  It is thought that these redundancies might be an
              important feature of the wavelet, one that could further simplify and improve
              the accuracy and reliability of signal analysis.

