Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Applications to Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9801087

Award Number: 9801087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86499              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Sawyer esawyer@math.iupui.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9801087
Principal Investigator: Eric Sawyer

Abstract: Sawyer
              will continue to research areas of partial differential equations with strong
              ties to harmonic analysis: e.g., oscillatory integrals and maximal operators
              over surfaces, regularity estimates for degenerate boundary value problems, and
              Holder regularity for degenerate elliptic equations and the Monge-Ampere
              equation. The spherical maximal function arises in the solution to the
              3-dimensional wave equation, and its variants play a role in understanding more
              general hyperbolic equations. The PI will continue to investigate L^p
              inequalities for maximal operators over convex surfaces, especially in the
              range p < 2, with attention to the related problems of multiparameter variants
              and L^p-improving convolution operators. He will build on the recent success in
              understanding regularity for the oblique derivative problem by applying the
              techniques used there to even more degenerate boundary value problems, both
              linear and nonlinear. Harnack's inequality and Holder regularity extend to a
              large class of equations with rough coefficients in the presence of
              ellipticity, the permitted roughness being essential in applications to
              nonlinear problems. Sawyer will attempt to obtain sharp estimates in terms of
              the eigenvalues of the degenerate operator when ellipticity is relaxed, in
              order that Holder regularity of solutions follows. Applications to the
              Monge-Ampere equation will also be considered.

Partial differential
              equations (PDEs) are used to model physical processes, often in an "idealized"
              way, but this very simplification usually leads to a better understanding of
              the role played by the various complex factors involved. Harmonic analysis is,
              roughly speaking, the breakdown of data into simple components which are easily
              analyzed under the processes being investigated. Analyzing existence,
              uniqueness, regularity and growth of solutions to PDEs through harmonic
              analysis has led to increased understanding of wave processes such as optics
              and electromagnetism, and more theoretical topics related to quantum mechanics.
              The study of averages related to PDEs has application to tomography as well as
              to theoretical aspects of solutions.

