Title       : L-Functions, Elliptic Curves and Siegel Zeros
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a9801642

Award Number: 9801642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $506770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henryk Iwaniec iwaniec@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Duke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          9801642  Iwaniec    This award supports a joint project by W. Duke
              and H. Iwaniec. Some of the most important problems in number theory concern
              families of L-functions associated to automorphic forms and elliptic curves.
              The study of analytic aspects of these topics has progressed over the last
              twenty years and now constitutes one of the most rapidly expanding areas of
              modern analytic number theory. This project will address central questions of
              this subject. In particular, issues surrounding the old controversy about the
              existence of Siegel zeros form part of the proposal. A new line of
              investigation on this difficult unsolved problem is proposed using automorphic
              theory. Another aim is to broaden the scope of analytic number theory by
              implementing its techniques in novel ways in the arithmetic theory of elliptic
              curves, number fields, and modular forms.  This will be accomplished through a
              series of new interdisciplinary problems about L-functions, division fields,
              and exponential sums associated to modular curves.  The project also aims to
              have  educational impact  at several levels. It is a significant benefit for a
              young student to gain experience conducting research and presenting mathematics
              before his or her dissertation begins. When done in a collaborative and
              supportive environment it provides a needed bridge between the phase of
              learning foundational mathematics to that of thinking independently and
              creatively, as is required to write a good dissertation. The investigators plan
              to provide several students with an opportunity to engage in such research
              before their thesis.      This research falls into the general mathematical
              field of number theory.  Number theory has its historical roots in the study of
              the whole numbers,  addressing such questions as those dealing with the
              divisibility of one  whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches
              of mathematics and  was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic
              reasons. However, within  the last half century it  has become an indispensable
              tool in diverse  applications in areas such as data transmission and
              processing, and  communication systems.
