Title       : Multidimensional Hypergeometric Function Associated with Riemann Surfaces and
               Dynamical Quantum Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9801582

Award Number: 9801582
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Varchenko anv@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Title: "Multidimensional Hypergeometric Functions Associated with Riemann       
                Surfaces and Dynamical Quantum Groups"  Principal Investigator: Alexander
              Varchenko   Abstract:  The goal of the project is to solve differential
              equations for conformal   blocks on Riemann surfaces of an arbitrary genus, to
              quantize the   differential equations for conformal blocks and develop modular 
               properties of solutions of the quantized difference equations,   to construct
              the representation theory of dynamical quantum groups,   which form an
              algebraic structure underlying the properties of   the quantized conformal
              blocks.The theory of special functions is a useful tool to solve   differential
              equations important for applications. New problems   of mathematical physics
              require new special functions and   suggest new approaches to studying special
              functions.  The Gauss hypergeometric function is an example of a classical  
              special function.  The Gauss hypergeometric function  satisfies the remarkable
              hypergeometric differential equation.   The hypergeometric differential
              equation is connected with   representation theory of   affine Lie algebras. 
              The monodromy properties of the   Gauss hypergeometric function lead to the
              theory of quantum groups.     Modern field theory and statistical mechanics
              suggest a new point of   view on the Gauss hypergeometric function, namely, one
              considers  the hypergeometric differential equation as a special example of  
              the differential equation for conformal blocks  on the Riemann sphere and the
              Gauss hypergeometric function as   a special conformal block on the Riemann
              sphere.  Thus,  a new   class of special functions arises - the conformal
              blocks on Riemann   surfaces. To describe algebraic properties of conformal
              blocks   one will need new algebraic structures. Namely, the algebraic
              structure   underlying the properties of conformal blocks on the Riemann sphere
               is the standard quantum group structure. The algebraic structure underlying  
              the properties of conformal blo cks on the torus is the recently  discovered
              dynamical quantum group structure. One can  expect that to describe properties
              of conformal blocks on Riemann   surfaces of a given genus, one will need the
              corresponding  to this genus variant of the quantum group theory.   The aim of
              this project is to develop the theory of special functions   associated with
              Riemann surfaces of an arbitrary genus and study   algebraic structures
              associated with these special functions.
