Title       : Studies in Classical and Quantum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9801329

Award Number: 9801329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4530               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Thomas let@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9801329  Principal Investigator: Lawrence Thomas  Abstract:  Three
              areas of mathematical physics will be investigated: the semi-classical and
              high-energy limits for Schroedinger operators, the polaron model for an
              electron interacting with a quantized field and other simple non-relativistic
              quantum field theories, and the classical Heisenberg model and related
              time-dependent problems. (1) For many Shroedinger operators, the corresponding
              classical problem, even though not integrable, is almost integrable in a
              measure-theoretic sense at high energy.  It is then possible, via KAM theory,
              to develop asymptotic expansions for Schroedinger operator eigenfunctions and
              eigenvalues with large quantum numbers. These results will be extended to
              Schroedinger operators on spheres and to perturbations of the hydrogen problem,
              where the corresponding classical integrability is more problematic. (2) For
              the polaron model, rigorous bounds for the effective mass will be sought by
              methods including those used in joint work with E. Lieb to obtain a sharp lower
              bound for the ground state energy with large coupling constant. (3) The ground
              state of the classical Heisenberg spin model satisfies a finite difference
              equation analogous to a partial differential equation for a harmonic map. The
              solutions to the difference equation exhibit regularity and partial regularity
              properties analogous to those for harmonic maps uniform in the lattice spacing.
               The Dirichlet problem for the difference equation, convergence of the
              solutions as the lattice spacing goes to zero, and the scattering theory for a
              related time-dependent problem will be studied.    Mathematical physics is a
              discipline in which new mathematics is developed to provide decisive resolution
              to important questions in modern theoretical physics and for which physics
              generates and provides insight into important problems in mathematics.  Much of
              the work here concerns the following general problem: Beginning with a
              microscopic picture of matter -- p articles, atoms or molecules interacting
              with each other, systems with either a few or many degrees of freedom --
              determine mathematically measurable macroscopic (observable) quantities --
              energy levels, effective masses, net magnetism, etc. (1) The goal of the work
              on the semi-classical limit is to elucidate the transition from the arena of
              microscopic quantum physics to macroscopic classical physics. This work bears
              on foundational questions in the interpretation of quantum mechanics and
              provides useful schemes for computing certain energy levels using methods of
              classical mechanics. (2) The polaron is a simple model from condensed matter
              physics for a particle moving through a quantized field of lattice vibrations. 
              As the particle moves, it carries along a "cloud" of excitations in the field
              immediately surrounding it. This composite is what one observes in the
              laboratory. What is the effective mass of this composite?  The problem of
              computing such masses is ubiquitous throughout condensed matter, particle, and
              nuclear physics, and insight into how to perform these calculations would be of
              considerable general value. (3) The Heisenberg spin model provides a model to
              explain magnetism. It consists of a regular (infinite) array of  "magnetic
              spins," each of which can point in any direction but tends to align with its
              immediate neighbors. If the spins align just right collectively, one "sees" a
              net large-scale magnetism. It is the questions of alignment and smoothness of
              the alignment which will be examined both in static and time-development
              settings.
