Title       : Quantum Dynamics and Spectral Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a9801474

Award Number: 9801474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113634             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoram Last ylast@cco.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9801474  Principal Investigator: Yoram Last    Abstract: The main
              aim of this project is the study of fundamental relations between dynamical
              properties of quantum mechanical systems, spectral properties of the
              corresponding operators, spatial properties of their eigenfunctions, and
              various other spectral related and transport related properties. The key model
              problem to be considered is that of a d-dimensional (time independent)
              Schroedinger operator and its associated free time evolution. The operators of
              interest here are mainly those with long-range potentials that do not converge
              to infinity, such that rich spectral phenomena and dynamical behaviors may
              arise. The study is expected to be applicable to a more general context of
              problems involving unitary time evolution. Moreover, the project is expected to
              provide effective tools for spectral analysis of unitary and self adjoint (in
              particular, Schroedinger) operators, as well as for the study of dynamical
              properties of the corresponding quantum systems.    The project aims at some
              fundamental questions of quantum mechanics that are expected to be important to
              modern physics. The core mathematical questions are also of interest in more
              general contexts, such as problems arising in classical chaos theory. The
              project would seek relations between various fundamental quantities that are
              associated with the systems under consideration. This is expected to provide
              improved and coherent understanding of such systems as a whole, as well as to
              provide effective analytical tools for the study of the properties themselves.
              The need to develop such general understanding arises in connection with
              various rich mathematical phenomena which until recently where mainly
              considered as theoretical curiosities. Recent studies show, however, that such
              phenomena occur in many natural models for physical systems that are now within
              experimental reach.
