Title       : Reductive Dual Pairs in Exceptional Groups: Cohomology, and Unipotent
               Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9801713

Award Number: 9801713
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70596              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Shu Li jsl@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Li    The ``classical'' theory of theta series and reductive dual
              pairs   in the symplectic group has become a standard part of representation  
              theory and automorphic forms, and continues to attract a great amount   of
              interest and activity. The analogous theory for exceptional groups   was begun
              just a few years ago, and is going through rapid development.   In previous NSF
              sponsored projects, the proposer fruitfully studied   some basic questions in
              the theory, such as  the correspondences of   infinitesimal characters, and
              developed new methods to determine the   discrete spectrum of exceptional dual
              pairs. Here he proposes to   continue his study of the remaining fundamental
              problems, and to apply   the results to specific problems such as cohomology of
              arithmetic   manifolds and unipotent representations. He plans to combine his
              own   methods with those of Burger and Sarnak, and hopes to establish close  
              relations  between discrete series of certain non-symmetric  homogeneous spaces
              and the spectrum of reductive dual pairs.         The theory of Lie group
              representations is concerned with the study of   certain kinds of symmetries.
              When two groups are embedded in a larger   ambient group in a interesting way,
              one could ask how the symmetries   of the larger group would behave upon
              restriction to the two embedded   groups. Frequently this leads to deep
              information which plays   important roles in both representation theory and
              number theory.   Building upon earlier work by the proposer and other
              mathematicians,   this project  aims to settle  several fundamental questions
              in   the study of such restrictions of symmetries, and apply the results   to
              the study of geometry and arithmetic  of various interesting   spaces
              associated to the groups in question.
