Title       : Optical Burst Switching - A New Paradigm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9801778

Award Number: 9801778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chunming Qiao qiao@computer.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              URL: http://www.acsu.buffalo.edu/~qiao/nsf_abs.html    There are two basic
              drivers for optical internetworks. One is the explosion of the multimedia
              (mainly data) traffic over the Internet, especially the World-Wide-Web, which
              as many discovered recently, can be bursty at all time scales and various
              multiplexing levels. The other is the continuing advances  of WDM optical
              networking technologies, which offer many opportunities to streamline both
              software (protocols) and hardware (electronic equipments) for reduced latency
              and cost.    The objective of this research is to explore a novel switching
              paradigm for WDM (Wavelength Division Multiplexed) optical networks, called
              Optical Burst Switching (OBS). OBS uses an offset time between a control (or
              set-up) packet and its corresponding data burst when making one-way delayed
              reservation, which facilitates all-optical data transfers and distinguishes it
              from other one-way reservation schemes   and label/tag switching schemes. By
              combining the best of the coarse-grained optical circuit switching (via
              wavelength routed lightpaths) and the fine-grained optical packet/cell
              switching, while avoiding their shortcomings, OBS can efficiently support
              applications requiring many short-lived (or bursty) sessions during which a
              substantial   amount of data needs to be transferred at a high bit rate and
              with a low end-to-end latency. More importantly, it will help realize the
              vision of building a flexible, efficient and bandwidth-abundant fiber-optic
              internetworking infrastructure capable of providing ubiquitous services through
              TCP/IP (as well as ATM and other existing and future protocols).  In this
              project, we will focus on the design and performance evaluation of   efficient
              OBS protocols that can reduce burst dropping probability, and support flow and
              congestion control as well as multicasting, priority and fault-tolerant
              routing. We will also study how upper layer protocols (e.g. IP) interact with
              OBS, investigate related optical-layer control and managemen t issues such as
              resource provisioning, protection and restoration, and in addition, compare OBS
              with other burst switching and  lable/tag switching techniques. Finally, we
              will examine the synchronization problem and the cost-effective designs of the
              interface between the upper layers and the optical layer as well as the designs
              of the WDM switches.
