Title       : Studies in Operator Algebras and Operator Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2001       
File        : a9801525

Award Number: 9801525
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger R. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Corran Webster  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dear Joe,     Please find below our abstract for the NSF grant. We hope it is
              what  you had in mind.     Best wishes for the new year,       Corran and Roger
                     The proposed research concerns the theory of operator algebras and
              operator   spaces. Smith will concentrate on the theory of von Neumann
              algebras, and   continue his work on the Kadison-Ringrose conjecture on the
              cohomology groups   of type II_1 factors. He will also investigate the Haagerup
              invariant for   operator algebras, which addresses the difficult problem of
              distinguishing   between various von Neumann algebras and C*-algebras. Webster
              will continue his   investigation of local operator spaces, the quantized
              version of locally convex   vector spaces, concentrating on applications to
              subalgebras of smooth elements   of C*-algebras, and algebras of unbounded
              operators. He will also pursue   applications of the Krein-Milman theorem in
              operator convexity theory, with the   particular aim of shedding light on the
              problem of the existence of boundary   representations. In joint work the
              proposers will consider various   approximation properties of operator algebras
              and operator spaces and these   will be connected to both the Haagerup
              invariant and operator compactness of   matrix sets.    Operator theory and
              operator algebras are the infinite dimensional analogues of   finite matrix
              theory. They were first studied by von Neumann as a framework for   quantum
              mechanics. Subsequently they have had, and continue to have, important  
              applications to control theory, quantum groups, non-commutative geometry,  
              non-commutative probability and knot theory. The work in this proposal is most 
               closely related to mathematical physics and quantum mechanics. We will
              consider   algebras of unbounded operators which arise from the Heisenberg
              Uncertainty   Principle, as well as crossed product C*-algebras which model the
              time evolution  of quantum mechanical systems in physics. The techniques we use
              rely heavily on   the theory of operator spaces , a topic which has undergone
              considerable   development in the last ten years. These spaces provide a
              unifying framework for  the self-adjoint algebras of physics and the
              non-self-adjoint algebras of   control theory.
