Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Labor Market Attainment in the Context of Mass
               Migration: The Case of Soviet JewishImmigrants in Israel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9801697

Award Number: 9801697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7489               (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Grusky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In conventional studies of immigrant labor attainment, researchers assume that
              the main question of interest is how an immigrant group adjusts to the host
              society, while that society remains largely unchanged. But when an immigrant
              group is large relative to the size of the host population, it is conceivable
              that the social structure of the host country will change in ways that affect
              the subsequent incorporation of immigrants into labor market positions. The
              purpose of this dissertation will be to determine whether conventional models
              of assimilation into a stable labor market still obtain under large migration
              streams. The case of Soviet Jewish immigrants in Israel is especially
              instructive in this regard because the size of the Soviet migration stream has
              varied greatly over time, with the most recent wave reaching extremely large
              and unprecedented proportions. The data for these analyses will come from three
              surveys administered by the Israeli Central Bureau of Statistics. These
              surveys, which include native-born Israelis as well as immigrants, contain
              detailed longitudinal information covering the period prior to migration (for
              immigrants) through the first few years in Israel. Regression models and
              log-linear models will be used to address the issues posed above. Results of
              these analyses will provide valuable knowledge concerning how variation in the
              size of an immigration stream affects both the distribution of immigrants into
              available labor market positions, as well as the overall shape of the labor
              market itself.
