Title       : Multivariable ComplexDynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9801074

Award Number: 9801074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diamond                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Diller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Diller proposes to study the iteration of rational maps on complex projective
              space, focusing primarily on birational maps of the projective plane. Chaotic
              sets for such maps tend to occur as the support of certain positive closed
              currents, thus pluripotential theory is a natural tool to use in understanding
              the dynamics of birational maps.  Diller plans to take this insight a step
              further, by understanding a birational map entirely in terms of its action on
              appropriately chosen positive currents.  For instance, he proposes to replace
              the projective plane by a dynamically defined quotient of the space of
              non-constant analytic disks as the natural domain of a birational map.  The
              hope is that since the refined domain will not have points which are
              indeterminate for the map, it will be a more natural setting for constructing
              and understanding the dynamically significant currents.   A dynamical system is
              any process that evolves in time-for instance, the weather or information
              traffic on the internet.   It is often both very useful and very difficult to
              understand the behavior of such systems.  The problems and solutions concerning
              such systems are often mathematical and can be reduced to sets of equations
              which can then be analyzed theoretically by hand or experimentally by computer
              simulation.  This work will contribute to the further understanding of still
              more complicated and ever more realistic systems.
