Title       : Partial Differential Equations and Variational Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9801250

Award Number: 9801250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60183              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Han Qing.Han.7@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9801250  ABSTRACT OF RESEARCH PROJECT   Principal Investigator: Qing Han    
               The principal investigator would like to continue his work on partial  
              differential equations and variational problems. The main theme of   this
              project, and also of the research of the PI over the past several   years, is
              to study special sets associated to solutions to differential   equations and
              variational problems. An important part of the study is   the investigation of
              the asymptotic behavior of the solutions near   these sets. The problems that
              the PI would continue to work on include   the geometric structure of level
              sets, in particular the nodal sets and   the singular sets. Such sets arise in
              the study of the axis of the   optical director in the Erickson model of liquid
              crystals. These sets   are also related to the singularities in the
              Ginzburg-Landau model in   the  superconductivity and in other geometric
              variational problems.   This study is partly motivated by the desire to
              understand to what   extent the solutions can be described quantitatively by
              polynomials or   by homogeneous solutions. These problems have a close
              connection with   other fields in mathematics, including several complex
              variables and   algebraic geometry.     The problems of the singular sets
              originate from  material sciences   and control theory. Singular sets, as the
              name suggests, are those   sets where singularities occur. Precise definitions
              vary according to   problems where they arise. In reality it is impossible to
              eliminate   the singular sets, the so-called "bad sets". Hence one of the
              central   tasks is to investigate under what condition the singular sets can be
                controlled and under what condition such sets are small. Another  
              application involves high-performance computing, in particular   image
              processing. One problem is to recover the image from a distorted   copy and the
              difference is measured exactly by some singular sets. It   is usually expected
              that such sets should be small enough to be neglected.   T he problems
              mentioned above in the project are simplified mathematical   models. It is the
              hope of the investigator that the discussion of these   mathematical problems
              will improve the methods to control the singular   sets in various
              applications.
