Title       : Aspects of Nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9801013

Award Number: 9801013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Bourgain bourgain@math.ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9801013  Jean Bourgain  ABSTRACT                      Aspects of nonlinear
              Hamiltonian PDE's                               J. Bourgain         1. The PI
              intend to continue research on several aspects of nonlinear  Hamiltonian PDE's.
              A first line of investigation is the KAM-theory for PDE's   (on bounded domains
              - assuming periodic boundary conditions say), concerned   with existence and
              persistency of time periodic and quasi-periodic solutions.   A second theme is
              the wellposedness theory for the initial value problem with   special emphasis
              on critical nonlinearity and data of minimal regularity.       The first
              research direction is closely related to the theory of smooth  dynamical
              systems (here in infinite dimensional phase space) and localization   theory
              for lattice Schrodinger operators.  There has been a substantial  
              technological progress over the recent years leading also to results in higher 
               space dimension (D > 2), for instance in the construction of time-periodic  
              solutions and quasi-periodic solutions for 2D NLS.  But these developments are 
               still in an initial stage and a lot of challenging work needs to be done  
              involving mainly so-called "small-dimension" questions.        The second
              direction aims to exploit recent advances in Harmonic Analysis  And its
              interplay with conservation laws and apriori inequalities, in order to  
              progress on some of the remaining open problems on the Cauchy problem for  
              certain nonlinear Schrodinger equations for instance, with critical  
              nonlinearity.  A typical issue are the global wellposedness questions in the  
              defocusing case for large data.         2. Nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE's such as
              the nonlinear wave equations   (NLW) and nonlinear Schrodinger equations (NLS)
              are mathematical models in a   number of issues in physics and engineering. 
              They are studied by many   distinct groups of scientists, with different
              emphasis and often different   (mathematical) tools. My interest in this
              proposal is an analytically purely   rigorous inv estigation. From this point
              of view NLW (resp, NLS) are the   typical model equations for finite (resp.
              infinite) speed propagation.  When considering questions of global dynamics,
              one should distinguish the   case of bounded and unbounded spatial domains
              where different features should     be expected and the "natural" problems
              (often unsolved) are also distinct.  Of course, a first question to ask is
              whether the solution exists for all time   and remains smooth in case of smooth
              data.  Next is the question of long time   behaviour, both for individual data
              and the dynamics in various phase space.    In the case of bounded domains, we
              are particularly interested in almost   periodic behaviour.  On the line, due
              to dispersion, scattering often occurs   and we intend to investigate this
              phenomenon in certain critical cases.
