Title       : Partial Differential Equations and Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9801091

Award Number: 9801091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62544              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mei-Chi Shaw mei-chi.shaw.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9801091  Principal Investigator: Mei-Chi Shaw    Abstract: Shaw
              plans to continue her investigation of partial differential equations that
              arise in the theory of functions of several complex variables. In particular,
              the regularity of the Cauchy-Riemann equations on Lipschitz domains and
              function theory on such domains will be studied. This work represents a natural
              extension of recent progress on the Dirichlet and Neumann boundary value
              problems on Lipschitz domains to boundary value problems that are not coercive.
              Harmonic analysis and a priori estimates will be used in order to obtain the
              optimal regularity property of the solution. Related problems on the boundary
              behaviour of holomorphic functions on Lipschitz domains, zeros of holomorphic
              functions, and Bergman projection on non-smooth domains will also be studied.
              In addition, Shaw intends to continue her research on the tangential
              Cauchy-Riemann equations, including such topics as the regularity of the
              solutions and embedding problems for abstract CR structures. Boundary
              regularity problems for sum- of-squares operators and other subelliptic
              operators constitute a third focal point of the project.     Motivated by such
              fundamental physical problems as the conduction of heat through a solid medium,
              the classical Dirichlet and Neumann problems have for almost two centuries been
              central to the study of analysis. Through the use of technical tools like
              potential theory, Schauder estimates, and singular integral theory, these
              problems have now become quite well understood in the case of a domain with
              smooth boundary. The extension of this understanding to the setting where the
              boundary is not necessarily smooth, a situation encountered more and more
              frequently in applications of several complex variables to problems in physics
              and engineering, has been an active area of recent research. In fact, novel
              approaches employing geometric measure theory, Schauder estimates with
              non-smooth coefficients, and harmonic measure have been em ployed to tackle
              these problems, a process that has led to the development of many new fields
              and methods. Within the last thirty years very precise results have been
              obtained concerning elliptic boundary value problems for domains that are not
              smooth, but have so-called "Lipschitz boundaries." The Neumann problem for the
              Cauchy-Riemann complex presents the next great challenge in this area. Not only
              will it be interesting from the point of view of partial differential
              equations, but it will also have many applications in the function theory of
              several complex variables - and beyond. The problem will be solved, however,
              only with the injection of significant new ideas.
