Title       : Operator Algebraic Structures and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1999    
File        : a9801324

Award Number: 9801324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $457995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masamichi Takesaki mt@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sorin Popa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Effros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Effros/Popa/Takesaki    The three PI's and their students will
              continue their investigations in operator algebra theory.  Edward Effros is
              embarking on a major program of understanding non-commutative functional
              analysis in collaboration with Zhong-Jin Ruan, using the theory of "quantized"
              Banach spaces.  Sorin Popa will be continuing his investigation of subfactor
              theory in both its analytic and combinatorial aspects.  Masamichi Takesaki will
              be taking advantage of the enormous progress that he and his collaborators have
              made in finding the intrinsic underlying structure of von Neumann algebras to
              make further progress.  This work has enabled him to formulate a paradigm for
              classification problems in mathematics that bypasses the non-classifiability
              theory of Mackey.    It is only now becoming clear that the abstruse notions of
              quantum physics pondered by Bohr, Einstein, and Heisenberg in the early part of
              this century, will have profound effect on modern technology.  In particular,
              we will be able to exploit the classifically inconceivable predictions of
              quantum mechanics to build new kinds of computers, measure physical quantities
              with unprecedented accuracy, and make new materials with remarkable properties.
               These possibilities were to some degree foreseen by John von Neumann, who
              invented the correct mathematical language for quantum mechanics.  He was the
              first mathematician to realize that since mathematics is based on fundamentally
              mistaken ideas of geometry and matter arising from classical physics, it was
              incumbent on mathematicians to develop new forms of "quantized mathematics". 
              For that purpose he introduced the area of operator algebras, which now
              constitutes one of the most exciting branches of modern mathematics.  This
              subject has important applications to geometry, algebra, probability theory,
              and mathematical physics.  The participants in this grant are pursuing some of
              the most exciting directions in this field.  These include the exploration of
              quantized symmetry  (Popa:  subfactor theory), the quantized version of
              infinite dimensional analysis (Effros:  operator spaces), and understanding the
              classification problems of operator algebra and its deep implications for such
              problems throughout mathematics (Takesaki:  von Neumann algebras).
