Title       : Disjunctive Planning: A Unified Approach for Scaling up Plansynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9801676

Award Number: 9801676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subbarao Kambhampati rao@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recently, several new and efficient approaches have been developed for plan
              synthesis that relate plan synthesis to constraint satisfaction.  At present,
              there exist a huge gulf between these new breed of algorithms and the
              traditional refinement planning approaches.  The PI has developed a
              generalization of the refinement planning framework within which the newer
              approaches mentioned can all be seen as particular instances of a distinguished
              subclass of refinement planners called "disjunctive planners."  This insight
              opens up several exciting avenues of focused research: Could the missing
              planners corresponding to the other instances of general disjunctive planning
              be more efficient?  What are the tradeoffs governing the efficiency of these
              spectrum of planners?  How does one effectively transfer the progress made in
              improving the performance of non-disjunctive planners to disjunctive planners? 
              The PI proposes several specific research tasks to answer these questions.  The
              proposed disjunctive planning framework bridges the areas of constraint
              satisfaction, planning and propositional reasoning, and promises to offer a
              radically efficient substrate for plan-synthesis. The framework bridges the
              areas of constraint satisfaction, planning and propositional reasoning, and
              promises to offer a radically efficient substrate for plan-synthesis.  The
              framework also supports seamless integration of planning and scheduling.
