Title       : Global Solutions of Semilinear Parabolic and Elliptic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9801271

Award Number: 9801271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carlos Berenstein                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Qi S. Zhang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Qi S. Zhang  DMS-9801271    GLOBAL SOLUTIONS OF SEMILINEAR PARABOLIC AND
              ELLIPTIC EQUATIONS    The proposed research is on the existence, nonexistence
              and singularity formations of global solutions to semilinear parabolic and
              elliptic equations and systems which arise naturally in many diverse fields
              such as geometry, chemistry, biology and physics.  These equations include,
              among others, the equations of prescribed scalar curvatures, reaction diffusion
              equations and systems.  The primary goal is to find conditions (optimal if
              possible) so that these equations shall have global positive solutions;
              solutions with sufficiently regular local behavior such as continuity; good
              asymptotic behavior when time becomes large; solutions that blow up in finite
              time.  In the case solutions blow up, an effort will also be made to understand
              the pattern of singularities.    The mathematical problems under investigations
              arise from model problems in several practical areas such as nonlinear heat
              transfer, biology, chemical reaction theory, physics.  These natural
              phenomenons are described by certain semilinear or nonlinear partial
              differential equations.  One of the central problems is to understand when or
              if solutions to these equations may be stable in the long run, and when or if
              solutions may blow up in finite time.  These will give important information to
              the physical models as whether a chemical reaction may blow up or stabilize in
              long time, or whether shocks may be formed in wave propagations, and whether or
              not two competing species may co-exist.
