Title       : Dissertion Research: Reciprocal Interactions Among Inbreeding, Mate Choice, and
               Fitness in the Monogamous Old- Field Mouse, Peromyscus Polionotus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9801424

Award Number: 9801424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14067              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne Altmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Non-Technical Abstract    This project will evaluate the interrelationships
              among  inbreeding, mate choice, and reproduction in the monogamous  old-field
              mouse.  Inbred juvenile old-field mice are smaller  and suffer increased
              mortality.  Consequently, adults are  predicted to maximize offspring
              production by choosing  unrelated mates with which they will produce outbred, 
              healthier pups.  Inbred adult female old-field mice suffer  reduced fertility. 
              Therefore, males are predicted to  maximize offspring production by choosing
              outbred mates.  These predictions will be tested using a controlled 
              experimental design.  This study will also investigate  potential physiological
              reasons for the reduced fertility of  inbred adult females.    Habitat
              fragmentation and over-harvesting continue to reduce  the size of many wild
              animal populations.  When populations  are small, and are separated from one
              another by suburbs and  farms, there is increased risk of inbreeding.  It is 
              important to understand how this can impact population  growth rates.  If
              inbred adults have reduced fertility and  if they are rejected as potential
              mates, small inbreeding  populations are at risk of extinction.  However, if
              animals  distinguish among potential mates based on their degree of 
              relatedness, the incidence of inbreeding is reduced.  The  old-field mouse will
              serve as a good model system in which  to address these broadly applicable
              questions.
