Title       : SBIR Phase II: An Inexpensive, Nanometer Resolution Interferometer for Education
               and Training
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9801035

Award Number: 9801035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396215             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen F. Fulghum sfulghum@srl.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shrenik Deliwala  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Science Research Lab Inc
	      15 Ward Street
	      Somerville, MA  02143    617/547-1122

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9801035  Deliwala  This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
              project from Science Research Laboratory, co-funded by the SBIR Program in the
              Division of Design, Manufacture, and Industrial Innovation and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences, proposes to develop an Educational Interferometer (EI)--a rugged,
              inexpensive, easily aligned optical interferometer is instrumentation
              specifically designed for education and training.  The EI will be an
              affordable, innovative research-grade instrument that will improve the way
              physics is taught; illustrate the basic concepts of wave interference; and
              demonstrate the application of high-precision measurements to numerous
              disciplines.  It will resolve optical-path differences of less than one
              nanometer, i.e., 10 to 100 times better than interferometers presently used in
              education.  It can also play a vital role in the training of technicians,
              engineers, and physicists in industry where increasingly sophisticated optical
              instruments are used.  For example, interferometer-based diagnostics are used
              to measure the position accuracy and repeatability of production equipment such
              as coordinate measuring machines for determining the quality of manufactured
              goods and for assessing machining performance of machining centers and turning
              centers.  Positioning devices using interferometers are critical to the
              manufacturing of leading-edge semiconductor chips; laser gyroscopes use
              interferometry to guide airplanes and satellites.  Interferometry and
              electro-optics provide light-switching in fiber optic phone networks.  Science
              Research Laboratory can improve the interferometer design created in Phase I so
              that the total cost of instrument parts can be reduced to approximately
              $500--including optics, ultra-stable mounts, a diode laser, and
              shot-noise-limited electronics that incorporate two balanced detectors and a
              fringe counter thus making it affordable so that it can be widely use in edu
              cational and training settings.  The project will develop a curriculum around
              the EI and an instruction guide for students and instructors.  The instrument
              will be field tested at universities with the ultimate goal of making it
              suitable for use at industrial training sites and two-year colleges.  The
              interferometer is an inherently flexible instrument with a long history of
              applications.  Thus, the scope of new, sensitive experiments made possible by
              the introduction of the EI is vast.  Science Research Laboratory's EI will thus
              become an ideal tool for conveying the excitement of modern science and
              technology to students.  Aside from the educational and training applications,
              other immediate potential applications of this interferometer are a laser
              calorimeter, detector of trace chemical species, femtosecond spectroscopy, and
              locking lasers to atomic or molecular transitions.  ***
