Title       : Structures and Electrical Properties of Hydrogen-Containing Defects in
               Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9801843

Award Number: 9801843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Stavola mjsa@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9801843 
              Stavola    This   experimental  research  is  focused  on  the  nature   and 
              properties  of  hydrogen-containing  deep  level  impurities   in 
              semiconductors.  Hydrogen  is often  used  for  passivation,  for  example  to 
              fill  dangling  bond states  in  amorphous  silicon,  reducing the density of
              states in the energy gap. In other cases,  under  study  here, hydrogen may
              attach to a deep level  impurity  resulting in a new complex which is
              electrically active. Examples  of  such  deep level states in n-type silicon
              are AuH,  AuH2  and  FeAuH centers, whose identities and structures may be
              established  by  IR  absorption and Deep Level Transient Spectroscopy  (DLTS). 
              The  work carried out under this grant uses the methods cited and  also  ESR, 
              on impurity doped semiconductor specimens  which  are  typically hydrogen
              annealed and electron irradiated using  a  Van  de  Graaff accelerator. Of
              interest are the electrical properties  and  the structural properties of such
              defects. The work is  also  concerned  with  theoretical modeling of the 
              defects  and  their  properties. This research program is interdisciplinary in 
              nature  and  typically  involves one or more undergraduate  and  graduate 
              students,  who  receive  excellent training  in  preparation  for  careers in
              industry, government laboratories or academia.  %%%  This   experimental 
              research  is  focused  on  the  nature   and  electrical   properties  of  a 
              specific  type  of  impurity   in  semiconductors  such as silicon. Silicon is
              a basic  material  in  producing  microelectronic devices for computers and 
              many  other  applications. Silicon must be highly purified for successful  use 
              in producing transistors and other microelectronic devices.  Even  extremelly 
              small concentrations of impurities, such as  gold  or  iron,  or  of defects
              such as vacant lattice sites, can  be  very  important.  It is useful to know
              the details of the defects  that  can   occur, and to learn of the possible
              electrical actions  that  can  result.  This project is devoted to learning the
               electrical  and  structural  properties of a class  of  impurity  defects  in 
              silicon and related semiconductors. These defects are produced by  a 
              combination of a "deep level" impurity such as gold  or  iron,  with  hydrogen.
              Hydrogen is sometimes introduced in semiconductor  processing because in many
              cases it "passivates", or reduces  the  electrical effects, of certain
              impurities or defects. However, in  the cases under study in this work, the
              hydrogen has the opposite  effect,   of   making  the  normally  passive  
              "deep   impurity"  electrically  active.  The  methods  involved  in  this 
              research  involve  semiconductor  specimens which are  intentionally  doped 
              with, eg, iron or gold, and subsequently annealed in hydrogen and  bombarded 
              with  high  energy electrons  from  a  Van  de  Graaff  accelerator.  These
              steps make the defects; study is  done  by  a  combination of optical
              absorption in the infrared range, electron  spin resonance, and a technique for
              measuring electrically active  defect  properties known as "Deep Level
              Transient  Spectroscopy".  This  basic research adds to scientific
              understanding of  silicon  and   other  semiconductors,  which  are  at  the 
              heart  of  the  microelectronics and computer technologies. The  information 
              may  be useful in the design and successful operation of manufacturing 
              processes   for  microelectronics.  This  research   program   is 
              interdisciplinary in nature and typically involves  one  or  more 
              undergraduate  and  graduate  students,  who  receive   excellent  training  in
               preparation  for careers  in  industry,  government  laboratories or academia.
               ***
