Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Phylogenetics and Biogeography of the Genus
               Myioborus (Aves, Parulinae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a9801524

Award Number: 9801524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Blake blakej@msx.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Ricklefs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9801524  Blake    Neotropical montane regions are areas of high diversity and
              endemism, and are, therefore, special areas of concern for conservation of
              biodiversity.  Because of their island-like distribution, these montane regions
              provide a natural laboratory for studying processes responsible for the
              generation of biodiversity, including evolutionary differentiation among
              populations and species.  In this project, we shall use mitochondrial DNA
              sequence data to determine the evolutionary relationships among species and
              populations of birds known as tropical redstarts (Myioborus).  The small
              warblers are distributed at higher elevations from the southwestern United
              States to Argentina with many endemics in Central America, the Andes, and the
              Venezuelan highlands (Pantepui region), although a few species are widely
              distributed.   Relationships between Venezuelan and Andean populations are
              enigmatic because species that appear to be the most similar sometimes are the
              most distant geographically.   Furthermore, resolution of the intriguing
              question of whether species in the ancient Pantepui region of Venezuela are
              ancestral to Andean species or are derived from them can be only by a
              phylogenetic analysis of their relationships.  This study will use DNA
              sequences to establish relationships, reconstruct the historical biogeography,
              and examine the evolution of body size and shape, as well as plumage
              coloration, in Myioborus.  The results of the study will allow us to establish
              taxonomic limits within the genus, more accurately assess biodiversity patterns
              in the group, and contribute to our general understanding of organismal
              diversification in the Pantepui region of Venezuela and of the historical
              relationships between Central and South American montane avifaunas.
