Title       : Motion By Curvature In Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9801337

Award Number: 9801337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63243              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gieri Simonett simonett@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Gieri Simonett   DMS-9801337  ABSTRACT:    Over the last years the PI has
              worked on various free boundary problems  and has studied existence,
              uniqueness, regularity, and qualitative properties   of classical solutions for
              such models as the gravitational flow of a fluid   in a porous medium, the
              multi-dimensional one-phase Hele-Shaw problem,   the one and two-phase
              Mullins-Sekerka model,the quasi-stationary Stefan   problem with surface
              tension, and the surface diffusion flow.This research  led to the solution of
              some long-standing open problems. In this project   the PI will continue to
              study geometric evolution problems for surfaces   driven by mean curvature.
              These models are widely used in material sciences, physics, and chemistry to
              model phase changes, domain growth,and interface controlled crystal growth.
              Progress on the mathematical front will   necessarily have an impact in
              material sciences.    The Mullins-Sekerka model is a nonlocal geometric
              evolution law in which   the normal velocity of a propagating interface depends
              on the jump   across the interface of the normal derivative of a function which
                is harmonic on either side and which equals the mean curvature on   the
              propagating interface. It was introduced to study solidification and
              liquidation of materials of zero specific heat and has attracted considerable
              attention since then.Important contributions by Alikakos, Bates and Chen   have
              tied this  model to a singular limit for the Cahn-Hilliard equation, a fourth
              order parabolic equation which is widely used as a model for phase separation
              and coarsening phenomena in a melted binary alloy.  This model has also been
              proposed to account for aging or Ostwald ripening   in phase transitions. In
              general, the kinetics of a first order phase transition is characterized by a
              first stage where small droplets of a new phase are created out of the old
              phase, e.g., solid formation in an undercooled   liquid. The first stage,
              called nucleation,yields a large number of small particles .During the next
              stage the nuclei grow rapidly at the expense of the old phase.When the phase
              regions are formed,the mass of the new phase is close to equilibrium and the
              amount of undercooling is small,but large surface area is present.At the next
              stage, the configuration of phase regions is coarsened, and the geometric shape
              of the phase regions become simpler and simpler,   eventually tending to
              regions of minimum surface area with given volume.  The driving force of this
              process comes from the need to decrease the interfacial energy. There have been
              considerable effortsin finding a theory which describes Ostwald ripening, and
              the Mullins-Sekerka model is a prominent candidate.The surface diffusion flow
              and the intermediate surface diffusion flow are geometric evolution problems
              which model morphological changes where surface diffusion and interface
              kinetics are the transport mechanisms.   These laws constitute a class of
              dynamic problems where the volume   is conserved and the driving force is
              surface energy reduction.
