Title       : Continuous Metal-Insulator Transitions in Highly Correlated Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9801824

Award Number: 9801824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Rosenbaum t-rosenbaum@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                    9801824  Rosenbaum  In this research
              conducted by Prof. Th. A. Rosenbaum of the James  Franck  Institute  of the
              University of Chicago  the  problem  of  metal-insulator   (MI)  transitions 
              resulting  from   continuous  changes   in   external   parameters   will   be 
               experimentally  investigated.    Specifically,   the   continuous   
              Mott-Hubbard  transition  in  NiS(2-x)Sex, the MI transition in  metal  hydride
               films,  and  the  MI  transition in vanadium sesquioxide  in  the  highly 
              disordered limit will be studied.  These researches  have  important bearing on
              the properties of novel materials,  such  as  transition  metal  oxides  and
              sulfides, high-Tc  superconducting  cuprates, giant magnetoresistance
              manganates, and others that are  governed  by strong charge carrier
              correlations.  The purpose  of  this  research is to elucidate the fundamental
              nature of  the  MI  transition  in  materials  where  electron-electron 
              interactions  dominate  and  where  it  is possible  to  apply  the  experience
               obtained from studies of continuous phase transitions.  %%%  Many materials of
              current technological importance, such as,  for  example,  transition metal
              oxides and sulfides,  metal  hydrides,  high-temperature      superconducting  
                cuprates,      colossal  magnetoresistance manganates,  exhibit behaviors
              that are not yet  fully understood.  This absence of detailed understanding
              impedes  their  efficient  application  in technological  devices.   Among 
              these  properties is the continuous change of a material  from  a  metal  to 
              an insulator (MI) in systems in which the behavior  of  the  electric charge
              carriers is highly correlated.  For example,  at  liquid  helium temperatures
              the electrical conductivities  of  materials can vary by 32 orders of
              magnitude.  It was only during  the  last  year  that  materials systems were 
              discovered  (doped  semiconductors and amorphous alloys) in which the  MI 
              transition  proceeds in a continuous manner in  response to the variations  of 
              an  external  parameter.   The purpose of  this  research  is  to  elucidate  
              the  fundamental  nature  of  the  MI  transition  in  materials where
              electron-electron interactions dominate and where  it  is  possible to apply
              the experience obtained from continuous  phase  transitions.  The results of
              these investigations will  be  of  great importance for the development and
              application  of  new  and improved electronic solid state materials.  ***
