Title       : CPMSA: Little Rock Partnership for Mathematics and Science Achievement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a9801615

Award Number: 9801615
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3228022            (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Kenneth James   (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie V. Carnine  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Little Rock School Dist
	      600 S Ringo St
	      Little Rock, AR  72201    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9801615  Carnine    The Little Rock Partnership for Mathematics and Science
              Achievement  (LRPMSA) is a collaborative effort for systemic reform of public 
              education that will impact all students.  The program goals are to  increase
              student enrollment and success in courses in mathematics  and science and to
              encourage continued study through higher  education toward careers in science,
              mathematics, and engineering.    To accomplish these goals, the Little Rock
              School District has  built a partnership effort among leading institutions in
              the  central Arkansas area.  Program partners include:  higher education  - the
              University of Arkansas at Little Rock, Philander Smith  College and the
              University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences; the  Arkansas Museum of Science
              and History; municipal agencies - the  City of Little Rock and Little Rock
              Housing Authority; the Central  Arkansas Library System; and the Little Rock
              Alliance for Our  Public Schools, a business/community association dedicated to
               excellence in public education.    The LRPMSA program focuses on curriculum
              revision and staff  development programs to increase the capacity of educators
              to  motivate students and provide more effective instruction.    Program goals
              include:  o    Prepare 100% of graduates to successfully complete Algebra.  o  
               Increase the number of students who successfully complete       upper-level
              mathematics and science courses.  o    Adopt a Board policy to require that
              students in AP courses       take the AP examination.  o    Revise the
              mathematics curriculum to limit the number of       topics for each grade level
              and subject and to increase the       depth at which each topic is taught.  o  
               Implement standards-based modules in each elementary/middle       school
              mathematics and science classroom.  o    Provide the support programs for
              students in upper level       mathematics and science courses.  o    Increase
              the knowledge and involvement of parents in the       mathematics and science
              programs.  o    Prov ide targeted staff development to assist staff in      
              facilitating the above stated objectives.
