Title       : Workshop on Distributed Geolibraries: Spatial Information Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1998      
File        : a9801753

Award Number: 9801753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Usselman usselman@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Traditional libraries have developed sophisticated tools for abstracting and
              cataloging their contents, allowing users to find information efficiently. The
              flood of digital information that is now available via the Internet and other
              technologies has overwhelmed these tools, and created an urgent need for new
              methods. Geographic location is one basis for organizing information that has
              been underexploited in the traditional library, but is much more practical in
              the digital world. A geolibrary is a library filled with georeferenced
              information and accessed using geographic location as the primary key. The full
              power of the geolibrary lies in its ability to provide access to types of
              information not normally found in libraries. The project entails a workshop to
              (1) develop a vision of geolibraries for organizing information resources using
              spatial reference and search mechanisms; (2) identify the research and policy
              issues associated with the development of distributed geolibraries; and (3)
              facilitate greater collaboration between various research and technology
              development projects related to geolibraries. Participants will be drawn from
              the disciplines of information and library science, computer science,
              geography, and related fields. They include participants who have had
              experience in building parts of the geolibrary, and others who can place its
              problems within broader scientific contexts. The project will result in an
              Academy report which will be widely distributed both in conventional form and
              on the Internet. The report will describe the vision of the geolibrary, its
              current practicality, and the research and development that will be needed to
              make it a reality.     http://www2.nas.edu/besr/230a.html
