Title       : SBIR PHASE II: A New Approach to Local Area Damage Detection in Composite
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a9801489

Award Number: 9801489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386344             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Sofge sofge@visuallink.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NeuroDyne Inc
	      One Kendall Square, Building 200
	      Cambridge, MA  02139    617/252-3360

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                ***  9801489  Sofge    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project will explore a new approach to detection, classification, and location
              of damage to structural composite parts, providing a means for sensing
              structural degradation such as delaminations, fatigue and other damage. 
              Piezoelectric transducer technology may be used for sensing various structural
              properties such as stress, strain, and elasticity when sensors are mounted on,
              or embedded within, a material structure.  Structures may degrade due to
              improper manufacture, duty cycle wear, impacts, and material corrosion.  The
              advanced structural concept proposed here is the use of these sensors to
              measure changes likely to be damage to an aircraft part.  The method is to use
              high-frequency acoustic signals to extract the vibration signature from a
              structure.  This vibration signature is then compared with that of a normal
              undamaged structure and the signature changes are used by software to extract
              metrics related to the health of the structure.  These metrics are then used to
              diagnose the severity of damage and to locate the damage on the structure.  The
              software uses a statistically based technique which accommodates normal
              variation of the signature on a structure, while accurately identifying changes
              in the signature due to delamination and other structural damage.     The
              advanced structural monitoring concepts being sought have potential for
              commercial use in the civil transportation industry for aircraft, automobiles,
              trucks and boats and in the commercial space industry for boosters and
              satellites.  ***
