Title       : CPMSA: Beaumont Independent School District: Enterprise 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a9801773

Award Number: 9801773
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5798094            (Estimated)
Investigator: Carrol A. Thomas cthomas@beaumont.k12.tx.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra G. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beaumont Indep Sch Dist
	      3395 Harrison Avenue
	      Beaumont, TX  77706    409/981-7750

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9801773  Thomas    Designed to increase the aspirations of minority
              students, Enterprise 2002, as systemic initiative, guarantees a  strong
              mathematics and science foundation upon completion of high school.  Minority
              students graduating from  Beaumont Independent School District (BISD) will be
              prepared for university studies in science, mathematics,  engineering and
              technology (SMET) fields.  The project targets all BISD students,
              pre-kindergarten through twelfth  grade in thirty schools and assimilates all
              partners in contact with students:  principals, teachers, counselors,  business
              partners, community volunteers, parents, professionals, university experts in
              mathematics and science and  minority scholars.  The nucleus of Enterprise 2002
              encompasses professional development, minority student  support, activities
              beyond the school day and standard based curriculum enhancements.  Professional
              development  incorporates innovative instructional strategies, such as
              cooperative learning, diversity awareness, inquiry learning,  problem based
              learning, and assessment, and recent research in changes in math and science. 
              Student support  includes tutorials involving community volunteers, business
              partners, guidance and career awareness seminars,  clergy in schools, and
              parental support groups.  Activities beyond the school day include:  summer
              programs,  Saturday Academies, and after school projects that are designed to
              increase awareness of careers in science,  engineering, mathematics and
              technology, and strengthen student performance.  The standards based curriculum
              and  classroom materials will be augmented with National Science and Technology
              Week Projects, Future Math and  Science Teacher Clubs, Create Southeast Texas,
              Math 24 Challenge Tournaments, Insights, Voyager, Science  Sleuths, Lego Dacta
              Math, Science, and technology programs, SAT and PSAT preparation courses,
              University  Interscholastic League (UIL) competitions, Future Problem Solving,
              Odyssey of the Mind, Young Astronauts,  Minor ities in Science, Family Math and
              Family Science.  We have also implemented a tuition free Educational 
              Enhancement Program for Non-Degree BISD personnel designed to recruit minority
              teachers in mathematics and  science from within the district.  In other words,
              we are growing our own mathematics and science teachers.  Since  significant
              partnerships have already been established with many local organizations
              (universities, businesses,  museums, industries community organizations),
              implementation of Enterprise 2002 will proceed at a rapid pace.   Enterprise
              2002 complements the BISD Board of Trustee's primary goal of reducing rapid
              disparity in achievement  by channeling more minority students into advanced
              classes and ensuring that all students are better prepared to  enter the
              science, engineering, and mathematics pipeline after graduation.  This project
              is a systemic initiative driven  by high achievement standards for all state
              and local accountabilities.  An advisory council composed of all partners  will
              oversee the implementation of Enterprise 2002.  Evaluation of student
              achievement will be documented through  various data resources:  results of
              performance based and criterion referenced state and local assessments, course 
              grades, attitudinal surveys, student projects/portfolios, and pre-college
              courses successfully completed.  Beaumont  Independent School District is
              committed to Enterprise 2002 and will continue with the systemic reform in 
              mathematics and science even after the National Science Foundation (NSF)
              funding ceases and will present a plan  for sustaining the reform.    Goals:  o
                     To double the number of minority students enrolled in and successfully
              completing  science,           engineering, and mathematics pre-college
              courses.  o        To improve teacher expectations and diversify instructional
              methods through staff  development and           content proficiency in
              science, mathematics, engineering and technology    (SMET) pipeline courses.  o
                     To improve st udent achievement in mathematics and science education in
              grades Pre K-12.    Enterprise 2002 will receive priority in the Beaumont
              Independent School District (BISD) for it directly supports  the district
              goals.  See Section J, Appendix A, for the district mission and goals.
