Title       : Dissertation Research: Sexual Conflict and Constraints on Female Breeding
               Tactics in a Monogamous Passerine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9801695

Award Number: 9801695
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Westneat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Non-technical Summary      Ecological factors have a variety of effects on the
              behavior  of  organisms. However, relatively little is known in detail  about
              how these factors translate into different behavioral  decisions. This study
              will address ecological and social  variables affecting behavioral decisions
              during reproduction  in a seldom-studied migratory songbird, the
              yellow-breasted  chat. A combination of radiotelemetry, molecular genetics, 
              behavioral observation and field experiments will be used to  follow the
              movements, mating patterns, and behavioral  choices of both males and females.
              Additionally ecological  variables (vegetation density and food abundance) will
              be  measured. This study will assess the often cryptic movements  of chats
              (particularly females), offspring paternity,  behavior of each sex in relation
              to the other, and the  consequences for the reproductive success of
              individuals.  This study has several scientifically important features.  First,
              it  will test general processes, proposed in more theoretical  literature,
              shaping male/female interactions. Second, it  will provide a more detailed
              understanding of the effect of  ecological factors on breeding behavior. These
              features will  offer valuable insight into the potential problems faced by  a
              little-known migratory songbird and  also uncover some of the ways in which
              these problems are  overcome. Finally, this project will enhance the training
              of  promising graduate and undergraduate students.
