Title       : Extremal Problems, Orthogonal Polynomials and Approximation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a9801677

Award Number: 9801677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181455             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Saff   (Principal Investigator current)
              E.A. Rakhmanov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Grant Title: Extremal Problems, Orthogonal Polynomials, and              
              Approximation Theory    Principal Investigator: Edward B. Saff   Co-Principal
              Investigator: E. A. Rakhmanov      The project involves the use of potential
              theory and operator theory  to investigate three main problem areas: (1)
              discretization of the surface   of the unit sphere in N-dimensions, including
              asymptotics for minimal   energy arrangements and algorithms for constructing
              near optimal points;   (2) weak and strong asymptotics for orthogonal
              polynomials with respect  to continuous and discrete weights; and (3) best
              rational and meromorphic   approximation in function spaces, including
              generalizations of the   theory of Adamyan, Arov, and Krein.      The main
              problem to be investigated concerns finding nearly optimal   arrangements of
              large numbers of points (typically in the hundreds or   thousands) on the
              surface of a sphere so that these points are uniformly   dispersed with respect
              to area on the sphere (i.e., the proportion of   points lying in an arbitrary
              cap is close to the ratio obtained by   dividing the area of the cap by the
              total area of the sphere). For this   purpose the investigators will use
              minimum energy criteria which were   introduced in a previous NSF grant. By
              analyzing the asymptotic behavior   (as the number of points grows large), the
              investigators aim to devise   simple schemes that generate configurations with
              near minimal energy. The   importance of this problem is underscored in a
              recent article by S.Smale,   who lists the study of such spherical point
              schemes as one of the eighteen   main mathematical problem areas for the next
              century. Indeed this study   has a wide variety of practical applications,
              among which are the   following: (1) the structural analysis of large, stable,
              carbon molecules   (known as fullerenes); (2) the determination of optimal
              sampling points on    the Earth's surface for data gathered by orbiting
              satellites; and (3) the   testing of radar sensors for aircraft  when spherical
               coverage around the aircraft is essential.
