Title       : SBIR Phase II: Investigation of Novel Genetic Resource for Rootworm Resistance
               in Corn
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9801386

Award Number: 9801386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary W. Eubanks eubanks@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sun Dance Genetics
	      8 Pilton Place
	      Durham, NC  27705    919/490-6324

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9801386  Eubanks  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              will investigate the opportunity to confer rootworm resistance to corn via
              newly developed germ plasm.  Corn rootworm, Diabrotica spp., is the most
              expensive insect pest of corn.  Larvae hatch from eggs deposited in soil and
              feed primarily on corn roots.  Root damage from larval feeding causes lodging,
              affects water uptake by the plant, and reduces grain yield.  Combined yield
              loss and pesticide treatment costs exceed $1 billion annually.  Tripsacum
              dactyloiodes,  a wild relative of Zea mays, is known to be resistant to corn
              rootworm larvae.  Plant breeders, however, have not been able to utilize
              resistance from Tripsacum effectively because of the high degree of sterility
              in maize-Tripsacum hybrids.  A hybrid between Tripsacum and another wild
              relative of maize, Zea diploperennis, has been developed by the principal
              investigator.  The Tripsacum-diploperennis hybrid is an important technological
              breakthrough because it is highly fertile and cross fertile with corn.  As a
              bridge species, it provides an unprecedented advantage for moving valuable
              Tripsacum genes into corn.  Phase I insect bioassays testing 254 plants
              pollinated by Tripsacum-diploperennis indicated rootworm resistance is
              transferred to corn via this novel hybrid.  Chi square analysis based on root
              rating scores verified resistance segregates 3:1.  This confirms rootworm
              resistant corn can be developed commercially through a breeding and selection
              program. Lower larval weights and lack of feeding on resistant plants indicates
              the mechanism is a combination of antibiosis and anlixenosis.  Enhanced growth
              of treated over control plants indicates hybrids also have higher tolerance for
              insect herbivory.  During Phase II, investigation and elucidation of the
              genetic mechanisms of rootworm resistance will proceed simultaneously with
              production of homozygous resistant inbred corn lines using conventional plant
              breeding methods.  Resistant inbreds developed in P hase II will be crossed
              with elite lines in Phase III for production of commercial hybrid seed
              resistant to corn rootworm.  This product incorporates natural insect
              resistance from a wild relative and is completely safe for humans and the
              environment.  It will eliminate the need for toxic, costly insecticides to
              protect corn from corn rootworm.  Furthermore, the combination of all three
              resistance modalities provides best opportunity for long-term protection by
              inhibiting selection of biotypes breaking host plant resistance.  ***
