Title       : Engineering Research Center for Neuromorphic Systems Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a9402726

Award Number: 9402726
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8169806            (Estimated)
Investigator: Pietro Perona perona@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Demetri Psaltis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9402726  GOODMAN       The goal of the Engineering Research Center in
              "Neuromorphic  Systems Engineering" is to develop the technology infrastructure
               for endowing the machines of the next century with the senses of  vision,
              touch, and olfaction which mimic or improve upon human  sensory systems.  The
              Center will raise artificial neural network  technology to became an "enabling
              technology" for industry  (comparable with the impact of the introduction of
              the  microprocessor).  Although the U.S. is the world leader in neural  network
              research, a quantum leap in technology is needed for this  research to manifest
              itself as innovative processes and products in  U.S. industry.        The
              Center will aim to facilitate this leap by focusing on  sensory processing in
              which the natural parallelism of artificial  neural networks, and neuromorphic
              VLSI and optical circuits can  provide solutions to problems that are hard for
              conventional  computing.  These problems include vision, audition, tactition,
              and  chemical sensing (olfaction).  Coupling high bandwidth arrays of  sensors
              and actuators with the processing power and learning  abilities of distributed
              neural networks will generate a quantum  leap in human-machine interaction and
              machine-environment  interaction.       The Center will take a
              multi-disciplinary approach through the  tight coupling of sensors and
              intelligence required to achieve  sensory processing.  Algorithms and VLSI
              hardware must be developed  together.  Lessons must be learned from
              neurophysiology, anatomy,  and psychophysics but then translated into rigorous
              engineering  design and practice.  In order to have massive impact on industry,
               these design technologies must be automated to the level that  digital
              Application Specific Integrated Circuits (ASICs) are today.             The
              educational mission of the center will be assisted by  Caltech's existing
              Computation and Neural Systems (CNS) Ph.D  program.  Established in 1986, the
              goal of this multidisciplinary  program is to stud y the structure and
              computational powers of both  living and synthetic neuronal circuits and
              systems.  The program  currently has 34 doctoral students working in the
              laboratories of  20 Caltech faculty members, spread across the divisions of 
              Engineering and Applied Science, Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics,  and the Jet
              Propulsion Laboratory.         The Center will run an effective program for
              industrial  collaboration and technology transfer, as well as an outreach 
              program to academia, schools and local business.  Industrial  guidance will be
              obtained through the creation of an industrial  advisory board.      
              Ultimately, low cost hardware solutions to these sensory  processing tasks will
              open up new areas of application in industry  and ensure U.S. competitiveness
              in such areas as automatic  inspection, quality control, flexible
              manufacturing,  telecommunications, process control, transportation, consumer 
              electronics, autonomous machines, smart sensors, and robotics.       This award
              begins the ERC with an initial cooperative of  agreement of five years.  ***
