Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Optimal Inference in Non-Linear Regression Models with
               Long Range Dependent Errors and in Non-Linear Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9402904

Award Number: 9402904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hira L. Koul koul@stt.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A discrete time stationary stochastic process is said to be long  range
              dependent if its correlations decrease to zero like a power  of the lag, as the
              lag tends to infinity, but their sum diverges.  Part I of the proposal proposes
              to investigate the large sample  behavior of three classes of robust estimators
              and to develop  asymptotically efficient and adaptive estimators in non-linear 
              regression models when the errors are long range dependent with  possibly
              unknown joint distributions. The Part II of the proposal  is concerned with
              studying the asymptotic behavior of several  classes of robust estimators and
              devloping asymptoticlaly optimal  inference procedures in non-linear time
              series in the presence of  regression component, in a semi-parametric setup. In
              particular,  the P.I. plans to develop asymptotically efficient and adaptive 
              estimators in random coefficient and threshold autoregression  models when
              there may be a regression variable present in these  models, in a llinear or
              non-linear fashion, and when the  distributions of the random coefficient and
              the error variable  are unknown. The optimal estimators would be developed a l 
              a Hajek - Le Cam theory.   A data set where an association between distant
              observations is  slowly decaying but persistent, as distance between
              observations  increases, is called long range dependent. Such data arise often 
              in astronomy, economics, geophysics, hydrology, meteorology, and  many other
              disciplines. An example worth mentioning is the data  of 289 high-precision
              measurements on the 1-kg check standard  weight made between 1963 to 1975 by
              the U.S. National Bureau of  Standards. In spite of ideal conditions for
              preserving  independence, the observations turned out to be long range 
              dependent. The first part of the proposal is concerned with  developing some
              optimal statistical procedures for analyzing the  long range dependent data in
              the presence of a covariate. The  second part of the proposal is concerned with
              developing  efficient inferential  procedures in some complicated time series 
              models that often arise in econometrics. It is anticipated that  these
              procedures will be broadly applicable and not very  sensitive to model
              departures.
