Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows: A Group Theoretic Approach to the Nonlinear
               Bifurcation Analysis of Symmetric Shell Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9402041

Award Number: 9402041
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Wohlever   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401958  Miller      This award is under the International Junior Investigator
              and  Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S. scientists and  engineers
              to conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at  research centers of
              proven excellence.  The program's awards  provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique  or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a six month
              postdoctoral research visit  by Dr. Christopher M. Miller of Lehigh University
              to visit  Professor Robert G. Gilbert at the University of Sydney on 
              mechanisms controlling miniemulsion polymerization.    The project will apply
              the knowledge and experimental techniques  of the University of Sydney and
              Lehigh to understand the  fundamental science of processes governing polymer
              formation, and  properties of the resulting polymer in miniemulsion systems. 
              The  knowledge gained will open the way for design and innovation  using the
              process in the future.    The first part of the project will be to build into
              previously  existing models for miniemulsion kinetics the new discoveries  that
              were reported by the Sydney group.  Their theories concern  the mechanisms for
              radical entry into polymer particles, detailed  predictions of the fate of
              desorbed monomeric radicals, and a  description of the time evolution of
              particle growth during the  polymerization.  The outcome of these will will be
              computer codes  whose predictions should be consistent with the extensive data 
              for archetypical miniemulsion polymerizations compiled by the Dr.  Miller
              during the course of his doctoral studies.  On of the main  goals of this work
              is to understand the mechanisms governing  radical entry into monomer droplets
              and polymer particles, since  these have shown to be different.  The second
              part of the project  will be to use the Y radiolysis relaxation facilities
              available  to the Sydney group.      ***
