Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Workshop on the Method of Lines for Time-Dependent
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9402448

Award Number: 9402448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Graeme Fairweather   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Gladwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleagues organize a workshop on the  method of lines
              for solving partial differential equations.   Major themes are ordinary
              differential equation theory and  software as applied in method of lines (MOL)
              algorithms for  time-dependent partial differential equations, theoretical 
              aspectsof MOL algorithms including error estimation and stability 
              considerations, the design and development of MOL software,  scientific and
              engineering applications of MOL software, and the  impact of modern computer
              architectures, particularly distributed  memory parallel processors, on the
              structuring and implementation  of MOL algorithms.  The workshop brings
              together both new and  experienced researchers in the numerical analysis of
              ordinary and  partial differential equations to discuss the interaction of 
              their MOL research.  In particular, it facilitates collaboration  among
              theoreticians, designers of MOL software packages, and  researchers applying
              the MOL to large scale problems, with the  aim of improving parallel
              implementations, and identifying  theoretical and practical constraints
              impacting MOL algorithms.     Many issues of considerable current interest,
              such as global  climate change or the behavior of contaminants in the 
              atmosphereor in groundwater, are influenced by a variety of  physical and
              chemical processes.  These processes can be  simulated by mathematical models
              solved by techniques in this  workshop.  As tools in the study of these models,
              researchers  participating in the workshop are developing advanced 
              computational techniques for use on high performance computing  systems
              involving parallel processing.  On a computer of this  type, several tasks,
              sometimes as many as several hundred, can be  executed simultaneously.  As a
              consequence, it becomes feasible  to solve more realistic, and usually more
              complex, models than  those previously considered.  The computational speed
              afforded by  techniques discussed in this workshop permits comprehensive 
              models that can  lay a firmer scientific foundation for policy  decisions. 
              With such models, the short-and long-term effects of  a change in policy, for
              example in emission standards, can be  effectively predicted before a proposed
              change is actually  implemented.
