Title       : An Engineering Research Center for Collaborative Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1999   
File        : a9402533

Award Number: 9402533
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Lynn Preston                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10190800           (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Solberg solberg@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9402533  SOLBERG                   This award supports Purdue University's ERC
              on the  "Collaborative Manufacturing" system.  The activities include 1.) 
              integrated product and process development with customer's supplier  chain, 2.)
              flexible manufacturing distributed over networks of  cooperating facilities,
              3.) teamwork among geographically and  organizationally distributed
              organizational units, which may be  highly diverse in size, capabilities, and
              culture, and 4.) use of  high-technology support for collaboration, including
              high-speed  information networks and integration methodology.       The central
              focus of the proposed research is the  investigation of fundamental engineering
              principles that are  critical to the success of collaborative manufacturing or
              test the  limits of the concept in case of the most demanding requirements.  
              The ultimate goal is to create the enabling tools and help  manufacturing
              companies and students learn how to make effective  use of the new
              opportunities.          There are three major thrusts for the new proposal: 1.)
               Coherent Product Realization which deals with the issues related to  bringing
              new products into production, supported by the previously-  developed
              technologies in distributed concurrent engineering,  performance evaluation
              design, and product and process simulation;  2.) Coherent Process Integration
              which relates to analysis and  synthesis tools required for integrating all of
              the activities  associated with production; and 3.) Coherent Production System 
              Tools which targets the issues at a system level such as modelling  of
              collaborative production system, decision support structures,  and distributed
              implementation.       This award provides support for the ERC for 5 years.  In 
              addition, a supplementary award with funds provided by the Army  Redstone
              Missile Command to fund a research project to adapt,  extend, and apply
              research in rapid product manufacturing  techniques demonstrated by the Purdue
              Engineering Research Center  (ERC's) Qui ck Turnaround Cell (QTC) system and to
              support a testbed  installation at the Army Redstone Missile Command Production
               Engineering Division for the purpose of validation and technology  transfer.  
                    The major thrust for this project is to implement the  developed research
              tools for designing and planning of cylindrical  parts.  The newly developed
              design tools will be installed and  tested at Army Redstone Missile Command. 
              This system contains new  features developed to represent cylindrical and
              hybrid parts for  turning and milling operations.  In addition, the interface
              module  will be installed and implemented to validate the simulation  results. 
              ***
