Title       : Acquisition of 500 mHz NMR Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9402529

Award Number: 9402529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur C. Watterson Arthur_Watterson@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rudolf Faust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Sandman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sukant K. Tripathy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexandre Blumstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Funds are provided to The Center for Advanced Materials  (CAM) to acquire a
              500-MHz NMR instrument for research  programs of more than 50 faculty, staff
              and graduate  students within the University. The availability of this 
              instrument will allow the Center to expand and develop  substantial
              interdisciplinary research in materials.  Currently, no capability for 500-MHz
              studies exists at the  institution. Research initiatives just underway include 
              studies of: 1)synthetic analogues of natural poly(beta-  hydroxyalkanoates); 2)
              stereochemical and repeat unit  sequence analysis; 3) characterization of 
              rigid-rod like  site-selective Chitosan derivatives; 4) characterization of 
              biodegradation products; 5) characterization of fermentation  reactions and
              products; 6) reversible association/gelation  of amphiphilic cation-anion
              polymers; 7)relative strength of  intraand intermolecular ionic interactions;
              8) well-defined  blockgraft- and functional polymers by living cationic 
              polymerization; 9)initiation via haloboration in living  cationic
              polymerization; 10) syntheses and characterization  of biotinylated copolymers
              of thiophene and nonlinear  optical chromophore substituted copolymers of
              thiophene  which are precursors for monolayer, photovoltaic and  biosensor
              applications; 11) syntheses and characterization  of novel polydiacetylenes for
              second and third order  nonlinear optical applications; 12) syntheses and 
              characterization of guest-host, sol-gel, and  interpenetrating polymer
              network(IPN) systems for NLO  applications; 13) NMR studies of polyacetylenes;
              14) and  studies of chemical shifts, coupling constant, and molecular 
              structures of selenium and tellurium compounds.    Funds are provided to The
              Center for Advanced Materials  (CAM) to acquire a 500-MHz NMR instrument for
              research  programs of more than 50 faculty, staff and graduate  students within
              the University. The availability of this  instrument will allow the Center to
              expand and develop  substantial interdisciplinary research in m aterials. 
              Currently, no capability for 500-MHz studies exists at the  institution. The
              greater chemical shift dispersion of the  high field instrument is advantageous
              for characterization  of materials, particularly polymer stereochemistry, 
              sequencing and biological macromolecules. Such information  is extremely
              valuable for determining mechanisms of  polymerization and degradation and
              macromolecular  interactions. In addition, the four-fold gain in sensitivity 
              will permit studies of low sensitivity nuclei and/or dilute  spin systems that
              are currently either inaccessible or  accessible only through the preparation
              of isotopically  enriched materials.
