Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Higher Operations on Hochschild Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1994  
File        : a9402076

Award Number: 9402076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander A. Voronov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9402076  Voronov       The main objective of this project is to work on and
              prove the  following conjecture of Deligne of the Institute for Advanced Study 
              in Princeton:  There exists the natural structure of an algebra  over the
              operad of chains of the little disks operad on the  Hochschild complex of an
              arbitrary associative algebra.  The  significance of the proposed activity is
              that it provides the  Hochschild complex with very rich algebraic structures
              extending  the bilinear cup product and bracket that define a Gerstenhaber 
              algebra structure on the Hochschild cohomology.  Those new  structures involve
              higher multilinear products and brackets.  More  precisely, the structure
              extending the bracket is expected to be  similar to the homotopy Lie algebra
              structure, which plays a very  important role in different branches of physics
              and mathematics.   Such structures have been used by Stasheff and May in their
              study  of loop spaces, Beilinson and Ginzburg and Hinich and Schechtman in  the
              study of deformation theory of algebraic varieties and vector  bundles, and by
              Kontsevich in his study of knot invariants.   Physicists Witten and Zwiebach
              have effectively used the homotopy  Lie structure in string theory.  The
              conjecture itself may be  reformulated as the existence of a canonical string
              theory  associated to every associative algebra.       The conjecture indicates
              deep connections between algebra and  complex analysis.  Connections between
              different branches of  mathematics are known to create a lot of excitement and
              lead to  most important discoveries in mathematics.  The best recent example 
              may be the Shimura-Taniyama conjecture, which establishes a bridge  between
              number theory and analysis.  The recent work of Wiles  towards the
              Shimura-Taniyama conjecture has had many important  implications, including his
              proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.  ***
