Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research (INRIA): Perturbation Analysis and Parallel
               Computing for Production Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1999   
File        : a9402580

Award Number: 9402580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Fu mfu@umd5.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ioannis Minis  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jeffrey W. Herrmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5918,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in operations
              research and production systems between Ioannis Minis of the University of
              Maryland and  Jean-Marie Proth of INRIA (French National Institute for Research
              in Computer Science and Applied Mathematics) in Lorraine, France.  The
              objective is to develop a system that facilitates effective and efficient
              production planning for complex manufacturing systems.  The investigators will
              study a multi-product production planning problem.  The  problem addresses a
              way to determine the number of products to be manufactured over  many time
              periods in order to minimize the cost function. The investigators propose to
              use a parameterized hierarchical production management system to deal with the
              numerous variables and account for random events that disrupt production.  In
              this approach they will aggregate the time units, the machines, and the part
              types in order to reduce the size of the problem.  After computing a solution
              for the aggregated problem, they propose to solve the subproblems corresponding
              to each group of machines in  order to achieve a near-optimal detailed
              production plan.  The U.S. investigators bring to this collaboration
              considerable expertise in optimization and  perturbation analysis, production
              hierarchy, and aggregation schemes.  This is complemented by the French
              investigator's expertise in production planning and scheduling, parallel
              computing, and his practical experience in manufacturing.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
