Title       : Biotechnology Process Engineering Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9402065

Award Number: 9402065
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Cheryl A. Cathey                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel I. Wang   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9402065  WANG       The vision of the Biotechnology Process Engineering Center
              is  directed towards the technological barriers in the manufacturing of 
              therapeutic proteins.  The research is organized in two areas:   Therapeutic
              Protein Production; and Therapeutic Protein  Aggregation, Stability,
              Formulation and Delivery.       Research in the first area will be directed
              towards cellular  physiology, metabolism, and generics coupled with advanced
              concepts  in bioanalytical monitoring and systems' diagnostic in aid of 
              bioreactor performances and assurance of protein quality.  Research  in the
              second area will be directed toward protein aggregation,  stability,
              formulation and delivery.         The educational programs of the Center are
              designed to ensure  both breadth and depth with a balance in scientific and
              engineering  principles in the training of students.  The goal is to create a 
              new breed of professionals for the biotechnology sector as future  leaders in
              industry, university and government.  Educational  experience is intended to
              provide an integrated view of  biotechnology and bioprocessing within an
              atmosphere of cross-  disciplinary and team research, exposing students to the
              industrial  viewpoint.       Industrial collaboration and technology transfer
              are achieved  through a number of organized efforts.  Industry inputs in the 
              planning of the Center's overall activities through two annual  meetings with
              Industrial Advisory Board members.  In addition, an  Industrial Consortium
              Program is in place having 69 companies  representing the entire biotechnology
              sector ranging from small  (45%), medium (25%), and large (30%) businesses. 
              Workshops and  formal discussions with the Consortium members are held two to
              four  times per year to solicit their inputs and to develop collaborative 
              research programs.       The Center has in place a cross-disciplinary team of
              11  faculty members from three departments:  Biology, Chemistry and  Chemical
              Engineering.  Outreach activities have involved  formal  participation of two
              other universities, Purdue University and Iowa  State University.  The second
              outreach activity is the Research  Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) where
              annually 10 to 12 non-  students perform research at the Center.         This
              award provides a new ERC award for the Center through an  intial five-year
              cooperative agreement.  ***
