Title       : Extending the Online Microbial Germplasm Database to Provide a Robust,
               User-Friendly Interface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9402192

Award Number: 9402192
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Beach                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry W. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Cherri M. Pancake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                            In the two years since NSF initially funded the development of the
              online Microbial  Germplasm Database (MGD), issues of preservation of all
              categories of germplasm and loss  of biodiversity have become key social,
              political and scientific issues.  There has been a  concomitant intensified
              perception of the role of microbial germplasm in plant health,  sustainable
              agriculture, biotechnology, biocontrol, bioremediation and genetic engineering.
                Clearly, and from diverse sources, there is a call for an inventory of
              germplasm, national and  worldwide, and for its preservation.  No single
              national collection can expect to maintain  more than type species or
              representative isolates of the diversity of irreplaceable germplasm  in the
              biosphere.  Working culture collections, those collections, maintained by and
              for  specific research purposes often contain thousands of isolates
              representing a cross-section  of the genetic diversity within a single taxon.  
                   MGD has placed online a prototype database cataloging and quantifying
              microbial  germplasm utilized in plant-related research and held in working
              collections at universities  and research stations. We have thus far uploaded
              approximately 40,000 records of accession  information from
              volunteer-researchers who have allowed their collection data to be included.  
              This is a small fraction of the body of data available.  In the project, MGD
              will develop a  vigorous outreach program to assist researchers in developing
              suitable formats for data  storage and in moving their collection records to a
              computer accessible medium.  Not only  text data describing germplasm, but
              images, charts, drawings, and diagnostic materials, as  well, will be included.
                     During the previous funding period, software was developed that allows
              uploading of  information from disparate sources to a common area where data
              relating to individual strains  can be browsed or searched by key words.  The
              system is based on the Internet Gopher, a  tool developed at  the University of
              Minnesota for connecting to remote sites and allowing use  of data resources at
              that site. The system is based on placing text files on a server in  directory
              locations reflecting intuitive and logical associations so that a user can move
              to the  files by simple menu choices.  We have devised means to provide
              multiple views of records  so that users may browse by any of several criteria.
               As a prototype, the result is quite  satisfactory and has provided much useful
              information.  We have now reached the limits of  the UNIX file system, however.
               During this round of funding MGD will be moved to a  fully relational database
              structure using SQL as the query language.  This will necessitate 
              modifications to the Gopher server so it can interface with SYBASE database
              management  system installed on the MGD computer.  The Gopher layer will be
              maintained because of its  ease of use and its ubiquity among users of academic
              high speed networks, and because its  continued evolution at other sites will
              bring added capability to MGD users.  As part of a  Masters Degree project in
              the Department of Computer Science, extensions to the interface  will allow
              users to store information about queries that they find useful, define
              time-saving  macros, establish views of the data that are unique to individual
              needs, and maintain other  user-dependent information.  Users will be afforded
              the benefits of a powerful query language  while at the same time being
              shielded from its complexities.  This becomes increasingly  important as the
              volume of data on MGD grows.         Because MGD users represent a considerable
              spectrum in terms of both computer  experience and areas of interest, special
              attention will be devoted to identifying user  requirements for the interface
              layers.  Survey instruments will be designed and applied to a  cross-section of
              the biological community in order to establish the prototypical conceptual 
              models with which users approach MGD (i.e., their perceptions of the database's
               organization  and how meaningful queries should be structured).  The most
              common patterns of access will  be identified, and database structure adapted
              to these patterns so that the most common user  queries are easy to specify and
              fast to carry out.  It is anticipated that an interface of this  nature will
              have far-reaching implications for other providers of information resources.   
                  An e-mail interface, now being developed at MGD will be placed in beta
              testing during  the next funding period and, once stable, will be placed into
              full production.  Remote  locations in the U.S. and in developing countries as
              well as sites served by other networks  (many secondary schools, community
              colleges, and private companies), will be able to access  data and images
              placed online by MGD.        MGD will also make available to participants,
              tools that have proven useful in providing  computer-supported collaborative
              work environments, including a prototype multiple-user  workspace, which is
              being developed at XEROX PARC (ASTRO-VR) for the astrophysics  community.  The
              environment allows users at remote locations to enter a common network 
              workspace, interact easily in real time and even examine images concurrently. 
              The network  and computing resources required are not excessive and are within
              the reach of most  researchers.
