Title       : An Experimental Study of Structure-Property Relationships Governing Sorption,
               Transport, and Permeation of Small Molecules in Rodlike and Semi-Rodlike
               Aromatic Polyamides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9402055

Award Number: 9402055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162685             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benny D. Freeman benny_freeman@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Preston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9402055  Freeman    This experimental research program is designed to explore
              the synthesis and gas sorption, transport, and permeation properties of a new
              class of highly soluble wholly aromatic polyamides, having either ridded rod,
              possibly mesogenic, backbones or semi-rodlike backbones and structural elements
              which could be precursors for further reactions such as crosslinking or the
              attachment of pendent rigid or flexible groups.  These fundamental studies are
              directed toward developing an expanded and more subtle repertoire of structural
              modifications useful for the rational tailoring of super-membranes and
              super-barriers.  Central to the thesis under consideration is the notion that
              the proposed primary chemical structure variations could markedly influence
              polymer suprastructure (i.e. polymer chain packing), polymer-penetrant
              interactions, and, in turn, strongly affect gas sorption, transport, and
              permeation properties.    An experimental program is proposed involving
              controlled synthesis of highly soluble wholly aromatic polyamides having
              substituents which could be used to crosslink the polymers or attach rigid or
              flexible side chains.  The chemical structure, physicals properties, and gas
              transport properties of these polymers would be characterized to determine
              explicitly the influence of side and main chain molecular architecture and side
              chain stiffness, plus the potential for crosslinking, on the overall sorption,
              transport, and permeation behavior.    This research program would benefit from
              collaborative interactions with researchers at the Hoechst Celanese
              Corporation, a world leader in the production of high performance, high barrier
              liquid crystalline polymers.  This collaboration would involve several visits
              per year by principal investigators and students associated with the proposed
              program to Hoechst ,elanese facilities.  Moreover, Hoechst Celanese personnel
              would visit NC State several times per year to coordinate the objectives of our
              research program with theirs.    In  addition, computer modeling and synthesis
              will be provided by Spanish researchers at the Instituto de Ciencia Y
              Tecnologia de Polimeros of the Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas
              (CSIC) in Madrid, Spain.  This group, under the direction of Dr. Javier de
              Abajo, has worked very closely with the PIs during the past several year.  This
              collaborative research program has already resulted in approximately 10
              research publications related to the synthesis and gas transport
              characterization of polymers similar to the polymers described in this
              proposal.  The exchange has stimulated several visits by PIs from both sides
              and students.  The collaboration would be expanded in the proposed research
              program to take advantage of the extensive computer modeling capabilities and
              expertise of our Spanish partners as well as their extensive experience in the
              area of novel polymer synthesis.   ***
