Title       : Speed of Constraint Satisfaction Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9402780

Award Number: 9402780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173892             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Purdom pwp@cs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This research investigates finding fast algorithms for  constraint
              satisfaction problems.  A constraint satisfaction  problem is one in  which a
              series of constraints is imposed on a  set of discrete variables.  The  task is
              to find a set of values  for all the variables that satisfies all the 
              constraints  simultaneously.  For example, when scheduling traffic lights each 
              light may be in one of only three discrete states.  Furthermore,  there are 
              constraints on the states of the traffic lights that  require that no two 
              cross-streets get green lights at the same  time.  A constraint satisfaction 
              problem may have thousands of  variables and thousands of constraints. 
              Constraint satisfaction problems arise in diverse areas.  These  include 
              generating tests of correctness for electronic circuits,  understanding line 
              drawings by computer, solving combinatorial  problems, and predicting the 
              folding of RNA molecules.  The set  of constraint satisfaction problems is one 
              of the NP complete  problem sets, so it is unlikely that a fast algorithm for 
              all  constraint satisfaction problems will ever be found.  Indeed,  brute force
               algorithms for constraint satisfaction problems may  be extremely slow. 
              Nonetheless, algorithms have been found that  are fast for most problems in 
              certain NP complete problem sets.  This research concerns finding and 
              characterizing the  algorithms and problem sets for which constraint 
              satisfaction  problems can be solved quickly, with the aim of finding general 
              algorithms that are fast over as wide a range of problem sets as  possible.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
