Title       : Biogeography of Marine Carnivorous Calanoid Capepods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9402011

Award Number: 9402011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221541             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Taisoo Park   (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Wormuth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9402011  Park    Early researchers suggested that bathypelagic copepods have  
              extremely widespread distributions, which was generally attributed  to the
              relatively stable physical environment at bathypelagic  depths. However, recent
              research by Park found that species  of the bathypelagic copepod genus,
              Paraeuchaeta display highly  variable ranges of geographic distribution. The
              geographic patterns  displayed by the species seemed to reflect their food
              requirement  and the availability of food in their habitats. The dominant 
              species in the eutrophic waters were found to be endemics and the  rare species
              generally had wider ranges of distribution. This  project will study additional
              calanoid taxa inhabiting different  depth ranges to see how the geographic
              patterns of calanoids vary  with depth and whether the geographic patterns of
              the meso- and  epipelagic calanoids are similar to those of Paraeuchaeta.  The 
              meso- and epipelagic carnivorous copepod genera, Heterorhabdus and  Euchaeta
              were selected for the study so that carnivorous taxa from  three different
              depth zones can be compared. Samples to be used for  the study will be those
              collected from many different parts of the  world's oceans and presently
              available mainly at Scripps  Institution of Oceanography.  Additional samples
              will be obtained,  particularly for the Atlantic and Indian Oceans, from
              several other  institutions. This study will follow the same procedures as 
              employed in the study of Paraeuchaeta, asking the same questions:  1) How many
              species are there in each taxon selected?  2) How  abundant is each species? 
              3) How widely distributed is each  species?  4)  How are the species related
              morphologically or  distributionally to one another?  By answering these
              questions, the  study will accomplish two major objectives:  1) to clarify the 
              taxonomy of the selected taxa by defining each species with  adequate
              diagnoses, and 2) to define the biogeography of epi- and  mesopelagic
              carnivorous genera based on established taxonomy  and  quantitative
              distribution data. The findings of this study,  together with those already
              obtained with the bathypelagic  Paraeuchaeta, are expected to help understand
              the global  biogeography of carnivorous calanoids.  ***
