Title       : Acquisition of High Resolution Powder X-Ray Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1994     
File        : a9402860

Award Number: 9402860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Mallouk tom@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Partial funding is provided for the acquisition of a high  resolution powder
              x-ray diffractometer to support basic  research in materials chemistry by
              faculty in the Chemistry,  Chemical Engineering, and Clay Mineralogy programs
              at  Pennsylvania State University. The primary users will be  eight faculty and
              43 graduate students, postdoctoral  fellows, undergraduates, and research
              associates. The  instrument will have special capabilities for low-angle x- 
              ray diffraction of materials with large unit cell  dimensions; and for thin
              films of layered materials. It will  have a Peltier detector for increased
              sensitivity, a  glancing angle attachment for the study of nanocomposite 
              materials containing small crystallites in polymer matrices,  and modern
              software for library searching of known phases,  indexing, peak fitting, and
              profile refinement of crystal  structures. The x-ray diffraction equipment
              currently  available at the University is not adequate for many of the 
              proposed experiments, e.g., studies of metal-organic thin  films, polymer
              multilayer structures, intercalated clays  with large interlayer spacings, new
              mesoporous molecular  sieves, and ab initio solution of crystal structures from
               powder x-ray diffraction data. This equipment will be  dedicated to
              non-routine research problems. Routine  qualitative phase identification in
              polycrystalline samples  will continue to be conducted on the existing 
              diffractometers. A primary objective in the study of new  solid state compounds
              and composite materials, regardless of  their ultimate application, is the
              determination of the  relationship between physical properties and the
              structure  and/or surface composition. X-ray diffraction is the most  generally
              applicable and powerful technique for this  purpose.
