Title       : A Study of the Transfer of Carbon Across the Seasonal Boundary Layer of the
               Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9402308

Award Number: 9402308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325030             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Marshall marshall@gulf.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Fellows  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sallie W. Chisholm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9402308  MARSHALL      Dynamical, chemical and biological processes will be
              studied that  control the transfer of carbon across the seasonal boundary layer
               of the ocean on the scale of ocean gyres.  The study is mechanistic  and
              designed to elucidate the role of the seasonal cycle in  controlling the
              relative importance of the solubility and  biological pumps.  It explores the
              possibility that extreme  conditions prevailing at the end of winter, not only
              determine key  dynamical properties of the main thermocline- such as its 
              ventilation rates, temperature and salinity properties- but also  has a major
              effect on the rates and geographical pattern and  seasonality of the carbon
              flux, both across the sea surface and  through the base the mixed-layer.  The
              inclusion of a realistic  seasonal cycle can change these rates by as much as a
              factor of two  and cannot be ignored in discussions of the natural or 
              anthropogenic carbon cycle.    The study employs a bio-geochemical model of the
              carbon cycle,  driven by off-line transport parameters from a general
              circulation  model of the North Atlantic undergoing a seasonal cycle. A 
              hierarchy of experiments is proposed in which the model is  integrated
              separately with representations of; a passive tracer;  air-sea transfer and
              inorganic chemistry of carbon; nutrients and  biology. The sequence will
              culminate in a comprehensive experiment,  bringing all three processes
              together, biology, chemistry and the  dynamics as well as the effect of
              enhanced air-sea exchange  associated with winter storms.    The experiments
              are designed to identify those processes which  control the rate at which the
              ocean inducts carbon into its  interior in different dynamical regimes.  They
              are a crucial first  step towards understanding the response of the ocean to
              the  anthropogenic input of carbon.
