Title       : In Situ Measurements of Damping Ratio Using Surface Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1994  
File        : a9402358

Award Number: 9402358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn J. Rix glenn.rix@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9402358  Rix  An important soil parameter that controls the amplification  of
              seismic waves as they propagate from bedrock to the  surface is the hysteretic
              damping ratio of the soil.  Damping is usually measured  on soil samples tested
              in the  laboratory, but the effect of the disturbance on the soil  properties
              when the sample is removed from the ground is  uncertain.  Moreover, the
              frequencies used in the laboratory  tests are usually much higher than those of
              interest in  earthquake engineering.  An alternative approach is to use  field
              tests to measure the damping ratio in situ.   However,  despite the advantages
              of in situ tests, there have been  relatively few field attenuation
              measurements reported.    One of the objectives of this project is to develop
              and  implement an insitu test procedure for damping measurements  using surface
              waves.  Surface wave measurements offer  several advantages compared to
              crosshole and downhole  techniques, one being that they are non-invasive.
              Another  objective is to understand better the causes of the 
              frequently-observed differences in the damping values  between laboratory and
              in situ measurements.    The project involves three tasks:    1. To acquire
              surface wave attenuation data at sites within  the Savannah River Site in
              Aiken, South Carolina, using  several different types of input motion
              (swept-sine, random,  and transient) to determine which one provides, for
              example,  the best signal-to-noise ratio.  Attenuation data will also  be
              recorded at several different source-receiver  combinations to evaluate the
              influence of near-field waves.    2. To develop and evaluate algorithms for:
              (i) estimating  particle motion amplitude spectra, (ii) calculating 
              attenuation parameters from observed surface wave  amplitudes, and (iii)
              inverting attenuation data to obtain  damping ratio.  Throughout this task,
              emphasis will be  placed on quantifying the uncertainties involved in each 
              step, with the aim of establishing not only the most likely  value of damping ,
              but also the possible range of values.    3. Once appropriate field procedures
              and analysis methods  have been developed as part of Tasks 1 and 2, and  in
              order  to compare surface wave damping values with values obtained  from in
              situ borehole methods and laboratory tests, to  perform surface wave
              measurements of attenuation at the  Treasure Island National Geotechnical
              Experimentation Site  in San Francisco Bay, and at one or more sites in the Los
               Angeles area affected by the Northridge earthquake.  ***
