Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship Program: Investigation of the Third- Order Nonlinear Optical
               Properties of Crystalline Organic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1994      
File        : a9402025

Award Number: 9402025
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Edward Murdy                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26210              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Van Keuren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              10        Physical Sciences                       
Program Ref : 9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9402025  Van Keuren    This award supports the foreign travel expenses  for
              Dr. Edward Van Keuren to spend six months  at the Solid State Chemistry
              Laboratory of the  National Institute of Materials and Chemical  Research
              (NIMCR) located at Tsukuba, Japan.  Dr. Van Keuren will be conducting research
              over  a period of six months on third-order nonlinear  optical properties of
              crystalline organic  materials with Dr. Hiro Matsuda, a senior  research
              investigator at NIMCR.    The crystalline organic materials to be  investigated
              are of interest due to their  potentially large third-order optical  effects,
              fast time responses and as model  systems for understanding the basic physics
              of  the molecular structure/optical properties  relationship. Dr. Van Keuren is
              very familiar  with the work being conducted by Dr. Matsuda,  having been a
              fellow at NIMCR supported by the  Japanese Science and Technology Agency. The 
              optical measurement systems recently installed  at NIMCR represent a broad
              spectrum of  available state-of-the-art measurement  techniques for third-order
              optical processes.  The collaboration will utilize the experience  of Dr. Van
              Keuren with optical systems and  nonlinear optical measurements with the 
              synthesis and optical characterization  facilities available at NIMCR, along
              with the  expertise of the participating Japanese  investigators.    The award
              is funded under the auspices of the  Center for Global Partnership (CGP) of the
               Japan Foundation under the NSF-CGP Science  Fellowship Program.  ***
