Title       : Collaborative Research: Is Variable Retention of Larvae Nearshore a General
               Cause of Variable Recruitment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1996      
File        : a9402690

Award Number: 9402690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Gaines gaines@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9402690  Gaines    Although it is widely acknowledged that oceanographic 
              processes  influence benthic communities, little effort has focused on  this 
              issue in a synthetic way. Prior research by the PI's had  taken a  predictive
              and experimental approach to explaining spatial  and  temporal variation in the
              recruitment of the northern acorn  barnacle, Semibalanus balanoides, in
              Narragansett Bay. About  80% of  the large interannual variation in barnacle
              recruitment in  the bay  over the last decade is explained by annual variation
              in bay  flushing times, which set the extent of retention and export  of 
              larvae from the bay.       This renewal project will test the generality and 
              consequences  of the previous findings in other estuaries and examine 
              additional  taxa. Only by undertaking studies across biogeographic areas  and a
               wide range of taxa will the linkages between oceanographic  processes and the
              population and community dynamics of  benthic  assemblages be unraveled.      
              The project will use replicated bays in New England  with  differing flushing
              characteristics to examine the  relationship  between spatial and temporal
              variation in bay flushing time  and the  recruitment of common shoreline
              species. The generality of  mechanisms generating recruitment variation is an
              unresolved  issue,  yet it has important implications to the dynamics of marine
               communities. With simultaneous studies on five important  space  occupiers of
              the NW Atlantic, this project will begin to  develop a  general understanding
              of linkages between hydrodynamic  processes  and the populations and community
              dynamics of benthic  assemblages.  ***
