Title       : Engineering Research Center for Low Cost Electronic Packaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a9402723

Award Number: 9402723
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18028191           (Estimated)
Investigator: Rao R. Tummala rao.tummala@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramamohan L. Tummala  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9402723  TUMMALA       This award establishes a new Engineering Research Center
              (ERC)  at the Georgia Institute of Technology on Low-Cost Electronic 
              Packaging.  The vision of the ERC is to improve performance of  electronic
              products significantly while simultaneously reducing  size and cost.  The
              objectives of the ERC are:  (1) to carry-out  research, development and
              prototype manufacturing in low-cost,  high-performance, and portable electronic
              packages consistent with  industry needs, (2) to transfer this knowledge to
              industry, and (3)  to train future leaders by educating students, industrial 
              personnel, and faculty from Georgia Institute of Technology and  other
              institutions.  The essential components of the ERC are  research, partnerships
              with industry, education, and technology  transfer.  The research thrusts
              include:  (1) package design and  modeling, (2) low-cost micro-chip module
              (MCM) based on novel  materials, processing, and large area planarization, (3)
              MCMs with  integrated passive and active devices, (4) MCMs with integrated 
              optoelectronic components, (5) novel interconnect materials and  processing
              tools, (6) assembly, (7) testing including built-in self  test for mixed-signal
              designs and fault location.  (8) thermal  management, and (9) large-area
              prototype manufacturing.       The electronics industry is built on the
              following technology  elements:  semiconductor chips, electronic packages,
              power sources,  displays, and the systems that are formed through integration. 
              The  United States leads in the design of computers, telecommunication  system,
              and the use of electronics in most industrial and  commercial applications. 
              The United States trails in consumer  electronics, and is increasingly
              dependent on non-domestic sources  for electronic packages and production
              equipment.  Electronic  packaging is one of the most important strategic
              technologies in  electronics.  The ERC will have a major impact on education of
               students in this important topic.  The Georgia Institute of   Technology is
              among the largest producers of electrical,  mechanical, and industrial
              engineering students in the United  States.  This ERC will expose
              undergraduate, graduate and post-  graduate students to this area of high
              national economic  importance.       This award initiates the ERC with a 5-year
              cooperative  agreement.  ***
