Title       : Growth, Mutation and Recombination in Bacteriophage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1998     
File        : a9402695

Award Number: 9402695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $850000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklin W. Stahl fstahl@molbio.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9402695  In crosses involving either pro- or eukaryotes, genetic
              exchanges  may be nonrandomly distributed with respect to each other, i.e., 
              they may show "interference."  The investigation of two systems in  which
              interference is manifest will continue.  In both systems,  interference may
              depend on a "machine" that moves along  chromosomes.  Understanding of these
              machines will contribute to  our understanding of molecular mechanisms of
              genetic recombination.  (1) When the RecBCD recombination pathway of E. coli
              operates on  phage lambda carrying the recombination hot spot Chi, recombinant 
              chromosomes recovered in phage particles have sometimes indulged in  a pair of
              exchanges, one reciprocal and one not.  The nonreciprocal  exchange occurs not
              at random but to the right of the reciprocal  one on the standard lambda
              linkage map.  The basis for this  nonrandom relationship resides in the RecBCD
              protein, which enters  DNA at a double-chain break and travels destructively
              along the  duplex, changing from an exonuclease to a "recombinase" when it 
              encounters the sequence 5'GCTGGTGG3' (Chi).  Models for the  mechanisms of the
              two exchanges and for the relationship between  them are being tested.  (2) In
              many eukaryotes, the presence of  one exchange in a meiotic bivalent reduces
              the probability of  finding an exchange in nearby intervals (chiasma
              interference).    A simple model that unites observations on gene conversion
              with  those on chiasma interference has been developed.  The model  supposes
              that conversions occur at random with respect to each  other, but that those
              with associated crossing over are invariably  separated by several conversions
              that lack associated crossing  over.  Thus, the two kinds of recombination
              events(one of which is  sometimes called "reciprocal" and the other not) are
              nonrandomly  distributed with respect to themselves and each other. 
              Development  of the model and testing of it continues.  Hypotheses regarding 
              mechanisms underlying the model are being te sted.  Such mechanisms  may
              involve a "machine" that travels along the synaptonemal complex  resolving
              double-chain break-repair intermediates such that a fixed  number of repair
              events unaccompanied by crossing over fall between  neighboring crossovers. 
              %%%  Recombination occurs in almost all organisms, and is responsible  for
              leading to new combinations of genes in offspring as well as  protection
              against damage to DNA and genes.  A better understanding  of this process
              should be applicable to many organisms, and could  lead to the development of
              better ways of introducing foreign genes  into organisms ("genetic
              engineering").  ***
