Title       : The Evolution of Allorecognition Specificity in Clonal Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1998   
File        : a9402797

Award Number: 9402797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $755000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Grosberg rkgrosberg@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9402797  Grosberg         Allorecognition is defined as the ability to 
              distinguish self from other members of the same species.  Although
              allorecognition was once thought to be the hallmark  of the vertebrate immune
              system, it is now clear that  virtually all encrusting clonal organisms possess
               allorecognition systems whose specificity rivals that of the  vertebrate
              immune system.  A growing body of evidence  supports the conclusion that
              allorecognition specificity in  clonal organisms is genetically based, and that
              relatively  few loci control the expression of this specificity.  Consequently,
              the loci that confer allorecognition  specificity must carry levels of genetic
              variation that  greatly exceed levels characteristic of other polymorphic 
              loci.  The major goal of this proposal is to analyze -- from  both a genetical
              and ecological  perspective --  how such  extraordinarily high levels of
              genetic variation are  evolutionarily maintained.         Three types of
              hyporthesis have been advanced to  explain the evolution of allorecognition
              specificity.  The  first, that the genetic variation is functionally 
              unimportant, is not a viable explanation, given what is  known about mutation
              rates, population sizes, and patterns  of nucleotide substitution at
              allorecognition loci.  The  second two hypotheses invoke natural selection;
              they differ  with respect to whether selection acts directly to regulate  the
              outcomes of tissue interactions,  or whether selection  acts indirectly via a
              correlated effect of allorecognition,  such as the control of mating
              preferences.  In contrast to  vertebrates, in which sustained tissue
              interactions are  rare,  such encounters occur frequently among clonial 
              invertebrates as they compete with conspecies for habitable  space. 
              Allorecognition systems mediate the nature and  outcomes of such interactions
              by dictating whether they will  lead to intergenotypic fusion, rejection, or
              aggression.         Quantitative models confirm that allorecognition 
              specificity can  evolve, through its effects on the outcomes  of competitive
              interactions.  The key determinants of how  strongly selection promotes the
              accumulation of specificity  include the costs and benefits of fusion,
              rejections, and  rejection,and the frequencies with which compatible (i.e. 
              fusible) and incompatible (i.e. rejecting or aggressive)  genotypes interact. 
              This project will evaluate how  allorecognition specificity evolves by
              estimating these  costs, benefits, and  interaction frequencies in two species 
              of  encrusting, clonal invertebrate.  In one species the  colonial sea squirt
              Botryllus schlosseri, allorecognition  systems control whether conspecific
              encounters lead to  fusion or rejection.  In the other species, the cnidarian 
              Hydractinia symbiolongicarpus, the alternative outcomes of  conspecific
              encounters are fusion versus aggression.  It  will also evaluate the merits of
              one widely invoked  pleiotropic mechanism by which allorecognition specificity 
              could also be maintained, namely the control of gametic  interations.  By
              comparing how allotypic diversity evolves  in both species, this research will
              build a foundation for  understanding how and why individuals of nearly every 
              species can distinguish self from nonself.
