Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic measure and fractal sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9402946

Award Number: 9402946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolai Makarov makarov@cco.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9402946  Makarov        This project emphasizes mathematical research on a basic
               concept in mathematical analysis known as harmonic measure.   There are
              several equivalent definitions ranging from the  probability that a Brownian
              path hits a fixed set to the  equilibrium distribution of that set as
              understood in potential  theory.  In recent years there has been considerable
              interest in  the study of global metric properties and characteristics of 
              harmonic measure such as the dimension of the minimal Borel  support, the size
              of exceptional sets for the boundary behavior  of the Green function, the
              bounds for the dimension distortion  under conformal maps, etc.  At the same
              time close connections  with the ergodic theory of analytic dynamical systems
              have been  established.  Harmonic measure has a natural characterization in 
              dynamical terms for boundaries which are like Cantor sets or  Julia sets, and
              ergodic theory provides a powerful tool for the  study of its metric
              properties.  In the opposite direction, the  estimates of harmonic measure
              describe the geometry of the  fractals and certain properties of the dynamics. 
              The main goal  of this project is to explore the fine structure of harmonic 
              measure for general plane domains as well as for some important  particular
              classes of fractals.  A continuation of studies on  various multifractal
              spectra that characterize the global metric  properties of harmonic measure. 
              Application to the ergodic  theory of Julia sets deal with the problem of
              analyticity of the  corresponding pressure functions and with the phase
              transition  phenomenon.  Efforts will be made to understand the evolution of 
              fractality in the structure of harmonic measure on the boundary  of diffusion
              limited aggregates.       Harmonic measure lies at the intersection of several 
              important areas of analysis and probability.  It seeks to measure  fine
              structure of sets.  It provides quantitative information of  highly complex
              object like fractals and badly disconnected sets  with  hidden structures
              arising in the study of two-dimensional  dynamics.   ***
