Title       : A Novel Approach to OCR Handwriting Recognition with Application to Man-machine
               Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1995   
File        : a9460060

Award Number: 9460060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64617              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Ostrem ostrem@cic.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Communication Intelligence
	      275 Shoreline Drive, #520
	      Redwood Shores, CA  94065    415/802-7888

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 6845,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will determine the
              feasibility of developing a novel OCR reader within the framework of an
              integrated technology aimed at providing ordinary people with the means to
              interact with computers in a more natural and productive way. For example, at a
              typical meeting people write notes, speak to each other, and show graphs,
              figures, and pictures. That's the natural way people work together. CIC wants
              to make it possible for people to interact with computers in this more
              human-like way. Rather than forcing people to adapt to computers, computers
              should be `smart` enough to deal with people on their own terms. The
              technologies required to make this possible include, at a minimum, on-line
              handwriting recognition, Optical Character Recognition (OCR) and associated
              image processing, speech recognition, and the methodology for handling
              interactions between input modalities. Phase I will examine the feasibility of
              an important step in this process -- bringing on-line handwriting recognition
              and OCR into a common algorithmic framework. If successful, this technology
              would have three significant benefits: 1) It will be an important step towards
              making it possible for people to interact with computers in a more natural way;
              2) It will improve the state-of-the-art for handwritten OCR readers; and 3) It
              will result in efficient new commercial products. Last year the United States
              Post Office (until recently, the major supporter of new OCR research) stated
              that `as significant advancements in OCR technology are needed to bring the
              read rate (of handwriting) to the desired level, innovative approaches are
              sought to achieve those advancements.` CIC expects that this approach, based
              upon techniques proven to be successful for its on-line recognition products,
              will advance the state-of-the-art in handwritten OCR. From a commercial
              standpoint, a product combining OCR and on-line handwriting recognition in a
              common framework with shared resources will be smaller, more efficient, less
              costly, and easier to maintain than two separate products.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
