Title       : Distributed Data Fusion in Dynamic Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9460641

Award Number: 9460641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74873              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daya Atapattu atapattu@sca.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Scientific Comput Assocs
	      One Century Tower, 265 Church St
	      New Haven, CT  065101070    203/777-7442

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 6855,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses research
              required to develop intelligent software systems for distributed real-time data
              fusion that will be capable of dealing with the explosive growth in the amounts
              and types of information available to intelligent information processing
              systems in dynamic environments. Today, automated techniques deal primarily
              with mere correlation of information, with more sophisticated analyses
              available only through largely manual processing. While this approach may work
              for certain situations, there is little hope that it can keep pace with highly
              mobile, dynamic systems, in which the numbers and positions of distributed
              information sources evolve in real time. Scientific Computing Associates, Inc.,
              proposes to investigate development of systems based on a software architecture
              (the Process Trellis) that is effective for data fusion and that can be
              dynamically grouped into ensembles and ungrouped as needed.  Such an
              architecture seems essential for applications like vehicular traffic
              management, air traffic control and others in which individual components may
              enter or leave the `world view` with great rapidity and at unexpected times. In
              terms of implementation, they propose to use distributed processors functioning
              as a single dynamic parallel computer. In Phase I, the researchers plan to
              build a prototype ensemble Trellis system and study its performance in order to
              assess the feasibility of a full-scale implementation. If the Phase I research
              is successful, it will lay the groundwork for building data fusion systems that
              will be able to maintain real-time behavior in dynamic environments by
              automatically scaling the use of processing power as required.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
