Title       : Isolation of DNA Promotors Induced by Environmental Stimuli and Their Use In The
               Construction of Improved Biocatalysts for Environmental Remediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1995   
File        : a9460082

Award Number: 9460082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Steffan Steffan@Envirogen.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Envirogen, Inc.
	      4100 Quakerbridge Road
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086484702    609/936-9300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project involves the development
              of chlorinated solvent-degrading biocatalysts that express degradative genes in
              response to environmental stimuli. Chlorinated solvent-degrading genes will be
              cloned under the control of promoters that are induced (turned on) in the
              presence of target chemicals, under low pH, and/or under low temperature. The
              biocatalysts will be applicable to both reactorbase( and in situ biotreatment
              processes for destroying recalcitrant chlorinated solvents.   Chlorinated
              solvents are the most widespread and abundant contaminants of the Nation's
              groundwater and soils, and many are directly carcinogenic even in small
              amounts. Current technologies for remediating soils and/or groundwater
              contaminated with chlorinated solvents are limited by their high costs or the
              fact that they often do not destroy the contaminating chemicals. Biological
              oxidation of chlorinated solvents, however, results in the complete destruction
              of the contaminant, and degradative microorganisms can be used to destroy
              contaminants spread over large areas or contaminants trapped in aquifers.
              Although many bacteria are capable of destroying chlorinated solvents, the
              process is co-metabolic; i.e. the compounds do not act as growth substrates or
              gene inducers for the degradative organisms. Degradation is often limited by
              repression of enzyme synthesis in the absence of toxic inducing substrates such
              as toluene or phenol. Envirogen, Inc. proposes to use molecular biological
              techniques to develop biocatalysts that no longer require the presence of toxic
              inducing substrates for destroying chlorinated solvents, but rather have
              degradative genes under control of DNA promoters that are induced by
              environmental conditions (low temperature or low pH) or the presence of the
              target compounds themselves. Cloned toluene monooxygenase genes will be fused
              to existing environmentally induced promoters, and to promoters isolated during
              the proposed project. The resulting biocatalysts will be capable of destroying
              chlorinated solvents under controlled conditions in bioreactors, and also under
              specific in situ conditions in aquifers and/or soils.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
