Title       : Solar Ultraviolet Human Hazard Monitoring System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1995   
File        : a9460925

Award Number: 9460925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Booth booth@biospherical.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Biospherical Instruments
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92117    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 5345,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The monitoring of long term trends and geographical variability of UV irradiance
              and how it may impact the environment has become increasingly important since
              the discovery of the `ozone hole` over vast regions of the Southern Hemisphere.
              In addition to potential environmental impacts, UV radiation has been shown to
              be hazardous to human health in several regards. However, critical evidence of
              the temporal and geographic extent of elevated UV radiation levels is in its
              infancy. Thus, there is an immediate need to deploy networks of suitable
              instruments. In this context, some small-scale deployments have been undertaken
              by a few groups. Yet there appears to be no significant level of agreement
              within the community that suitable, cost-effective instrumentation exists. In
              this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I, Biospherical Instruments,
              Inc., proposes to develop and demonstrate an instrument system, including
              measurement methodology, designed to monitor both ambient (downwelling) UV
              irradiance in the traditional sense, as well as measuring irradiance that may
              be damaging for visual systems (eyes). Critical aspects of this proposal
              include: 1) development of novel viewing geometries specifically appropriate to
              ocular studies; 2) development of data processing methods to process these data
              with the goal of issuing on-site advisories; and 3) the development of specific
              calibration techniques designed to be able to assess the quality of the
              resulting data.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
