Title       : A Model Based Interactive Graphical Scheduler
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1994   
File        : a9460011

Award Number: 9460011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52033              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Miller miller@combination.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adv Process Combinatorics
	      P.O. Box 2324
	      West Lafayette, IN  479060324    218/724-5416

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1465,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Advanced Process Combinatorics, Inc., proposes an interactive scheduling system
              which integrates model based optimization with an electronic Gantt chart. This
              system (SMART++/IGS) will be a new component for the object-oriented model
              based optimization scheduling system, SMART++ (Scheduling and Material Resource
              Timing). As such, IGS will be integrated with RCSPec, an existing language for
              describing scheduling problems, and MILP++, an existing object-oriented mixed
              integer program optimizer. The main defining feature of IGS will be the
              coupling of the electronic Gantt chart to the underlying model based
              optimization algorithms. Users will be able to add a wide variety of
              constraints to the schedule using the graphical user interface. By clicking the
              mouse on a task in the Gantt chart the user will be able to fix the execution
              time, or the place of a task in a sequence. The optimizer will complete the
              schedule, building an optimized schedule around the pieces already specified by
              the user. In addition to the obvious advantages of user friendliness, this
              provides the user with detailed control over the optimization algorithm. The
              addition of constraints (partial schedule specification) will make the
              optimization problem smaller and thus, easier to solve. Such user guided
              problem simplification may be exploited as a method of rendering difficult
              problems solvable. This and advances in optimization algorithms and faster
              computers offer hope that interactive scheduling which utilizes rigorous model
              based optimization will be a deliverable commercial product in the next few
              years.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
