Title       : Fast Laser Driven Plasma Switch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1995   
File        : a9460919

Award Number: 9460919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74946              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Polonskiy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PXL Inc
	      1 - H Deer Park Drive
	      Monmouth Junction, NJ  088521920    908/329-0505

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1492,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
              switch technology which  will secure instantaneous electrical connection based
              on the novel mechanism of the electrical  discharge initiation - laser
              breakdown in Besselian (B) laser beam. Laser breakdown in the B-beam will 
              result in a novel type of optical discharge - Continuous Extensive Laser Spark
              (CELS) which is ideally  suitable for shorting electrodes due to absence of
              breaks in the plasma channel, high electrical  conductivity of the channel, and
              generation of the channel with hyperlight speed. The most efficient 
              transformation of the Gaussian (G) beam into the B-beam can be achieved by
              focusing light beam into an  axial line with a conical lens (axicon). According
              to preliminary estimates, the triggering will  require modest energy of the
              laser pulse (  100 mJ) which can be provided with a compact and inexpensive
              laser.  The new switching technology will open new opportunities for all pulsed
              systems:  operation with high precision and reliability in the extremely broad
              voltage range (from zero to self-breakdown level), current range (kiloamperes
              to megamperes) and long gaps (1 - 100 cm), low jitter and fast switching
              (nanoseconds or better) will allow for highly precise synchronization of
              multiple switches as well as for multichannel switching in one device. In Phase
              I, feasibility of the technology will be established through the development
              and testing of a single-channel coaxial switch.  The alternative switch
              configurations will be analyzed from the points of view of cost and efficiency
              of operation.  Phase II will demonstrate practical realization of the full
              potential of the switch technology several different  purpose switch prototypes
              will be developed.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
