Title       : A Product Modelling and Fabrication System for Sheet Metal Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1994   
File        : a9460986

Award Number: 9460986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehran Kamran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geometric Machines Corp
	      60 Platinum Circle
	      Northampton, MA  01060    413/586-2477

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1464,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to explore the
              feasibility of developing a product modeling system for sheet metal and
              associated assemblies. This system, whose domain is the set of non-multi-curved
              objects, will be used to evaluate products for life-issues, capture designer
              intentions, propagate those intentions to planning modules, and to generate the
              necessary process information for manufacture. To accomplish this Geometric
              Machines Corp. will extend the research on ProMod-S, a sheet metal oriented
              product modeler developed by their group, which captures the geometric intents
              of the designer (which are related to the designer's functional intents), and
              evaluates the product geometry against manufacturing constraints. They will
              further develop principles and algorithms to capture design intentions, to
              evaluate designs, and to offer design advice. The capturing of assembly
              relations to preserve design intent will be accomplished using a spatial
              relationship kernel developed by their group in an earlier National Science
              Foundation SBIR grant for a product design system for mechanical assembly. The
              design rule checker will be developed using the concept of Medial Axis
              Transform applied to sheet metal design. The mapping of features to the tools
              and operations which make them and automatic process sequencing will also be
              investigated. This work will ultimately provide a stand-alone designer system
              for sheet metal.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
