Title       : In-Line Process Monitoring and Control for Poly-Silicon Formation Inside Cluster
               Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1996      
File        : a9460472

Award Number: 9460472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74894              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Solomon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Rosenthal  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Project will develop a Fourier Transform
              Infrared (FT-IR) reflectance spectrometer for in-line monitoring and control of
              poly-silicon processes within a cluster tool. Advanced Fuel Research. Inc.
              (AFR) has patented and developed a FTIR based method which eliminates many of
              the problems associated with present techniques. 1) It can determine accurate
              real-time thickness for as-deposited poly-silicon film inside the cluster tool.
              2) It can determine the real-time doping density in the poly-silicon film in
              nondestructive way; 3) It can monitor the thicknesses and doping density for
              poly-silicon processes on the product wafer directly; 4) It can determine the
              thicknesses of the cap SiO2 Layer and the thermal SiO2 layer, simultaneously
              and independently. A field test in the cooldown chamber of a Centura 5200
              cluster tool at Texas Instruments demonstrated the ability of on-line
              wafer-by-wafer data collection. An ex-situ analysis of poly-silicon product
              wafers, achieved excellent results. A software package is developed based on
              this method, and the first commercial sale is to SEMATECH. This project will be
              led by Advanced Fuel Research, Inc. (AFR). Texas Instruments, Inc. (11) will be
              a subcontractor. SEMATECH will be a collaborator. Phase I will prove the
              feasibility of in-line monitoring during the poly silicon processes in a
              Centura 5200 cluster tool. TI will fabricate calibration samples. SEMATECH will
              provide samples from different IC manufacturing. AFR will measure the ex-situ
              film characteristics, and improve the analysis method and software. Field tests
              will be done at TI. Phase II will implement the monitoring techniques and
              demonstrate the improved reliability of the process.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
