Title       : Novel Facilitated Transport Membranes for Olefin Separation Based on Water-Free
               Rubbery Polymer Electrolytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1995   
File        : a9460087

Award Number: 9460087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ingo Pinnau ipin@mtrinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Membrane Tech & Res Inc
	      1360 Willow Road Suite 103
	      Menlo Park, CA  940251516    415/328-2228

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1407,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
              separation of olefins from saturated hydrocarbons. Olefins, including ethylene
              and propylene, are produced in larger quantities than any other organic
              chemical in the United States. The separation of olefins from saturated
              hydrocarbons is currently carried out by distillation, which is an extremely
              energy-intensive process due to the very low relative volatilities of the
              components. Although polymeric membranes have been applied successfully to a
              number of gas separations, including nitrogen production from air and hydrogen
              removal from refinery streams, the selectivities and gas fluxes of such
              membranes are inadequate for olefin separation from saturated hydrocarbons.
              Facilitated transport membranes have higher selectivities and gas fluxes than
              polymeric membranes for olefin/paraffin separation. However, three problems
              have limited the application of facilitated transport membranes to industrial
              olefin separation applications: membrane instability, low gas fluxes, and the
              requirement of a water-saturated feed. Membrane Technology and Research, Inc.
              (MTR) proposes to develop a new type of solid facilitated transport membrane
              with high gas fluxes and high selectivities for the separation of olefins from
              saturated hydrocarbons. The membranes will consist of rubbery, polyether-based
              polymers that can be doped with a wide range of ionic salts as gas complexing
              agents. To provide high gas fluxes, the resulting solid polymer electrolyte
              will be formed into a thin-film composite membrane. Preliminary studies at MTR
              indicate that polymer electrolyte membranes can show dramatically improved
              performance over conventional facilitated transport membranes for
              olefin/paraffin separation and can be used with a dry feed.
