Title       : Radio-Optic Method for Measuring Relative Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9460825

Award Number: 9460825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Dunn wldunn@quantumres.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Quantum Research Svcs, Inc
	      5850 Fayetteville Road
	      Durham, NC  277139091    919/544-4952

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate a novel
              means of measuring the relative motion (displacement and velocity) between a
              structure and the medium in which it is embedded when the system is subjected
              to shock loads, such as those from earthquakes. The complexity of the behavior
              at the structure-medium interface poses a large source of uncertainty in design
              and analysis of man-made structures that are partially or totally embedded in a
              medium. The proposed method involves the use of an encapsulated and collimated
              radioisotope source located in the medium near the structure-medium interface
              and an array of plastic scintillating fibers embedded in the structure. As the
              source and fibers move relative to each other, the collimated source beam
              penetrates the intervening material and sweeps across the fiber array, exposing
              different fibers at different times. The displacement and velocity of the
              source (medium) relative to the fibers (structure) can be determined from the
              fiber count-rate time histories. Key features of the proposed approach include:
              the instrument minimizes interference with the motion at the interface; the
              fibers can be fabricated into ribbons, which maintain inter-fiber registration
              but are flexible and rugged; and the system can achieve high spatial resolution
              and high data collection rates. Phase I will involve design, modeling, and
              experimental testing of a laboratory system, in order to demonstrate
              proof-of-principle. Instruments for field evaluation would be developed and
              extensively tested in Phase II.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
