Title       : A Common Semantic Framework for Procedural and Non-Procedural Object-Oriented
               Database Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1995  
File        : a9460373

Award Number: 9460373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Nestor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Persistent Data Systems In
	      75 West Chapel Ridge Road
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152381827    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 6855,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate an
              approach to the creation of database applications that combines the convenience
              of user-friendly non-procedural interactive development with the rich
              programming power of an object-oriented database (OODB). Successful  completion
              of this project will put more power in the hands of non-programmers without
              limiting the  power available to programmers. Non-programmers will be able to
              develop their own simple applications  and more easily tailor and enhance the
              more complex applications developed by programmers. All users  will be able to
              develop applications more quickly and more reliably than is possible with
              currently available tools. Relational databases (RDBs) often include
              non-procedural tools such as schema designers, query-by-example, and report
              generators that can be used by relatively unsophisticated users to develop
              significant applications. Although OODBs are intrinsically more powerful and
              more naturally model many real world application domains, to date OODB
              application development has required considerable programming ability. The key
              idea that underlies our approach is to provide a seamless interface between
              non-procedural tools, like those available in RDBs, and a full general-purpose
              procedural programming language that when necessary (and only when necessary)
              can be used to write parts of an application. Persistent Data Systems' approach
              will be guided by a formal semantic model that will contribute to the design of
              an easy to learn and use development system that permits continuous incremental
              improvement to its set of tools.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
