Title       : Interactive Multimedia Educational Software Addressing the Technological
               Literacy Needs of Residents of Economically Disadvantaged Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1995  
File        : a9460696

Award Number: 9460696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60048              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Cottrell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton Teaching Assoc
	      15 Main St P O Box 562
	      Kingston, NJ  085289603    609/497-0008

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 5371,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
              feasibility of constructing interactive multimedia educational software to
              educate residents of economically disadvantaged communities in the skills
              necessary to take advantage of opportunities in emerging computer and
              information systems industries. A well-publicized revolution in information
              technology is taking place both nationally and globally. As the information
              decade unfolds, residents of economically disadvantaged communities face the
              prospect of further alienation from the American ideals of upward social and
              economic mobility (`Data Highway Ignoring Poor, Study Charges,` The New York
              Times, p. 1 May 25,1994). Just as real highways bypass economically depressed
              areas, it appears that the information superhighway--its technologies and its
              benefits--will bypass the residents of poor communities. Education, however,
              can give the residents of these communities the power to forge entrances into
              and become active participants in the information revolution. Instead of
              viewing emerging information technologies as further hindrances to the social
              mobility of historically disadvantaged groups, this project will construct the
              tools by which these technologies may be translated into new employment and
              educational opportunities. The technologies associated with the information
              revolution--interactive multimedia and computer networking--require a new set
              of job skills. Phase I research will prove that interactive multimedia training
              materials can effectively teach these skills, at both an introductory and an
              advanced level. Use of the proposed software will make students desirable
              members of the information technologies workforces by giving them skills,
              experience and training in emerging technologies. In addition, young adults who
              use the software will be introduced to subjects and technologies that will
              motivate them to pursue higher education in related fields.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
