Title       : Molecular Engineering of a Biocatalyst for the Destruction of Chlorinated
               Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1995   
File        : a9460076

Award Number: 9460076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Steffan Steffan@Envirogen.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Envirogen, Inc.
	      4100 Quakerbridge Road
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086484702    609/936-9300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project involves the use of
              molecular biological techniques to alter the substrate specificity and activity
              of a biological catalysts for destroying a wide variety of recalcitrant
              chlorinated solvents. The putative active site of cloned toluene monooxygenase
              genes of Pseudomonas mendocina KR1 will be altered by using site directed
              mutagenesis so that it more closely resemble that of
              broad-substrate-specificity methane monooxygenases. The resulting catalysts
              will be tested for their ability to degrade a variety of chlorinated solvents
              heretofore not degraded by the wild-type organism. The effect of alterations in
              the putative oxygen binding region of the enzyme will also be examined.
              Chlorinated solvents are the most widespread and abundant contaminants of the
              Nation's groundwater and soils, and many are directly carcinogenic even in
              small amounts. Moreover, they often occur as mixtures of chlorinated alkenes,
              alkanes, and sometimes chloroform. Current technologies for remediating soils
              and/or groundwater contaminated with chlorinated solvents are limited by their
              high costs or the fact that they often do not destroy the contaminating
              chemicals. Biological oxidation of chlorinated solvents, however, results in
              the complete destruction of the contaminant, and degradative microorganisms can
              be used to destroy contaminants spread over large areas or trapped in aquifers.
              Currently available biological catalysts for destroying chlorinated solvents
              are somewhat limited by their narrow substrate ranges, the instability of the
              degradative enzymes, or inherent properties such as slow growth or
              sensitivities to co-contaminants which make their application commercially
              impractical. During this project Envirogen, Inc. proposes to use modern
              molecular biological techniques to develop biocatalysts which have improved
              enzyme substrate specificity's and stability while processing characteristics
              such as rapid growth and robustness which make their application commercially
              feasible.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
