Title       : High-Level Specification for the Generation of Simulation Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1995    
File        : a9460150

Award Number: 9460150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anthony A. Centodocati                  
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63576              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Kant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SciComp Inc
	      7600 Valley Dale Drive
	      Austin, TX  787311236    512/346-5837

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2845,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to simplify the
              mathematical modeler's job by providing a very high-level specification
              language and implementation system for scientific computing. This project will
              extend a prototype that was developed for one application area (wave
              propagation) and one class of algorithms (finite difference methods).  In this
              prototype, equations can be specified in a coordinate-free notation (or by key
              words in the case of built-in equation classes). The system's output is a
              target code, optimized for the specific problem and platform (in the prototype,
              Fortran, C, or Connection Machine Fortran).   The modeler can optionally
              specify choices for the algorithm method and for initialization and output
              styles. Specifications can be given either interactively or in text files; many
              numerical experiments only require changing a line in the specification. The
              system can also generate a convergence rate test to validate the correctness of
              the generated program.   This main objective of this research is to develop an
              algorithm specification language that enables experts in algorithm design to
              cleanly and abstractly describe numerical methods. This language will make the
              program development approach extensible to a much wider range of applications.
              Because the program refinement process is implemented with objects, program
              transformations, and symbolic algebra, the algorithm specifications themselves
              can be very abstract-for example, independent of coordinate system,
              dimensionality, or optimizations. Other phases of the code generation process
              will incorporate these refinements.                                            
                     
