Title       : SBIR PHASE I: In-Situ Strain Measurements in Concrete by Use of Fiber-Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9460642

Award Number: 9460642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74979              (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Brower dbrower@astrotechnology.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Astro Technology Inc
	      14227 Oak Chase Drive
	      Houston, TX  770622036    281/464-9992

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1059,1448,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9460642  Brower       This Small business Innovation Research Phase I project
              investigates a method to monitor the mechanical response of civil engineering
              systems by use of fiber-optic sensors.  The effect of forces exerted on
              structures during natural catastrophes -- such as earthquakes, hurricanes,
              tornadoes, floods, or severe storms could be measured.  These devices will be
              rugged, low-cost, and will provide monitoring of strain in real time --
              allowing a constant vigilance of the state-of-stress during aging and changing
              loading profiles.  This would increase the ability of the engineer to assess
              the safety, state of repair, and expected lifetime of the structure.  The
              ultimate goal of this research effort is to commercialize a fully developed
              optical sensor that can be used throughout the construction industry.  The
              commercial sensor systems will contain "proven" low-cost optical-fibers,
              hardware, software, memory display, and support equipment.  This will be
              achieved through research, and application of a new approach, that uses
              innovative ideas built on existing fiber-optic interferometric sensors.  If
              successful, it will be possible to accurately measure the mechanical response
              properties of civil engineering structures in any desired location.  Strain
              from long-term and transient loads can be measured and recorded.       The
              sensors could be used in structures that use concrete such as buildings,
              parking garages, or bridges.  Currently, large civil engineering structures are
              visually inspected.  Extensometers or mechanical measuring devices are used on
              a periodic basis to evaluate the structure.  Unfortunately, visual inspections
              usually occur after a structural problem has already manifested itself. 
              Presently there are no sensing devices on the market that provide constant
              monitoring of the state of the structure.
