Title       : Social Perception and Social Categorization in Negotiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9210298

Award Number: 9210298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leigh L. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In all aspects of negotiation and conflict among individuals and               
              among groups, there are fundamental theoretical questions                      
              concerning biases in human judgment and decision-making.  This                 
              project examines the role of social perception in the                          
              development, maintenance and revision of judgment error in                     
              interpersonal conflicts.  The first line of investigation                      
              examines basic social perception processes in negotiation and                  
              factors that may reduce biases in social perception.  These                    
              studies focus on whether judgment error in negotiation is                      
              primarily due to biases in the reception of information or faulty              
              communication or information exchange.  The dynamic effect of the              
              two processes is also explored in an investigation of behavioral               
              confirmation in negotiation.  This investigation examines how                  
              perceivers' expectancies influence their behavior toward their                 
              opponent and may elicit expectancy-confirming behavior from the                
              opponent.  The second line of research investigates social                     
              categorization processes and negotiation.  These studies examine               
              whether negotiations with members of one's own social group are                
              more or less productive than negotiations conducted with members               
              of an outside group.  In addition, these studies examine how the               
              quality of negotiated agreements conducted with out-group members              
              is affected by the degree to which one's performance affects the               
              welfare of his or her group.  These studies have important                     
              practical implications for enhancing the quality of interpersonal              
              negotiations and intergroup relations.
