Title       : RIA: The Role of Lubricant Viscosity in the Frictional Behavior of the Magnetic
               Slider/Disk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9210469

Award Number: 9210469
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry P. Schwarcz schwarz@mcmaster.CA  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : McMaster Univ
	      
	      Hamilton, Ontario,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will continue research on ESR dating of prehistoric               
              archeological and hominid sites.  Energy is stored in natural                  
              materials as a result of bombardment by natural radioactivity.                 
              The amount of stored energy increases with time and can be used                
              to determine the age of the material.  The amount of stored                    
              energy can be determined from the intensity of an electron spin                
              resonance (ESR) signal displayed by these materials.  ESR dating               
              can be applied to tooth enamel of large mammals, and to quartz                 
              which has been heated in fires.  Tooth enamel is very commonly                 
              found in archaeological and hominid sites, and can be dated by                 
              ESR over a time range from a few thousand to over three million                
              years with a precision of + 5 to 10%.  Burnt flint and quartz are              
              also common in archaeological sites.  ESR dating has been                      
              successfully applied to prehistoric sites in Europe, Africa and                
              Asia, and has contributed to a revolutionary new view of the                   
              emergence of Modern Man.  This project will continue research on               
              methods of ESR analysis and application of the methods to sites                
              now being studied by U.S. archaeologists and anthropologists.                  
              The laboratory at McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada, is the                
              only lab in North America carrying out such analyses, which have               
              been recognized world-wide for their importance to the chronology              
              of human evolution.
