Title       : CAA: Molecular Systematics of the Lythraceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1992    
File        : a9210543

Award Number: 9210543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley A. Graham sgraham@phoenix.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              The Lythraceae is a plant family best known for the popular                    
              cultivated crape myrtles, the pomegranate, and the purple                      
              loosestrifes.  They are serious invaders of North American                     
              wetlands.  Other important genera are Henna, from which henna dye              
              is obtained; heimia, an hallucenogenic plant used by the Aztecs;               
              and cuphea, a promising new industrial crop being developed for its            
              specialized seed oils.  The family is primarily tropical and,                  
              although its evolutionary history is unclear, it is considered one             
              of the oldest members of the large order Myrtales.  The natural                
              relationships of the 31 genera are not easily determined, but                  
              computerized phylogenetic analysis of the floral, wood, and                    
              vegetative characters have produced hypotheses suggesting where the            
              family originated, what major divergent lines have evolved, and how            
              the modern genera are related.  The hypotheses are not strongly                
              supported by morphological characters, probably because of                     
              substantial loss of intervening taxa through time.  Taxonomic                  
              classification of the family is also inadequate and needs to be                
              revised based on phylogenetic information.  Molecular data offer               
              powerful new sets of characters for estimating phylogeny of the                
              family.  The research proposed will obtain DNA sequence data from              
              the nuclear and chloroplast genomes in 28 genera, construct                    
              phylogenies based on actual evolutionary changes at the molecular              
              level, and combine molecular and morphological information to                  
              produce a better understanding of the history and biodiversity of              
              this important plant family.  The Molecular Systematics Lab at the             
              Smithsonian Institution is an ideal facility for the molecular                 
              studies.  Modern characterization of the family will contribute to             
              active basic botanical research aimed at establishing the overall              
              history of the flowering plants, and to a myriad of applied                    
              research problems, including protection of wildfowl habitats from              
              invasion by loosestrife, production of specialized seed oils for               
              industrial and medicinal use, and investigation of lythraceous                 
              alkaloids for new drugs.
