Title       : Cellular Mechanisms of Nociceptive Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1992      
File        : a9210268

Award Number: 9210268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymon Glantz                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222852             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar T. Walters   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-9352

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project by Dr. Walters will compare cellular mechanisms within            
              the same neurons contributing to 3 classes of long-lasting                     
              alteration.  These alterations, which have generally been                      
              considered separately in different biological preparations by                  
              different laboratories are: 1) adaptive responses following injury             
              of a neuron's axon, 2) hyperexcitability of nociceptive neurons                
              (functionally equivalent to neurons in mammalian pain pathways)                
              during persistent nociceptive sensitization ("hyperalgesia"), and              
              3) aversive learning and memory.  Dr. Walters will be using                    
              electrophysiological, pharmacological, and morphological methods,              
              to characterize functionally identified neurons in an invertebrate             
              preparation to address the following questions:  First, does axonal            
              injury induce long-term changes in excitability, synaptic                      
              transmission, and morphology in functionally diverse neurons?                  
              Second, how do alterations induced by axonal injury compare to                 
              activity-dependent alterations that have previously been linked to             
              learning and memory.  In addition, how do injury-related and                   
              learning-related effects interact?  Third, is long-term plasticity             
              induced by axonal injury initially triggered by the interruption               
              of retrograde axonal transport of trophic factors, or do the axonal            
              triggers involve elevation within the axon of known signals for                
              neuronal plasticity such as the second messengers calcium and cAMP?            
              Fourth, do cAMP and calcium in or near the cell body of the neuron             
              contribute to the triggering of long-term plasticity during both               
              learning and cellular reactions to axonal injury?  These                       
              investigations may reveal basic mechanisms of plasticity that                  
              appeared early in evolution and which may be involved in memory,               
              regeneration, and chronic pain-like states.***//
