Title       : Binding Site Recognition of Trypanosome Mitochondrial Topoisomerase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1992 
File        : a9210943

Award Number: 9210943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Carter bcarter@UOFTO2.utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Trypanosomes are protozoa which cause several types of disease.                
              This proposal is for the study of a unique type of mitochondrial               
              DNA found in trypanosomes (kinetoplast DNA) and its interaction                
              with a new type II topoisomerase. Topoisomerases alter the topology            
              of DNA by causing transient breaks in the phosphodiester chain and             
              then resealing the chain. The structure of kinetoplast DNA is very             
              unusual. The mechanism of action of this topoisomerase will be                 
              compared to those of previously described topoisomerases. It is                
              known that certain drugs used to treat trypanosomal infections                 
              interact with this topoisomerase but not others, causing cleavage              
              of DNA to occur but resealing not to. Synthetic DNA substrates will            
              be prepared which mimic bent regions in the kinetoplast DNA, cross-            
              over junctions, minicircles, and enzyme binding site sequences.                
              These results will be compared to those obtained with natural DNA              
              substrates. The information obtained will add to our knowledge of              
              how DNA is packaged and processed in cells.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Trypanosomes are parasitic protozoa which cause sleeping sickness              
              and Chagas' disease. Several drugs are available to treat these                
              diseases. They apparently function by inhibiting an enzyme called              
              topoisomerase II, which is found in trypanosomal mitochondria. This            
              enzyme is involved in DNA replication, and after drug treatment the            
              DNA is cleaved but not resealed. A variety of approaches using                 
              synthetic DNAs with structural features similar to naturally                   
              occurring DNA will be used to determine the mechanism of action of             
              the enzyme and compare it to other topoisomerases.
