Title       : Culture and Negotiation Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1995        
File        : a9210536

Award Number: 9210536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193948             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Carnevale p-carnevale@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry C. Triandis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              This research focuses on negotiation behavior in different                     
              cultures.  People in some cultures, more than other cultures,                  
              emphasize group interests more than individual interests.  This                
              has implications for the way people resolve disputes and                       
              negotiate, especially between and within groups and                            
              organizations.  This research studies negotiation and mediation                
              behavior in the USA and Netherlands, where past work shows that                
              the individual is more important, and India and Hong Kong, where               
              the group is more important.  Procedures that identify subjects                
              who emphasize groups interests above individual interests will be              
              used in each of these sites in equivalent negotiation and                      
              mediation experiments.  These experiments will test hypotheses                 
              derived from negotiation and mediation theory.  Among the issues               
              to be examined are the effects of negotiating between versus                   
              within groups, group representation, and the effects of                        
              attributes of constituents on negotiation by the group                         
              representatives.  In the experiments, subjects will interact in                
              simulated negotiation and mediation sessions.  A record of their               
              interaction will be coded.  Outcome measures include negotiation               
              and mediation tactics, negotiator offers, concession rare,                     
              mediator recommendations, and the quality of the negotiated                    
              agreements.  The results of this research are important for                    
              understanding how negotiators and mediators function in different              
              cultures.  We will also learn how people in negotiations across                
              settings (e.g., business, environmental, political) can be                     
              trained to improve their negotiation effectiveness.
