Title       : Trans-neuronal Induction of Neuromuscular Atrophy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9210394

Award Number: 9210394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Susan F. Volman                     
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224814             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund A. Arbas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Intact nerve supply is known to be important to the development and            
              maintenance of muscle.  However, the mechanisms underlying nerve-              
              muscle interactions are poorly understood.  To examine this issue,             
              a unique case of muscle atrophy following damage to a remote nerve             
              will be studied in a simple, insect system.  In the grasshopper,               
              loss of a hind leg by autotomy results in atrophy of undamaged,                
              fully innervated muscles in the thorax.  Experimental cutting  of              
              nerves and loading or unloading of these muscles indicates that                
              severing the leg nerve during autotomy trans-synaptically induces              
              atrophy of the undamaged thoracic muscles.  Staining with                      
              antibodies and intracellular recordings from muscles and identified            
              neurons will elucidate cellular changes that precede and accompany             
              atrophy.  Selective ablations of sensory neurons will examine the              
              role of orthograde influences in the induction of atrophy.                     
              Selective axotomy of leg muscle motoneurons will examine the role              
              of retrograde influences.  Selective nerve blockade with                       
              tetrodotoxin will test the role of neural impulse activity.                    
              Blockade with colchicine will test the role of molecules                       
              transported by fast axonal transport maintaining.  These studies               
              will advance our understanding of the regulatory interactions among            
              neurons and muscle cells that are crucial for the development and              
              maintenance of their mature form and function.
