Title       : Diagnostic Reasoning Using Sequential Decision Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1994  
File        : a9210030

Award Number: 9210030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie L. Webber bonnie@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Provan  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9135,
Abstract    :
              Formalizing diagnostic reasoning is a necessary aspect of creating             
              useful diagnostic tools.  Even though much progress has been made,             
              there are several deficiencies in the existing formalization.                  
              These include the definition of diagnostic reasoning as a single-              
              stage process which is independent of the use of the diagnosis, of             
              tests which can be done to clarify the hypothesized diagnoses, or              
              of the utility associated with the treatment of the abnormalities.             
              This research proposes a sequential decision framework for                     
              diagnostic reasoning which overcomes many of these deficiencies.               
              A key new intuition for this approach is modeling diagnostic                   
              reasoning as a process which consists not solely as a single step              
              of computing a diagnosis (as there is considerable controversy over            
              what a diagnosis actually is, even given the same input data);                 
              instead, it is a multi-stage decision process in which decisions               
              about testing and treatment, as well as scarce resource and utility            
              considerations, are crucial parts of the model.  This framework                
              extends most existing formalization of diagnostic reasoning to                 
              incorporate important aspects of the diagnostic process.  Two                  
              applications of the framework to diagnostic systems are                        
              investigated in this research.  The first application (which has               
              been implemented) is a Markov decision network model for the                   
              diagnosis of acute abdominal pain.  The second application is a                
              sequential process of consistency-based diagnosis interleaved with             
              tests, for diagnosing Boolean circuits.                                        
               //
