Title       : The Initiation of New Democratic Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9210984

Award Number: 9210984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55193              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Geddes geddes@polisci.sscnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Career Advancement Award for Women Scientists and Engineers               
              is intended to support an experienced investigator in activities               
              that can expand  her research career potential through developing              
              new research skills and conducting exploratory and pilot work to               
              determine the feasibility of a contemplated new line of inquiry.               
              The work is directed at investigating the initiation of particular             
              democratic institutions, particularly during periods of transition             
              to democracy.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The study begins with the hypothesis that institutional choice                 
              depends primarily on the interests of those charged with writing               
              and voting on new laws and constitutions, and that these interests             
              center on achieving and surviving in office.  The research                     
              methodology involves, first, locating the constitutions,                       
              constitutional amendments, laws, and decrees that initiate                     
              institutional change; second, attributing institutional preferences            
              derived from their electoral and other political survival needs to             
              the actors involved; and third, examining the historical record to             
              see if the actors identified acted as predicted or not.  Cases to              
              be examined include nine Latin American countries with substantial             
              democratic experience during the twentieth century and four East               
              European countries currently engaged in the transition to                      
              democracy.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              During the period of the award, the investigator will take courses             
              in math and game theory to upgrade her analytic skills as well as              
              reading widely on the history and politics of Eastern Europe.  This            
              Career Advancement Award promises to substantially expand the                  
              capabilities and potential of the investigator.
