Title       : The Social Construction of Status Value
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1993      
File        : a9210171

Award Number: 9210171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122049             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecilia L. Ridgeway ridgeway@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              People hold consensual beliefs about the status value, that is,                
              about the competence and worthiness, of individuals.   It is                   
              puzzling, however, that these beliefs are often based largely                  
              upon the unordered or nominal categories, such as gender and                   
              ethnicity, to which these individuals belong.  This proposal                   
              examines the interactive processes by which such consensual status             
              values may be acquired.  A theory is proposed that argues that if              
              a correlation occurs between a given nominal characteristic and the            
              distribution of economic resources, it constrains face-to-face                 
              interaction within the population.  In encounters between people               
              differing in both resources and the nominal characteristic, these              
              constraints lead to an association between that characteristic and             
              status-type beliefs.  When individuals bring this status                       
              association to other encounters and treat people according to it,              
              the structural constraints on interaction allow it to diffuse                  
              widely, and it becomes consensual. Specifically, two experiments               
              will be conducted to test this theory.  The first experiment will              
              show whether or not an individual participant who works with a                 
              person who has a different pay level and a different nominal                   
              characteristic will form expectations states which then transfer               
              to a later situation where that individual differs from the other              
              person only in nominal characteristics but not in pay level.  A                
              second experiment examines a more "advanced" stage of the process,             
              exploring situations in which the nominal characteristic might                 
              acquire low status value even for people who have obtained a high              
              value of the resource.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This project will contribute better understanding of the linkage               
              between social processes at the micro-level and the distribution               
              of resources reflecting social and economic arrangements at the                
              macro-level.  It will also provide information for researchers and             
              policy makers who are concerned with issues of inequality and                  
              equity.
