Title       : Incomplete Markets and Macroeconomics Linkages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1992   
File        : a9210161

Award Number: 9210161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190726             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianne Baxter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The research investigates the importance of international financial            
              market linkages for macroeconomic activity.  It is divided into                
              three related topics, each part very cruical in improving our                  
              understanding concerning financial markets and fiscal policies in              
              an international setting.                                                      
                                                                                             
              (1) Financial Markets and Macroeconomic Linkages.  This part                   
              explores the effect of closing international markets in contingent             
              securities on the character of international business cycles and               
              asset prices.  Specifically, whether imposing plausible asset                  
              market restrictions improves the predictive power of international             
              real business cycle models will be explored.                                   
                                                                                             
              (2) The International Transmission of Fiscal Policy.  This part                
              studies the international transmission of shifts in domestic tax               
              and expenditure policies, under alternative assumptions concerning             
              the extent of financial market linkages.  Initial research suggests            
              that asset market restrictions are likely to be very important for             
              the transmission of fiscal shocks.                                             
                                                                                             
              (3) Incomplete Asset Markets and Optimal Portfolio Choice.  This               
              part reopens the well known, but little understood, "international             
              diversification puzzle" (individuals tend to hold portfolios in                
              which their country's assets represent a disproportionately large              
              share, relative to their share in the world market).  When labor               
              income risk is non-insurable, the optimal portfolio is shown to                
              involve a short position in securities of national origin, in order            
              to optimally hedge this risk.  In this part of the project, the                
              welfare effects of the observed deviations from the optimal                    
              portfolio under incomplete markets will be investigated.
