Title       : RPG: Clay-Mineral Assemblages as Signature of Climate Changes in
               Pennsylvanian-Age Rocks (USA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1992      
File        : a9210461

Award Number: 9210461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marvin E. Kauffman                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keddy Yemane kyemane@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   Although there is a consensus that major long-term global                 
              climate changes occurred during the Pennsylvanian in North America,            
              there are fundamental disagreements in the frequency and magnitude             
              of these inferred climate changes.  Are the disparities in the                 
              inferred records of Pennsylvanian climates reflections of                      
              nonuniform methodologies?  Or results of regional climate                      
              fluctuations?  In this proposal it is planned to readdress this                
              issue through an innovative approach in which the quantitative                 
              changes in the distribution of both clay-mineral and pollen and                
              spore assemblages will be documented on individual rock specimens              
              from selected continental sequences in the Appalachian Basin.  The             
              integration of combined clay/pollen study will  provide high                   
              resolution analysis and at the same time allow the comparison of               
              clay and pollen curves to isolated differences that may arise from             
              employing different methodologies.  Reconstructed climate changes              
              will be compared against the Pennsylvanian climate trends                      
              established by other workers.  In this proposal I will answer the              
              following questions using microfacies studies and quantitative                 
              variations of the clay-mineral and pollen/spore flora assemblages              
              across stratigraphic boundaries.  1) Are the aridities postulated              
              for the early Middle Pennsylvanian and Late Pennsylvanian recorded             
              in the clay mineral assemblages? 2) Are the abrupt climate changes             
              suggested by plant extinctions during the two arid intervals                   
              indicated in the clay mineral assemblages? 3) Are there                        
              similarities in the onset of aridity between the earlier and later             
              arid intervals?  4) Does the clay-mineral assemblages record minor             
              climate fluctuations not indicated in the paleoflora or in the                 
              large-scale sedimentological features?  This research will increase            
              the understanding of Pennsylvanian climate changes, and assess the             
              regional applicability of this rigorous and comprehensive approach             
              in documenting climatic signatures from continental deposits.
