Title       : Generalizations of Condorcet's Jury Theorem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1992      
File        : a9210800

Award Number: 9210800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna K. Ladha   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Societies and organizations spend considerable resources in search             
              of the truth or to identify the true state of the world.  For                  
              example, it must be decided whether a defendant is guilty, an                  
              economy is in recession or a given parcel of land bears oil.                   
              Usually, the decision is made in a state of relative ignorance                 
              because no one knows the truth.  The question then arises:  By what            
              rule should the society decide?  In particular, is the society more            
              likely to succeed by delegating the task of discovery to one of its            
              members or to a jury (committee) which follows majority-rule                   
              voting?  If the latter, who should be on the jury?                             
                                                                                             
              When the number of alternatives is two, Condorcet's jury theorem               
              (CJT) states that under certain conditions a majority of jurors                
              would do better than any one individual.  Unfortunately, these                 
              conditions are difficult to satisfy:  CJT assumes that jurors (i)              
              share a common goal, and (ii) vote independently.  In reality,                 
              assumption (i) may not be met, and assumption (ii) is seldom met.              
                                                                                             
              This research investigation seeks to advance Condorcet's jury                  
              theorem in various directions.  It synthesizes the preceding work              
              on CJT by permitting simultaneously both conflict of interest and              
              correlated votes.  It studies choice situations where the                      
              alternatives are not fixed but arise from interactions among the               
              voters.  In particular, the research seeks to specify conditions               
              under which a relatively uninformed electorate attains the outcome             
              it would choose with full information.
