Title       : RIA: Condition Monitoring and Control: An Integrated, System-Theoretic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1994    
File        : a9210178

Award Number: 9210178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Devendra P. Garg                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Helmicki ahelmicki@royal.fulff.ece.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Modern engineering systems often utilize closed-loop control in                
              order to meet requirements on system performance. Condition                    
              monitoring systems augmenting the control system are seen to be a              
              means of enhancing reliability, reducing operating cost and                    
              extending system lifetime. This research is a general system-                  
              theoretic approach which will promote the integrated analysis and              
              design of condition monitoring and control systems. This approach              
              is based on recent results from algebraic systems theory allowing              
              the integrated condition monitoring and controls problem to be                 
              imbedded in a general control systems architecture. The                        
              capabilities of this approach will be demonstrated as follows:                 
              First, this approach will be used to illuminate the extent to                  
              which condition monitoring and control system design objectives                
              impact one another. Second, existing control system design tools               
              will be extended to handle the design of integrated condition                  
              monitoring and control systems. Third, these tools will be used                
              to obtain analytical results quantifying the design trade-offs                 
              involved. Fourth, these tools will be used to address open                     
              research questions related to generating condition monitoring                  
              system specifications and selecting condition monitoring sensor                
              suites. Finally, it will be shown that the above results can be                
              extended to classes of nonlinear plants.*** //
