Title       : Gene Regulation in Melanocytic Cell Hybrids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1992 
File        : a9210146

Award Number: 9210146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy G. Lugo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal is to study the formation of melanocyte cell                  
              hybrids which contain negative regulatory genes that suppress                  
              either the production of melanin or the production of basic                    
              fibroblast growth factor. Individual chromosomes from non-pigmented            
              cells will be transferred to melanocytes, and chromosomes from                 
              normal melanocytes will be transferred into melanoma cells.                    
              Techniques are available to form microcell hybrids which can then              
              be subjected to karyotypic analysis for identification of the                  
              individual chromosomes. Tissue specific extinguisher loci have not             
              been well characterized in melanocytes, although they have been                
              characterized in liver cells. In liver cells, down-regulation of               
              target gene expression occurs at the mRNA level; similar                       
              experiments will be carried out in melanocytes.                                
              %%%                                                                            
              Melanocytes produce the pigment melanin under closely regulated                
              conditions. When melanocytes are converted to melanoma cells, which            
              are frequently cancerous, the production of melanin and of a growth            
              factor, basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), is increased. This              
              proposal is to prepare microcell hybrids of melanoma cells                     
              containing individual chromosomes from normal melanocytes, in order            
              to isolate the specific genes that in normal cells suppress the                
              production of melanin and of bFGF. The individual chromosomes will             
              be identified by standard karyotypic analysis. The molecular                   
              structure of the genes involved in suppression will then be                    
              determined.
