Title       : Oculomotor Responses in Substantia Nigra and Thalamus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1994      
File        : a9210478

Award Number: 9210478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Walter Wilczynski                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224141             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Gardiner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The control of movement is accomplished by the coordinated activity            
              of many different brain nuclei, which are discrete collections of              
              brain cells or neurons. One system of brain nuclei that make                   
              important contributions to the function of movement in general is              
              the basal ganglia. Recently it has been shown that the basal                   
              ganglia help to control eye movements as well as other types of                
              movements. Signals from the basal ganglia are known to project to              
              lower brainstem structures that control the detailed execution of              
              saccadic eye movements, which are rapid, ballistic-like eye                    
              movements that are made in order to rapidly change the direction               
              of gaze. Another pathway by which the basal ganglia can influence              
              eye movements is via a projection to nuclei of the thalamus. Such              
              signals are then propagated to selected parts of the neocortex                 
              where more complex aspects of eye movements are regulated. In this             
              award to Dr. Thomas Gardiner, signals transmitted to the thalamus              
              from the basal ganglia will be studied to understand the type of               
              controls that the basal ganglia has over eye movements via pathways            
              from the thalamus to the neocortex. Recordings of activity will be             
              made from neurons in thalamic regions which receive basal ganglia              
              input in relation to the performance of both saccadic eye                      
              movements, as described above, and pursuit eye movements, which are            
              the smooth, slow movements that allow visual tracking of moving                
              objects. This work will contribute important knowledge about how               
              the central nervous system controls eye movements.
