Title       : Economic Models of Strategic Information Technology Investments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1992       
File        : a9210398

Award Number: 9210398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Les Gasser                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anitash Barua bgga031@utxvms  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
                Information Technology (IT) is considered as a strategic weapon              
              that can be used to secure competitive advantage.  Most of the                 
              relevant studies in this domain seek to make the case through the              
              development of conceptual frame works, and ex post examples of                 
              successful deployment of strategic IT.  Empirical evidence,                    
              however, suggest that many strategic IT investments became                     
              unfortunate strategic necessities rather than means of gaining                 
              competitive advantage.  Thus, many questions regarding the                     
              economics of strategic IT remain unanswered.  The research analyzes            
              IT investments under various competitive situations through the                
              development of formal economic models.  The research consists of               
              three studies in distinct but related areas within strategic IT.               
              The first study involves IT related quality competition in a                   
              setting where two firms have the opportunity to improve the quality            
              of their services through IT investment.  The research analyzes the            
              division of technology related benefits between the firms and the              
              consumers, and the impacts of technological improvements on                    
              investment levels.  The second study focuses on competition through            
              IT innovation.  It analyzes the IT investment incentives of a                  
              market leader and a challenger, and characterizes situations in                
              which there may be a reversal of such incentives.  Adoption of                 
              interorganizational systems is the topic of the third study.  In               
              particular, the optimal adoption times of an Electronic Data                   
              Interchange network by supplier firms are studied.  The research               
              is based on the Industrial Organization (IO)  approach with both               
              theoretical and empirical components.  Game theory is used as a                
              primary theoretical research tool.  The studies enhance the                    
              understanding of many economic aspects of IT investments in                    
              competitive environments.
