Title       : Public Values and the Transition to the Market Among Post- Soviet Republics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9210429

Award Number: 9210429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna Bahry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Although post-communist countries vary in their approaches to                  
              economic reform, many share a common complaint:  the opposition of             
              sizeable groups in society to the basic values of a market economy.            
              Particularly in the Commonwealth of Independent States and the                 
              Baltics, pro-and anti-market leaders alike have noted what they see            
              as deep-seated public resistance to private property, market                   
              prices, and substantial inequality.  Cultural traditions and                   
              socialist values appear to have reinforced a public taste for a                
              strong but benevolent welfare state, from early Tsarist times to               
              the post-Soviet era.                                                           
                                                                                             
              An adverse public reaction could surely undermine the transition to            
              a free market economy.  Not only is there a threat of outright                 
              resistance; reforms may simply be subverted by a resentful                     
              citizenry.  As some experiments with privatization elsewhere                   
              reveal, lack of public backing can breed chronic dissatisfaction or            
              simple disengagement.  And as the reluctance of post-Communist                 
              leaders demonstrates, fear of adverse public reaction influences               
              both the content and the sequencing of reforms.  The problem is all            
              the more challenging where economic restructuring is accompanied by            
              political liberalization.  Society is "empowered" just at the time             
              when many of its most cherished values, and its accustomed economic            
              security, are under attack by political leaders.                               
                                                                                             
              This situation leads to examining the extent to which there is in              
              fact resistance to the elements of a free market economy, such as              
              private enterprise, deregulation, and inequality of outcomes.  The             
              current project is designed to gauge the extent and nature of                  
              public resistance to a market economy, and to explain its sources.             
              It is also designed to address several other issues, some                      
              substantive (such as the relationship between cultural values,                 
              support for economic reform, and democratic attitudes); and some               
              methodological (such as the consistency and reliability of survey              
              data from former Soviet republics).  The research explores public              
              attitudes toward economic reform in four republics of the former               
              Soviet Union.  Based on a survey in Russia, Armenia, Lithuania and             
              Estonia the investigator examines support for, and opposition to,              
              different elements of a market economy, and the core values that               
              shape public views.  The research should help to inform the debate             
              both in the West and in the former republics over the prospects for            
              a post-Soviet market economy.
