Title       : Optical Microstructures and Their Application to SpontaneousEmission Inhibition
               and Semiconductor Micro-Lasers (ResearchInitiation Award)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1993    
File        : a9210434

Award Number: 9210434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seng T. Ho sth@eecs.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1503      OPTICAL COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              An experimental research program is                                            
              proposed to study inhibition of                                                
              spontaneous emission in semiconductors                                         
              using micro dielectric structures and to                                       
              explore various realizations of                                                
              semiconductor micro-lasers with                                                
              microscopic ring cavities.  The inhibition of                                  
              spontaneous emission is of great interest                                      
              because of its potential application to low-                                   
              threshold lasers.  We showed recently                                          
              theoretically that the spontaneous emission                                    
              rates of excitons in a semiconductor can                                       
              be drastically reduced by embedding a                                          
              thin layer of the semiconductor in low-                                        
              refractive-index materials.  An experimental                                   
              study of this effect is proposed.  The                                         
              experiment will involve time-resolved                                          
              measurement of excitonic decay in thin                                         
              GaAs or InP quantum wells, or Yb-doped                                         
              semiconductors, surrounded by materials                                        
              of low refractive indices.  Later, similar                                     
              studies will be extended to wire-like                                          
              dielectric structures.  The microstructures                                    
              required will be fabricated via a selective-                                   
              etching technique.  The same technique                                         
              can be used to fabricate semiconductor                                         
              micro-ring lasers, which were recently                                         
              demonstrated to have low (optically                                            
              pumped) thresholds.  A good way to                                             
              obtain output from such lasers, however,                                       
              has not been achieved.  An experiment is                                       
              proposed to investigate the coupling of                                        
              such lasers to waveguides as an output                                         
              coupling method.  Various geometries and                                       
              active layers will be explored to determine                                    
              the optimal relaization of such lasers.
