Title       : Foundations and Practice of Social Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1994       
File        : a9210009

Award Number: 9210009
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313083             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Kimball Romney akromney@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Batchelder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Social measurements derived from informant judgements                     
              are widespread and improvements in their quality are critical                  
              to advancing social science research.  Examples of these                       
              measurements,  drawn from various areas of social science,                     
              include:  ratings of occupational prestige in sociology,                       
              rankings of friendship in social networks and social                           
              psychology,  determinants of group preferences in social                       
              choice,  judgments of the similarity among kinship terms in                    
              anthropology,  and judgments of the seriousness of crimes in                   
              political science, etc.                                                        
                   The long range goal the this research is to contribute                    
              scientific methods to improve the quality of social                            
              measurements that depend upon aggregating the judgments of                     
              informants.  Social concepts such as cultural beliefs and                      
              social norms are defined by social conventions,   with no                      
              outside criteria for comparison.  Measurements must be                         
              inferred from the pattern of responses among informants,                       
              obtained in field settings with limitations on time,                           
              facilities,  and number of informants.                                         
                   Combining methods from foundations of measurement and                     
              statistical modelling,  this research probes the fundamental                   
              logic underlying two problems basic to social measurement:                     
              (1) How can one meaningfully infer item attributes from                        
              responses of informants,  each of whom may be calibrated on a                  
              different scale ?  Meaningful social attributes should                         
              satisfy some sort of invariance under permissible                              
              transformations in the response scales of each informant.                      
              Improved measures of interitem similarity and social network                   
              concepts will result from such investigation.  (2)  How can                    
              one assess the quality of the information provided by each                     
              informant in order to arrive an an optimal weighting scheme                    
              for aggregating responses ?  The research develops new                         
              statistical models for different scaling techniques such as                    
              magnitude estimation,  paired comparisons,  and the constant                   
              sum method.  The models will allow researchers to optimize                     
              the reliability of aggregated data.                                            
                   The significance of the research is that it will provide                  
              new methods of social measurement comparable in quality to                     
              those used in such areas as psychophysics, where comparisons                   
              with objective physical stimuli are utilized.  The                             
              interdisciplinary collaboration of the two investigators has                   
              been extremely successful in the past.  The promise of their                   
              ambitious research agenda,  both in its conceptual                             
              significance and practical import,  is equally great.
