Title       : Guaranteeing Hard Real-Time Deadlines in FDDI Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9210583

Award Number: 9210583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99652              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Zhao zhao@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4097,
Abstract    :
                   The key to the success in using a distributed system for                  
              hard real-time applications is the timely execution of                         
              computation tasks which usually reside on different nodes and                  
              communicate with one another to accomplish a common goal.                      
              End-to-end deadline guarantees are not possible without a                      
              communication network which supports the timely delivery of                    
              intertask messages. The main focus of the research is to address               
              issues related to guaranteeing synchronous message deadlines,                  
              i.e., no matter what happens (except a network  failure), the                  
              messages will be transmitted before their deadlines.  We have                  
              selected FDDI (Fiber Distributed Data Interface) networks for                  
              this study because they are well suited for hard real-time                     
              communications, due not only to their high bandwidth, but also to              
              their property of bounded token rotation time.  However, a                     
              bounded token rotation time alone is not sufficient to guarantee               
              hard  real-time deadlines. Synchronous capacity allocation is                  
              equally critical in achieving this performance objective.  In                  
              this project, we concentrate on design and analysis of                         
              synchronous capacity allocation to guarantee message deadlines.                
              The project consists of four related tasks: We  first address                  
              the issue of optimality. An optimal scheme  achieves the highest               
              worst case utilization and hence offers the best chance to                     
              guarantee a set of synchronous messages. Then, we  study                       
              localized allocation schemes which use local information to                    
              allocate synchronous capacity to a node.  They have the advantage              
              of being able to adjust the parameters on one node without                     
              disturbing the operations of others.  Next, we will extend our                 
              basic model to consider variations needed in practice.  For                    
              example, some applications do not require an absolute deadline                 
              guarantee, i.e., occasionally  missing a deadline is acceptable.               
              We formalize these ideas in the design and analysis of                         
              allocations schemes in order to improve their applicability.                   
              Selection of TTRT (Target Token Rotation Time) also affects                    
              the chance of guaranteeing deadlines; this is addressed as the                 
              last task in the project.
