Title       : Topics in the Economics of Traffic Congestion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9210319

Award Number: 9210319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Arnott   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to analyze four topics related to              
              the economic theory of urban transportation.  Given the huge                   
              costs of major new transportation projects in downtown areas, as               
              well as the political opposition to such projects, the current                 
              trend in urban transportation policy is to utilize existing                    
              capacity more effectively.  This entails primarily demand                      
              reallocation across travel modes, time of day, and links of the                
              urban traffic network.  The dominant cause of the inefficient                  
              utilization of existing capacity is that urban car travel is                   
              underpriced because drivers do not pay for the congestion they                 
              impose on others.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Three of the topics concern various aspects of congestion                      
              pricing.  The first asks the question;  If efficient congestion                
              pricing is employed, what proportion of the costs of constructing              
              and operating an urban traffic network will be covered by tolls?               
              The second examines efficient parking policy by analyzing how                  
              much space, both on- and off-street should be provided for                     
              parking and how should fees be set.  The third topic considers                 
              some practical aspects of the use of congestion pricing at major               
              metropolitan airports to replace the current system of weight-                 
              based landing fees levied on airplane.  The final topic                        
              investigates how individuals coordinate their daily schedules                  
              (leisure and work activities) over time and space, with the aim                
              of assessing the desirability of government policy to encourage                
              more flexible working hours.
