Title       : Undoing Socialism: Tensions and Dissonances in Law Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  1995    
File        : a9210575

Award Number: 9210575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Inga Markovits   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The reunification of Germany is prompting the restructuring of the             
              former East German (GDR) legal system.  In theory, East Germany's              
              legal transformation was sudden and total: on the day of Germany's             
              reunification, the GDR's former socialist legal system was replaced            
              by the West German model of the rule of law.  But in practice,                 
              reunification could not bring about the immediate exchange of one              
              legal culture for its opposite.  The German Unification Treaty,                
              sensitive to adjustment problems, therefore restricts the                      
              applicability of many West German statutes in the eastern half of              
              the country, extends the validity of East German statutes for a                
              limited period of time, and even allows for the temporary survival             
              of East German courts, and the continued employment of certain East            
              German judges.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This project examines the effects of this historical clash of two              
              fundamentally opposed legal cultures in one specific locale: the               
              Potsdam city court district.  It uses ethnographic methods,                    
              specifically court observations and interviews with various                    
              participants in the legal process, including East German judges and            
              prosecutors, West German guest judges and guest prosecutors, West              
              and East German attorneys, East German lay assessors, and                      
              (predominately) East German litigants.  The project is significant             
              in providing an in-depth analysis of legal reform underway in                  
              Germany and a number of former socialist states, focusing on how               
              formerly socialist citizens and professionals adjust to the rule               
              of law, providing insights about what remnants of socialist legal              
              thought and behavior are most likely to surface under the new legal            
              system, and revealing how these remnants impact the reform effort.             
              In addition, the project advances the study of legal consciousness             
              by revealing the role that the rule of law plays in restructuring              
              notions of social order and change when a society abandons its                 
              ideological identity.
