Title       : Characterization of Myosin in the Vertebrate Retina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1992      
File        : a9210141

Award Number: 9210141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Breckler jbreck@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal is to study the content and isoforms of myosin in             
              the retina of green sunfish and zebrafish. These teleost fish                  
              contain three well-defined types of cells: rods, cones, and RPEs               
              (retinal pigmented epithelial cells). All three cell types show                
              well-defined changes in response to light, darkness, and certain               
              chemicals. These shape changes occur both in the intact retina and             
              in isolated cells, and are known as retinomotor movements. Some of             
              the motility changes have been shown to be actin-dependent, so it              
              is likely that myosin is also involved. Myosin K/EDTA ATPase                   
              activity will be measured by standard techniques. Myosin will be               
              immunolocalized using monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies against              
              three types of non-muscle myosin, and monoclonal antibodies against            
              retinal myosin will also be prepared. Myosin isoform synthesis and             
              deposition will be determined in the developing retina; because of             
              the way the retina develops, the age and state of morphogenesis of             
              the various cell types can be easily determined.                               
              %%%                                                                            
              Fish retinas change more in response to light, darkness, and other             
              stimuli than mammalian retinas do. They provide a convenient system            
              for studying the possible role of myosin in the changes in cell                
              shape. Actin has already been identified in fish retinal cells. In             
              non-muscle tissues, at least three types of myosin have been                   
              identified, which have markedly different properties. Antibodies to            
              these isoforms have been prepared. They will be used to determine              
              which form of myosin is present in each cell type, and where it is             
              localized. If retinal myosin is different from the known types,                
              monoclonal antibodies will be prepared against it. Since the                   
              location of cells is well-characterized during retinal development,            
              the antibodies will be used to see whether isoforms change during              
              this time. Since myosin-based cell motility is important for many              
              life processes, it is likely that the results will apply to other              
              systems as well.
