Title       : Isolation and Characterization of a Calcium-dependent Hyaluronanbinding Protein
               in Rat Liver Sinusoidal Endothelial Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1992   
File        : a9210122

Award Number: 9210122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith Yannariello-Brown jybrown@beach.utmb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul H. Weigel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal is for study of an extracellular, calcium-                    
              dependent receptor which binds the glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan                
              (HA) in liver endothelial cells. HA is a component of extra-                   
              cellular matrix, and is involved in cell migration, cell division,             
              tissue organization, and development. One major and two minor poly-            
              peptides have been tentatively identified as the HA receptor using             
              modified HA which has been radioiodinated. The putative receptor               
              will be purified using standard biochemical techniques, the oligo-             
              saccharide specificity will be determined, and polyclonal or mono-             
              clonal antibodies will be produced. The antibodies will then be                
              used to localize the receptor in various cell types. Properties of             
              this receptor will also be compared to the calcium-independent HA              
              receptor, which is involved in binding and endocytosis of HA.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              One component of the matrix surrounding cells is a polysaccharide              
              called hyaluronan (HA). It is involved in development, tissue                  
              organization, cell division, and cell migration. Endothelial cells             
              have a receptor which is involved in removal of HA from the                    
              circulation. This proposal is to study the properties of a second              
              HA receptor which was recently discovered. Standard biochemical                
              techniques will be used to purify the protein, and antibodies will             
              be prepared so the location of the receptor in various cell types              
              can be studied. The mechanisms controlling the interaction between             
              extracellular matrix and endothelial cells will be examined.
