Title       : Theoretical Studies in Ecological and Population Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9210895

Award Number: 9210895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie A. Asmussen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Recent population studies show that joint nuclear-cytoplasmic                  
              surveys allow unique inferences about many important evolutionary              
              processes.  This special utility derives from the fact that genes              
              in the nucleus are inherited through both parents, while an                    
              organism's cytoplasmically-housed genes, such as those in                      
              mitochondria and chloroplasts, are usually inherited solely through            
              the mother.  As a result of this asymmetrical transmission, a                  
              population's joint nuclear-cytoplasmic makeup can provide a new way            
              for detecting zones of genetic admixture between two populations,              
              and for unraveling the relative amounts of pollen and seed                     
              dispersion in plant populations.  The proposed research will                   
              develop the necessary theoretical framework for unlocking the novel            
              information encoded by nuclear-cytoplasmic data in these and other             
              important evolutionary contexts.  The practical utility of these               
              new approaches will be demonstrated by direct applications to a                
              variety of recent data sets.  A parallel line of research will                 
              provide a conceptual framework for understanding the fundamental               
              question of how and why cytoplasmic inheritance patterns evolve                
              through time.  This seminal theoretical study is motivated by the              
              growing number of cases in which mitochondria and chloroplasts are             
              inherited through the father or both parents, instead of solely                
              through the mother.  Moreover, the pattern of inheritance may                  
              evolve through time under the control of nuclear or cytoplasmic                
              genes within the parents or progeny.  These exciting experimental              
              discoveries will form the basis of an extensive series of models               
              designed to delimit the conditions favoring evolution among the                
              three cytoplasmic inheritance patterns, and answer the critical and            
              intriguing question of why strict maternal transmission now seems              
              to predominate.
