Title       : Traffic Control Algorithms for Integrated-Services Packet-Switched Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1992 
File        : a9210626

Award Number: 9210626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon Peha peha@gauss.ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4097,
Abstract    :
                   In this research, we explore traffic control algorithms for               
              integrated- services networks. which are networks that carry                   
              diverse traffic types such as computer data, voice, video, text,               
              and images.  ln such a network performance objectives and packet               
              arrival processes vary tremendously from one data stream to                    
              another.  Either networks must be designed with so much capacity               
              that every conceivable set of performance objectives will be met,              
              or algorithms are needed that differentiate packets and packet                 
              streams based on these characteristics and adjust delay                        
              distributions, loss  probabilities, and blocking probabilities                 
              accordingly.  We plan to develop an integrated set of traffic                  
              control algorithms based in part on a novel mechanism called the               
              priority token bank.  An admission control  algorithm admits or                
              blocks entire packet streams, where admitting a packet stream                  
              means guaranteeing its performance objectives will be met. In                  
              each queue, a scheduling  algorithm orders the transmission of                 
              queued packets and a dropping  algorithm selects packets to be                 
              discarded when buffer overflow occurs.  Both algorithms                        
              effectively adjust delay distributions and loss probabilities to               
              optimize performance at a given load as perceived by the                       
              applications, or,  equivalently, to achieve a given level of                   
              performance at a higher load. We also explore usage-based charges              
              for network services based on the packet arrival processes of                  
              admitted packet streams and on  the corresponding performance                  
              achieved (and possibly guaranteed). These charges reflect the                  
              extent to which network resources are consumed. Policing and                   
              monitoring are also addressed. Algorithms  are evaluated through               
              analysis and extensive simulation by comparing delays, loss                    
              probabilities, blocking probabilities, and other relevant                      
              metrics, with those achieved with known algorithms.
