Title       : Fairness, Institutions and Anonymity in Bargaining Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1993  
File        : a9210052

Award Number: 9210052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185136             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vernon L. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this  research is to address the issue of fairness              
              in the context of bargaining.  Over a decade of research by                    
              experimental economists using sequential-move bargaining games has             
              documented the observed tendencies toward equal split of the                   
              available surplus.  This is contrary to the predictions of                     
              noncooperative equilibrium theory based on self-interested                     
              bargainers.  Is this due to a preference for fair outcomes, or is              
              it due to expectations arising in the context of social exchange?              
              Double blind experiments have already been run where no one,                   
              including the experimenter, can identify who made what decision.               
              The project will analyze the effect of this anonymity in a variety             
              of bargaining games, and explore procedures for assuring that a                
              subject has earned the right to an advantageous position in a                  
              bargaining situation.  These issues are fundamental to                         
              understanding the nature, circumstances and conditions under which             
              self-interested outcomes are observed in our society, as well as to            
              understanding the effect of social context on outcomes, and the                
              extent to which they arise because of expectation of reciprocity in            
              social relationships.  If it is the latter, then fair play is based            
              on self-interest and may be fragile and dependent upon expectations            
              of continuing relationships.  This type of research on the effect              
              of earned rights on behavior toward others is fundamental to                   
              property rights and contracting in the creation of markets.
