Title       : Investigation of the Mechanism of Mammalian Ribonucleotide Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9210537

Award Number: 9210537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sonja E. Hicks   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal is for a study to compare the mechanism of action             
              of mammalian ribonucleotide reductase with its bacterial                       
              counterpart.  The subunits of the enzyme will be produced using                
              plasmids available in the laboratory where Dr. Hicks will be                   
              spending a sabbatical year.  This will be one of the first                     
              opportunities to obtain an abundant amount of the mammalian enzyme             
              and compare its properties to the bacterial one. The tyrosyl                   
              radical-dinuclear iron cluster of the mammalian enzyme will be                 
              studied by stopped-flow absorption spectroscopy.  Studies of the               
              mechanism of action of this enzyme will be done using substrate                
              analogs and mechanism-based inhibitors.  The mammalian enzyme has              
              been reported to be much less stable than the bacterial one; this              
              study should give new information about dinuclear non-heme iron                
              clusters in this type of enzyme.                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              The components of DNA, the genetic material, are produced by a                 
              protein called ribonucleotide reductase.  This protein contains                
              iron atoms which are non-covalently linked to the amino acid                   
              tyrosine.  Most iron in proteins is present as part of hemoproteins            
              such as hemoglobin, in blood, or myoglobin, in muscle.                         
              Ribonucleotide reductase does not have this type of iron-protein               
              linkage.  The investigator plans to compare the properties of the              
              protein isolated from mouse with the much more well-characterized              
              protein from a bacterium.  She will use several biophysical                    
              techniques to determine this.
