Title       : Publication of Proceedings of Symposium on Syntactic Theory and First Language
               Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9210789

Award Number: 9210789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank C. Keil   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Lust  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1311,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              A symposium will bring together theorists in formal linguistics,               
              researchers on the empirical phenomena of language acquisition                 
              and groups concerned with the computational problems of language               
              acquisition.  Several key topics that exemplify some of the most               
              exciting current interactions between linguistics, psychology and              
              computer science will be explored by leading researchers and                   
              theoreticians at all levels of career development.  These topics               
              include: knowledge of principles and parameters of phrase                      
              structure and configuration, knowledge of principles and                       
              parameters concerning types of anaphora, and formal and empirical              
              approaches to learnability.                                                    
                                                                                             
              In addition to helping promote advances in one of the most                     
              successful areas of cognitive science, this symposium also seeks               
              to explore the nature of that success and its broader                          
              implications for cognitive science as a whole.  The field of                   
              language acquisition research has begun to adopt a number of                   
              common assumptions that form a core set of methodological and                  
              explanatory guidelines that have proved to be extraordinarily                  
              successful as a research strategy across several disciplines.                  
              Since these general guidelines do not seem to be obviously                     
              dependent on unique properties of language, it is natural to ask               
              how well they might work in other content domains.  To that end                
              the beginning session of the symposium will propose an initial                 
              characterization of those guidelines to be evaluated in terms of               
              the specific research presentations that follow.  The final                    
              session of the symposium will then revise those guidelines and                 
              then have leading researchers from different disciplines discuss               
              possible extensions of the revised guidelines to other domains of              
              cognition.
