Title       : Crime and Its Linkages to Urbanization and Industrialization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9210314

Award Number: 9210314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack D. Marietta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant provides support to study crime and its linkages to                 
              urbanization and industrialization in early America.  Specifically,            
              the grant provides support to collect and collate data from public             
              records on persons accused of crimes and their accusers or                     
              prosecutors in the justice system of Pennsylvania, 1682-1800,                  
              specifically in Chester County and the City of Philadelphia.  The              
              data treat their economic and vocational status as well as                     
              residence and their previous domiciles.  The analysis concentrates             
              on a number of issues related to the etiology of crime,                        
              particularly whether the identification of the criminal population             
              changes consistent with shifts in the economic and labor structure             
              of these locales.  Also, the evolution of the criminal population              
              in the City of Philadelphia is traced to determine whether it                  
              fulfills postulates about the relationship between urbanization and            
              the proliferation of crime.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This study deals with central issues related to the etiology of                
              crime, and the richness of the historical data will enable scholars            
              interested in various facets of crime causation to advance inquiry             
              of their own postulates about the interfaces among crime,                      
              industrialization, and urbanization.  Further, the availability of             
              the sentencing data will provide an opportunity to determine early             
              penal policy in the United States, and gain rich understanding of              
              how the Quakers operationalized their penal philosophy.  These data            
              and their analysis provide historical context for advancing debates            
              about the purpose of punishment in the United States.
