Title       : Pairwise Difference Estiamtion in Econometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9210101

Award Number: 9210101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191479             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Powell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project investigates the construction and asymptotic theory               
              of semiparametric estimators using moment conditions or                        
              minimization problems based upon a pairwise differencing approach.             
              This research should make valuable contributions both to applied               
              statistics and econometrics.  The data-differencing approach taken             
              in the project permits the development of semiparametric estimators            
              for important economic models that have not previously been                    
              considered in the nonparametric literature.  The approach taken                
              exploits the fact that the difference of independent and                       
              identically-distributed random variables will be symmetrically                 
              distributed around zero; by choosing transformations of pairs of               
              observations which satisfy this condition, moment conditions can               
              be constructed to estimate the parameters of interest.                         
                                                                                             
              The research on this subject proceeds along four lines:                        
              (1)  Existing results on minimizers of U-processes will be extended            
              to permit the kernel of the U-statistic to depend on the sample                
              size, as required for "smoothed" variants of pairwise difference               
              estimators.  Also, these theoretical results will be applied to a              
              number of potential semiparametric estimators, based on pairwise               
              differences for semilinear, selection, and index models, and                   
              efficient construction of pairwise difference estimators will also             
              be considered.                                                                 
              (2)  For the "smoothed" pairwise difference estimators, the form               
              of the optimal bandwiths will be derived, and "plug in" estimators             
              of these optimal bandwidths will be proposed.                                  
              (3)  A large-sample theory for pairwise difference estimators which            
              rely on preliminary nonparametric estimators of regression                     
              functions will be developed.                                                   
              (4)  The proposed estimators will be evaluated using an                        
              empirically-based simulation study.
