Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Mathematical Problems in Transonic Aerodynamics & in
               Flows with Vorticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1995  
File        : a9210467

Award Number: 9210467
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daljit S. Ahluwalia                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Pamela Cook-Ioannidis Cook@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gilberto F. Schleiniger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Numerical and asymptotic techniques will be used to                       
              investigate transonic flow about aircraft wings and flows with                 
              distributed vorticity.  Specific transonic problems to be                      
              analyzed are design of optimum critical axisymmetric bodies,                   
              flows about lifting, not-so-slender transonic wings and the                    
              transonic area rule, and wind tunnel flows.  Some use will be                  
              made of the transonic small disturbance formulation.  The                      
              investigations of the vortical flow problem will involve                       
              development and clarification of theories integrating nonlinear                
              and viscous effects.  Both the transonic and vortical flow                     
              problems require interaction between numerical and asymptotic                  
              treatments in order to deal with complex nonlinearities.                       
                   Present day commercial aircraft cruise in the transonic                   
              regime.  In this regime drag (the force opposing forward motion)               
              rises rapidly hence there is interest in understanding transonic               
              flows and in the design of reduced drag wings.  The study of                   
              flows with distributed vorticity (a certain distribution of                    
              whirl-like motion in the environment of interest) is both of a                 
              fundamental nature in fluid mechanics, but also of considerable                
              interest in specific applications.  One example of such an                     
              application is the prediction of aerodynamic losses and heat                   
              loads in turbo-machinery.  The investigators will use modern                   
              methods of applied mathematics to deal with the complexities of                
              the problems in the areas of research proposed.
