Title       : Calculation Behavior and Bounded Rationality in Economic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1994 
File        : a9210405

Award Number: 9210405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Garey Ramey gramey@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The vast majority of theoretical economic models impose very                   
              strong hypotheses as to the rationality of agents.  In                         
              macroeconomic contexts, the standard assumption is that agents                 
              are fully aware of the equilibrium distributions of endogenous                 
              variables, i.e., rational expectations prevails.  Models in which              
              strategic interactions are important typically impose some                     
              strengthened form of Nash equilibrium, in which agents know with               
              complete accuracy the decision plans of their rivals.  These                   
              hypotheses, although central to the economic predictions of the                
              models, can be criticized on the grounds that they give no                     
              account of how the agents acquire such information.  Recent                    
              research posits that agents engage in passive adaptive learning.               
              For example, the least squares learning approach presumes that                 
              the adaptive rule takes the form of a least squares regression,                
              and evolutionary adaptation schemes specific that agents adjust                
              their actions based on the relative fitness of competing                       
              strategies.  This project seeks to develop a middle ground                     
              between the opposing extremes of full rationality and passive                  
              adaptation.  The overriding goal is to establish a general                     
              framework for analyzing expectation formation behavior that                    
              allows agents to engage in a process of active cognition with                  
              respect to the economic environment, but places inherent                       
              limitations on their cognitive abilities in terms of restrictions              
              on the calculation technology.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This project develops an approach to bounded rationality  in                   
              which agents are endowed with a technology for calculating                     
              expectations, together with preferences over forecast errors.                  
              Agents form expectations by balancing the benefits of imp;roved                
              forecasts against the costs of calculation.  This project extends              
              previous work by the investigators to incorporate a much richer                
              variety of economic environments and calculation algorithms.  The              
              approach is used to study hyperinflation and to explain puzzling               
              experimental finding by Marimon and Sunder that are difficult to               
              reconcile with either rational expectations or conventional                    
              passive adaptive learning approaches.  The calculation framework               
              is extended further and applied to problems in macroeconomics,                 
              finance and industrial organization.
