Title       : Mathematical Sciences: NSF-CBMS Regional Conference on New Function Spaces and
               Geometric Analysis in Several Complex Variables to be held in Fairfax, VA May
               26-31, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1991   
File        : a9108504

Award Number: 9108504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22467              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniele C. Struppa Dstruppa@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Singman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Flavia Colonna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In many senses the harmonic analysis of Euclidean space is                
              well developed.  The theories of fractional integration, singular              
              integrals, parametrices for constant coefficient partial                       
              differential operators, and related matters are well understood.               
              In all of these theories, translation invariance plays a crucial               
              role.  In particular, Fourier analysis is a central tool in all                
              of this work.  Many physical problems - the flow of gas around an              
              obstacle, turbulence, problems of flux, Dirichlet and Neumann                  
              problems, etc. - have as their natural setting a smoothly bounded              
              domain (where the necessary degree of smoothness may vary with                 
              the application).  The canonical setting for many of the basic                 
              problems of harmonic analysis and of complex function theory is                
              also a domain in space.  Thus, it becomes appropriate to develop               
              analytic tools tailored to the geometry of domains.  This leads                
              to reconsidering classical function spaces on these domains and                
              to studying them with the use of invariant metrics.                            
                   This project will support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research                   
              Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on New Function Spaces                 
              and Geometric Analysis in Several Complex Variables to be held                 
              May 26-31, 1992 at George Mason University.  Professor Steven                  
              Krantz of Washington University will be the principal lecturer.                
              To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research, the               
              National Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-                
              CBMS Regional Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences.               
              Each five-day conference features a distinguished lecturer who                 
              delivers ten lectures on a topic of important current research in              
              one sharply focused area of the mathematical sciences.  The                    
              lecturer subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon              
              these lectures, which is normally published by the American                    
              Mathematical Society or the Society for Industrial and Applied                 
              Mathematics, or jointly by the American Statistical Association                
              and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.  Certain features                
              differentiate these conferences from typical research                          
              conferences.  These are: (1) Focus on a single important and                   
              timely area of research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued               
              effect and local stimulation through regional emphasis, (3) Panel              
              review for quality, breadth, and timeliness, and (4) Published                 
              monographs for a wider audience.
