Title       : U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research: Dynamic Restoration Mechanisms in Aluminum and
               Aluminum Magnesium Alloys Deformed to Large Plastic Strains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1992     
File        : a9108633

Award Number: 9108633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeanne E. Hudson                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Kassner kassner@engr.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5920      ITALY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              10        Physical Sciences                       
Program Ref : 1771,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support collaborative research between Professor               
              M.E. Kassner of Oregon State University and Professor E.                       
              Evangelista of the University of Ancona, Italy.  The objective of              
              the project is to investigate the dynamic restoration mechanisms               
              associated with large strain deformation of aluminum and aluminum              
              alloys at ambient and elevated temperatures.  The project is a study           
              of large strain deformation of pure aluminum and aluminum-                     
              magnesium alloys, a fundamental basis for understanding metal-                 
              forming operations with the important 1xxx and 5xxx series                     
              aluminum alloys.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The investigators hope to determine whether, for high purity                   
              aluminum at ambient and near-ambient temperatures, deformation                 
              to large plastic strains (e.g., > 4) will result in a mechanical               
              steady state.  The second objective of the research is to determine            
              whether the newly observed (elevated temperature) phenomenon,                  
              geometric-dynamic-recrystallization (GDR) is general.  The US                  
              principal investigator will substantially benefit from access to a             
              torsion machine that is designed to be more suitable for hot                   
              deformation of specimens for eventual transmission electron                    
              microscopy examination than the Lawrence Livermore National                    
              Laboratory (LLNL) Instron 1125.  The US principal investigator                 
              will also benefit from the Italian investigator's breadth of                   
              knowledge of the thermal-mechanical phenomenology of aluminum                  
              alloys.  This project will benefit the Italian principal investigator by       
              allowing access to highly reliable torsion testing equipment                   
              (Reometrics Spectrometer II) for the purpose of determining                    
              accurate stress versus strain behavior.
