Title       : Kinetic and Mechanistic Studies of Highly Reactive Species Containing
               Electron-Deficient Main Group Atoms, and the Synthesis of Novel Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1995      
File        : a9108130

Award Number: 9108130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $728332             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter P. Gaspar Gaspar@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Various highly reactive intermediates will be generated and a                  
              study will be made of their reaction mechanisms. These highly                  
              reactive intermediates will be generated by photolysis and by                  
              pyrolysis of appropriate precursors. Decay kinetics of these                   
              species will be followed by time-resolved spectroscopy following               
              laser flash photolysis. Chemical reactivity of these intermediates             
              will be probed through trapping experiments and product studies.               
              The molecules to be studied include species containing divalent                
              silicon, germanium, and tin atoms, namely, silylenes, germylenes,              
              and stannylenes, respectively. Reaction pathways for the                       
              monovalent six-valence-electron species nitrenes (R-N:) and                    
              phosphinidenes (R-P:), and of the monovalent four-valence-electron             
              borylenes (R-B:) and aluminylidenes (R-Al:) will be compared with              
              reaction paths for the corresponding carbenes, silylenes, and                  
              germylenes. Molecules will be synthesized with new kinds of bonds,             
              including silicon-silicon and silicon-germanium triple bonds, and              
              silicon-transition metal double bonds. New ring systems will be                
              prepared as well.                                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              continuing work of Professor Peter P. Gaspar at Washington                     
              University. Reactive intermediates will be generated that contain              
              silicon, germanium, tin, phosphorous, aluminum, and boron atoms                
              that have less than their normal complement of bonds. These                    
              reactive intermediates will be generated from stable precursor                 
              molecules by photolysis and by thermolysis methods. The steps by               
              which these intermediates decompose will be studied as well as                 
              the rate at which these processes occur. More direct evidence for              
              these reactive intermediates will be given by trapping them with               
              other molecules. The products of these trapping experiments will               
              reveal the structure of the intermediates. Compounds with silicon-             
              silicon single and double bonds are known. Now even more reactive              
              molecules will be synthesized with silicon-silicon and silicon-                
              germanium triple bonds. New ring systems will also be prepared.
