Title       : Neuroendocrine Role of Biogenic Amines in the Photoperiodic Control of Pheromone
               Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9108743

Award Number: 9108743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226083             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Linn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wendell L. Roelofs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Insects destroy inestimable amount of crops each year.  Spraying               
              insecticides to control pests has raised serious concerns because              
              of ancillary effects upon other species, especially humans.                    
              Pheromones are chemical signals that individuals release into the              
              external environment that affect the behavior and/or                           
              physiological states of other individuals.  In insects,                        
              pheromones are one of the major forms of communication.  Since                 
              these chemical signals provide a non-invasive method for control               
              of insect populations, the use of pheromones as an integral part               
              of integrated pest management programs for many lepidopterous                  
              pest species is of considerable importance and interest.  One of               
              the prominent features of this communication in insects is that                
              release of the pheromone by females and response by males occurs               
              during a species-characteristic time.  This temporal synchrony                 
              assures that males and females will be able to locate one another              
              at a time when environmental conditions ar most favorable for                  
              mating.  Drs. Linn and Roelofs' research program is aimed at                   
              understanding the mechanisms by which these chemical signals are               
              used by insects.  In this project, they will determine how male                
              insects can tell time so that they are responsive to the chemical              
              signals when the females are releasing it.  They will focus on                 
              the biogenic amines octopamine, serotonin and melatonin.                       
              Octopamine and serotonin were selected because their previous                  
              work indicates that these two amines affect both the timing and                
              the sensitivity of males to pheromones.  Melatonin is an                       
              excellent candidate given the significant role of this hormone in              
              the regulation of circadian-regulated activates in vertebrates,                
              including humans.  Drs Linn and Roelofs will determine the                     
              relationship between these biogenic amines, behavior and the                   
              neural regions associated circadian activity.  The results from                
              these basic biological studies provide fundamental information                 
              about invertebrate and vertebrate neurobiology.  Moreover, their               
              research will aid in the continuing development of pheromone                   
              attractants for practical agricultural use.
