Title       : Research Initiation Award: Robust Control for Time Varying Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1991  
File        : a9108927

Award Number: 9108927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilead Tadmor tadmor@ece.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Digital controllers are commonly designed for                                  
              continuous-time systems.  When the underlying system                           
              is significantly time varying, it is expected that so                          
              should be the controller.  Often (as is the case with                          
              locally linearized models of nonlinear systems with fast                       
              changing operation regimes, or in adaptive                                     
              implementations), long term values of the system                               
              parameters are not available.  The purpose of the                              
              proposed research is to develop a design methodology                           
              that will address these issues: to look for a robust                           
              digital design that takes into account, indeed, that will                      
              optimize the continuous-time system behavior.  That                            
              will be in contrast to most current designs which focus                        
              solely on the sample-time closed-loop evolution.  The                          
              design methodology should be suitable for time-varying                         
              systems and require only (temporally) local numerical                          
              values of the system parameters.  H-infinity, Graph and                        
              Gap control theory will provide the underlying                                 
              paradigms.                                                                     
              The immediate goals set forth in this proposal touch on                        
              issues at the focal point of current systems research,                         
              and are significant in realistic applications.  The                            
              objectives will also give rise to several fundamental                          
              technical and conceptual questions: The closed-loop                            
              system evolves in hybrid-time (continuous and                                  
              discrete).  An appropriate framework for hybrid-time                           
              H-infinity analysis and optimization will have to be                           
              developed.  The treatment of time-varying systems                              
              rules out direct use of transform domain techniques.                           
              This study is thus intended to follow and attempt to                           
              further extend the recent alternative path of a                                
              variational/game theoretical time domain approach to                           
              H-infinity design.  It will also attempt to bridge the gap                     
              between this time domain approach and the standard                             
              operator theoretic/factorization based transform                               
              domain H-infinity analysis.  Finally, reliance on                              
              temporally local models will require an adaptation the                         
              1970's LQ "receding horizon" approach to the H-infinity                        
              framework, and the study of appropriate concepts of                            
              "slowly varying systems" that will give criteria to the                        
              success of "frozen time" based on receding horizon                             
              design.
