Title       : Design and Development of Supramolecular Mixed-Metal Systems: The Investigation
               of Photochemical and Electro- chemical Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1991      
File        : a9108374

Award Number: 9108374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen J. Brewer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              The project involves planning activities for the design,                       
              synthesis, and study of novel multimetallic complexes                          
              withdesirable light absorbing and electrochemical properties.                  
              Mixed-metal multimetallic complexes of the platinum group                      
              metals (Rh, Ir, Os, Ru) which incorporate polypyridyl bridging                 
              ligands will be synthesized.  These systems are expected to                    
              have very complex electronic spectra and electrochemistry due                  
              to their multicomponent nature.  The electronic spectra will                   
              contain transitions well into the visible region of the                        
              spectrum, due primarily to low energy metal-to-ligand charge                   
              transfer transitions.  In addition, intense pi-pi star                         
              transitions will be evident in the ultraviolet region for all                  
              polypridyl ligands contained in the system.  The                               
              electrochemistry of these systems is expected to be dominated                  
              by metal-based oxidations and bridging and nonbridging ligand-                 
              based reductions.  For systems containing rhodium or iridium,                  
              metal-based reductions are also expected at relatively low                     
              potentials.  Through the systematic variation of the metals as                 
              well as bridging and non-bridging ligands, it will be possible                 
              to gain insight into the nature of the photochemical and                       
              electrochemical processes.                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Research Planning Grants enable women who have not had prior                   
              independent Federal research support to develop a competitive                  
              research proposal.  This project involves the study of the                     
              photochemical and electrochemical properties of metal complexes                
              containing more than one metal center.  The knowledge gained in                
              this study will enable better design and preparation of                        
              mixed-metal complexes with specific light-absorbing properties.
