Title       : State/Industry University Cooperative Research Center for Capsule Pipeline
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9108841

Award Number: 9108841
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Win Aung                                
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1942729            (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Liu liuh@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0207000   Transportation                          
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The principle objective of the State Industry/University                  
              Cooperative Research Center for Capsule Pipelines at the University            
              of Missouri-Columbia is to generate knowledge and know how for the             
              design and operation of these pipelines.                                       
                   Studies have shown that products can be transported                       
              economically to distant places by capsules (large cylindrical                  
              containers or log forms) moving through pipelines.  The technology,            
              called "capsule pipelines" or "freight pipelines," has many                    
              potential advantages including lower freight costs, less energy                
              consumption, less pollution and environmental problems, greater                
              safety, and better reliability.  Presently, interest in capsule                
              pipelines is centered around the "coal log pipeline (CLP)," i.e.,              
              the "capsules" are compressed coal cylinders (coal logs) in direct             
              contact with the water flowing in the pipe.  The center research               
              during the first four years will focus on CLP, and then gradually              
              shift to other types of capsule pipelines.                                     
                   The Core Program of the Center includes basic and applied                 
              research in hydrodynamics of capsule flow, theory of capsule pumps,            
              automatic control of capsule pipeline systems, manufacturing of                
              coal logs, water quality and corrosion of coal log pipelines, and              
              legal/institutional issues relating to eminent domain and water                
              rights for coal pipelines.  The Core Program will also involve                 
              technology transfer activities such as preparing a detailed design             
              and operations manual and constructing a small-scale demonstration             
              system of coal log pipeline for training industry personnel,                   
              holding a technology-transfer workshop, etc.  The Non-Core Program             
              will include the following:  methods to fabricate coal logs,                   
              determination of the best ways to prevent jamming and to minimize              
              abrasion of capsules and coal logs in pipelines, optimum design of             
              coal log pipeline systems, and the economics of coal log pipelines             
              as compared to other competing transportation modes including                  
              train, truck, barge, and slurry pipelines.  The State of Missouri,             
              industry and NSF will provide matching funds totalling $525,000 in             
              the first year.
