Title       : Spontaneous Mutation: Somatic and Germinal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1991 
File        : a9108515

Award Number: 9108515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77497              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Stadler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Our understanding of spontaneous mutation is still very incomplete             
              Our information comes from disparate sources.  The best studies on             
              the spectrum of molecular changes involve somatic mutations in                 
              microorganisms.  Less is known about germinal mutations in                     
              eukaryotes, although these are the source of variability for                   
              evolution. There have been measurements of rates of germinal                   
              mutations, but their rarity has limited the investigation of the               
              relative likelihood of different kinds of alterations (base                    
              substitutions, insertions, deletions, transposition) among these               
              mutants.  In the case of mutant genes for inherited diseases in                
              humans, there is extensive information, but vexing questions about             
              selection leave us uncertain as to the frequency and the spectrum              
              of the original mutations.  Germinal mutations result from a series            
              of rounds of mitosis followed by meiosis.  Little is known about               
              the role of meiosis in producing new mutants or in screening or                
              modifying those mutants which have emerged from the preceding                  
              mitotic divisions.  The vegetative growth habit of Neurospora is               
              ideally designed for the analysis of spontaneous  mutations.  The              
              mutants arise in the selectively neutral environment of the                    
              coenocyte and are revealed for assay in the asexual spores.                    
              Ascospores provide convenient material for the deletion of meiotic             
              mutations, and the distribution of mutants in the fruiting bodies              
              reveals which mutants are the products of the sexual cycle.  A                 
              comparison of these mutants to those from vegetative cells will                
              bridge the gap between somatic and germinal mutation.  We propose              
              a detailed analysis of spontaneous mutation at a specific locus in             
              Neurospora.mtr is the structural gene for the neutral amino acid               
              permease, and it offers special advantages for mutation studies.               
              Selective plating can be used to detect rare mutants (or                       
              recombinants) going in either direction: from wildtype to mtr or               
              the reverse.  The gene has been cloned, so probes are available to             
              examine the molecular properties of mtr mutants.
