Title       : Reactive Polymers: Applications in Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9108231

Award Number: 9108231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249116             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil E. Schore   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Kurth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9162,9232,
Abstract    :
              As an approach to the common synthetic problems of selectivity,                
              yield optimization, ease of product isolation, and efficiency                  
              with regard to use of expensive reagents, it is planned to                     
              explore the application of functionalized polymer systems to                   
              complex problems in organic synthesis.  The principle of                       
              covalent substrate anchoring to control chemoselectivity has                   
              already been successfully demonstrated in the context of                       
              intermolecular Pauson-Khand cycloaddition.  This work will                     
              first be expanded to intramolecular systems to establish its                   
              scope and range.  It will then be extended to several diverse                  
              synthetic processes.  Polymer linkage of nitroalkanes will be                  
              studied to control tandem cycloaddition/electrophilic                          
              cyclizations of nitrile oxides with alpha, omega-dienes,                       
              permitting stereocontrolled synthesis of differentially                        
              substituted cyclic ethers.  Next, polymer methodology will be                  
              applied to asymmetric synthesis by covalent attachment of                      
              chiral auxiliaries to enhance chemical yields, improve optical                 
              yields, and simplify recovery of the chiral auxiliaries.                       
              Pauson-Khand systems will be tested as routes to optically pure                
              polyquinanes, using polymer-bound chiral alcohols.                             
              Polymer-bound chiral oxazolines will be used as auxiliaries in                 
              stereoselective aza-Claisen rearrangements to generate                         
              optically active 4-pentenoic acids.  Finally, a range of                       
              polymer-bound systems of C2-symmetry will be developed as means                
              to approach the synthesis of a variety of differentially                       
              functionalized nonracemic synthetic systems.                                   
                                                                                             
              The Organic Synthesis Program is supporting this joint project                 
              between Dr. Neil Schore and Dr. Mark Kurth to develop new                      
              synthetic reagents that are based upon polymers.  The former's                 
              background in organometallic and polymer chemistry is being                    
              melded with the latter's background in the synthesis of complex                
              organic molecules.  These new synthetic reagents will simplify                 
              techniques and lead to more economic and convenient syntheses.
