Title       : Regulation and Function of Genes Expressed in the Accessory Gland of D.
               Melanogaster Males
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1995  
File        : a9108221

Award Number: 9108221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karen Bennett                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mariana F. Wolfner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Drosophila male accessory gland is a model system in which to              
              address issues of cell type specification and of the fate and                  
              function of molecules delivered to the female during mating. Dr.               
              Wolfner proposes to continue her developmental and functional                  
              studies of genes expressed in the accessory gland. First, she                  
              will investigate cell type specific gene regulation in the                     
              tissue. She will examine promoter sequences for their role in                  
              cell type and mating stimulated gene expression. She will also                 
              examine juvenile hormone effects on the mating stimulated                      
              expression of accessory gland genes. Second, using an accessory                
              gland promoter fused to sequences encoding and intracellular                   
              toxin, she will ablate specific cells of the accessory gland in                
              order to directly determine the functions of each cell type.                   
              Third, she will focus on the fates of individual accessory gland               
              products, including representative prohormone like molecules and               
              representative small peptides. She will determine their targets                
              in the mated female and the processing events important for their              
              function. Fourth, to define the function of individual accessory               
              gland products, she will use genetic methods to either introduce               
              or eliminate specific accessory gland products. She will examine               
              the consequences of these genetic alterations on the altered                   
              flies or on their mates. These studies will correlate specific                 
              molecules with behavioral and reproductive functions. These                    
              results will also establish the basis for production of those                  
              molecules in the male and for their processing and utilization in              
              the female.
