Title       : Transition Metal Templated Chemical Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1995        
File        : a9108398

Award Number: 9108398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom Livinghouse livinghouse@chemistry.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research will focus on the further development of organo-                 
              group IV metal (Zr and Ti) mediated cyclization and                            
              cycloaddition reactions which have been discovered in the PI's                 
              laboratory. Application of this new methodology will be                        
              showcased by the synthesis of selected natural products                        
              including securinega alkaloids via zirconocene promoted                        
              heteroannulations, the lycora ring system via a zirconocene                    
              promoted reductive cyclization, 9(0)-methanoprostacyclin and                   
              methano PGI-1 via a zirconium complex and related cyclizations,                
              and pyrrolidine and piperidine alkaloids via the intramolecular                
              imidotitanium ?2+2! cycloaddition reaction. These target                       
              molecules have been deliberately selected so that the crucial                  
              issues of stereo-, regio-, and chemocontrol associated with                    
              group IV mediated coupling processes can be thoroughly                         
              evaluated. In this way, the utility of these new reactions for                 
              performing operationally practical chemical syntheses will be                  
              demonstated.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              With this award the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                 
              Division will support the research of Dr. Tom Livinghouse of                   
              the Department of Chemistry at Montana State University. The                   
              research is in the general area of synthetic methodology and                   
              its application to natural products synthesis. The focus will                  
              be on the use of organometallic systems containing titanium or                 
              zirconium as templates for the actualization of chemical                       
              reactions which would be otherwise impossible. These new                       
              reactions will be used to synthesize a number of natural                       
              products whose structures have been deliberately selected so                   
              that the crucial issues of stereo-, regio-, and chemocontrol                   
              associated with these organometallic mediated processes can be                 
              thoroughly evaluated. In this way, the utility of these new                    
              reactions for performing operationally practical chemical                      
              syntheses will be demonstrated.
