Title       : Modeling Time In Belief Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9108385

Award Number: 9108385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward H. Shortliffe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the problem of modeling time in dynamic                 
              domains given incomplete and uncertain information about the                   
              domain.  The  first objective is to construct a dynamic model                  
              within a belief-network paradigm and to demonstrate how well                   
              known time series concepts-such as backward smoothing forward                  
              filtering and forecasting - are implemented in this model.  The                
              dynamic model will be generated semiautomatically given a belief               
              network that models the time-invariant relations of the domain.                
              This will provide a semiautomatic method for extending existing                
              belief network models to dynamic belief-network models that can                
              be used in applications where consideration of the time evolution              
              of system variables is crucial to making valid inferences about                
              the domain.  The second objective is to design an efficient                    
              randomized approximation scheme (RAS) for probabilistic inference              
              in belief networks to be employed by the dynamic model.  Certain               
              features unique to a RAS, compared to other stochastic simulation              
              algorithms for probabilistic inference, make the RAS desirable as              
              an inference algorithm for a dynamic model.  For example, in                   
              dynamic domains, the time required to make a decision enters the               
              utility of the decision when this time becomes comparable to the               
              expected time in which the system changes sufficiently to                      
              outdated a decision.  A RAS provides an a priori bound on the                  
              running time required to achieve a predefined level of accuracy                
              in the output.  This information can be used to reduce the loss                
              of utility due to delayed decisions.  Existing RASs for                        
              probabilistic inference in belief networks are known to have a                 
              poor worst-case behavior, although it is conjectured that they                 
              have efficient average-case complexity.  This research will                    
              characterize the class of belief networks or which existing RASs               
              run efficiently, then will extend these algorithms to handle                   
              cases that fall outside of this class.  The new RASs developed                 
              will be subsequently optimized specifically for computing                      
              inferences in the dynamic models developed.
