Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Manifolds and Algebraic K-Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9108542

Award Number: 9108542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Goodwillie tomg@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This research project has three parts.  The first involves                
              some ideas about the homotopy type of diffeomorphisms of                       
              manifolds beyond the stable range, in which these are related to               
              algebraic K-theory.  The second is a program for understanding                 
              the K-theory of group rings in terms of cyclic subgroups.  The                 
              third is concerned with applications of the cyclotomic trace to                
              K(Z) and to A(S1).                                                             
                   The details of these three parts vary, but all are concerned              
              either with reducing geometric information to a subject                        
              for calculation or to perfecting one of the principal algebraic                
              tools used for this purpose.  The nature of the geometric                      
              information involved is the crux of the difficulty.  While                     
              questions about lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and so forth                  
              virtually cry out to be reduced to calculations, it is far                     
              different with what are known as topological properties of                     
              geometric objects.  These are properties such as connectedness                 
              (being all in one piece), knottedness, having no holes, and so                 
              forth.  All systematic study of such properties, for example, how              
              to tell whether two geometric objects really differ in respect to              
              one of these properties or are only superficially different, or                
              how to classify the variety of differences that can occur, all                 
              these have only truly been comprehended and mastered when they                 
              have been reduced to matters of calculation.  Algebraic K-theory               
              has been developed into a major tool for this purpose, and the                 
              interplay between the algebra and the topology involved remains a              
              fascinating subject.
