Title       : Key Issues in the Estimation of the Impacts of Greenhouse Gas Control Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1992     
File        : a9108954

Award Number: 9108954
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34920              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Weyant weyant@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In response to the marked interest in global climate change over               
              the past few years, the Energy Modeling Forum (EMF) at Stanford                
              University initiated a multi-year study focusing primarily on the              
              likely energy sector impacts (costs and fuel mix effects) of                   
              initiatives that would constrain greenhouse gas emissions.  Like               
              previous EMF studies, this effort is geared to understanding what              
              the current set of models can contribute to understanding the                  
              nature and costs of these impacts as well as the comparative                   
              strengths and weaknesses of the various modeling paradigms that                
              are currently being used to help develop policy in this area.                  
              Since the focus of this study is on providing information that                 
              can improve policy making over the next few years, it is largely               
              being funded by applied-research oriented organizations like the               
              Department of Energy, the Environmental Protection Agency, the                 
              Electric Power Research Institute, and a group of leading                      
              domestic and international companies.  The contribution of this                
              project comes in carefully linking what comes out of this study                
              to basic research needs in the social sciences.  This project                  
              will tie the key policy analysis issues identified during the                  
              study directly to the type of basic social science research that               
              NSF has and will continue to support.  The preliminary                         
              conclusions regarding the implications of the EMF study for                    
              research priorities will be summarized in a report and the report              
              will be discussed at a workshop convened by the EMF.                           
                                                                                             
              More specifically, the linkages between the more application-                  
              oriented main EMF study and this project would include an                      
              assessment of the relevant merits of additional basic research on              
              such topics as demographics, economic growth determinants,                     
              structural shifts in economic activity, the determinants of                    
              energy demand, technical change, and the private sector R&D                    
              response to price changes and policy implementations to the key                
              policy issues in global environmental change.
