Title       : Research Initiation Award: A State-Space Approach for Multiple Objective
               Synthesis of Linear Controllers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1991    
File        : a9108493

Award Number: 9108493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario A. Rotea rotea@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Most control system design problems involve making                             
              tradeoffs among competing objectives.                                          
              In this research we consider a synthesis problem that                          
              arises when the goal is to find a controller such that                         
              several design specifications are jointly feasible.  The                       
              focus is on linear plants and controllers.  We consider                        
              design specifications that may be quantified by norms                          
              on the closed loop maps.  The aim is to develop a                              
              complete state-space theory for solving several multiple                       
              objective control problems, resulting from combining                           
              performance measures and robustness requirements of                            
              practical significance.                                                        
              Our formulation of the synthesis problem is significant                        
              because design specifications such as good disturbance                         
              rejection and tracking, guaranteed stability in the face                       
              of plant uncertainty, etc., can be taken into account                          
              simultaneously.  Since a comprehensive theory for                              
              these problems does not exist, the potential yields of                         
              this research will enhance the current theoretical                             
              understanding of some fundamental tradeoffs in the                             
              design of control systems.  Further, since the synthesis                       
              methodologies we may obtain capture better aspects of                          
              the design problem than existing methods (i.e. LQG,                            
              H-infinity, etc.), their use will result in a significant                      
              reduction of the time invested by the control engineer                         
              to get an acceptable controller design.                                        
              The methods we plan to use are based on linear                                 
              algebra and finite-dimensional convex optimization.                            
              We are motivated by the possibility of obtaining                               
              efficient numerical algorithms for controller synthesis,                       
              implementable in most computer systems.
