Title       : State Evolution on the South Coast of Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1991      
File        : a9108926

Award Number: 9108926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick J. Bove fbove@ufm.edu.gt  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Bove and his                     
              colleagues will conduct archaeological survey and excavation in                
              the Pacific coast region of Guatemala.  Preliminary work has                   
              indicated the presence of a major site, Texas-Los Chatos (TLC)                 
              which consists of six large platforms including a major platform-              
              pyramid construction.  Surrounding this central core in all                    
              directions are large numbers of smaller platforms and mounds of                
              various sizes.  Within a 5 km. radius of this complex are five                 
              subordinate sites.  These data indicate that the development of                
              cultural complexity, possible at a state level of organization,                
              occurred not only in Southern Mexico and Belize, the heart of the              
              Mayan lowlands, but extended into other regions as well.  The                  
              goal of this project is to reconstruct the cultural sequence at                
              TLC and to set it into a broader regional context.  To accomplish              
              this, Dr. Bove and his colleagues will conduct a complete survey               
              of the area.  They will accompany this with excavation in                      
              selected locations.  Lithics and ceramics will be analyzed.                    
              Chemical characterization of latter will permit identification of              
              non-local materials and hopefully allow reconstruction of broader              
              trade networks.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Archaeologists have focussed considerable attention on the                     
              prehistoric Maya and related groups which inhabited lowland                    
              Middle America.  In a difficult environment which today supports               
              only low population densities, these prehistoric societies                     
              developed a civilization characterized by hierarchical                         
              organization of large numbers of people, a complex calendric                   
              system and the construction of large monuments.  Scientists wish               
              to understand the processes which lead to the rise and later                   
              decline of this society.  While much is now known about the                    
              "heartland" areas, other regions such as coastal Guatemala have                
              received relatively little consideration.  This project will help              
              to remedy this deficit.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will produce               
              data of interest to many archaeologists.  It will increase our                 
              understanding of Middle American prehistory and shed new insight               
              into the rise of complex societies.
