Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Manifolds and Algebraic Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9108269

Award Number: 9108269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $988200             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Browder browder@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wu-chung Hsiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project involves four senior research topologists                    
              (William Browder, Wu-chung Hsiang, John N. Mather, and William P.              
              Thurston), one postdoctoral associate (Lang-Fang Wu), and three                
              advanced graduate students.  Their research topics are quite                   
              various.                                                                       
                   Browder will study free actions of certain topological                    
              groups on finite-dimensional spaces.  He will also study fixed                 
              point theorems and regularity of minimal surfaces.                             
                   Hsiang will work on a number of problems related to the                   
              cyclotomic trace map, including the notorious Novikov conjecture               
              in L-theory as well as some more tractable ones.                               
                   Mather's research deals with area-preserving diffeomorphisms              
              of infinite cylinders.  There are several hard conjectures about               
              invariant curves under diffeomorphisms and their rotation                      
              numbers.                                                                       
                   Thurston will work toward his famous geometrization                       
              conjecture for 3-manifolds.  In addition, he will work on                      
              automatic groups, self-similar tilings, one-dimensional real and               
              complex dynamical systems, and other topics.                                   
                   Wu's research concerns the Ricci Flow equations on manifolds              
              and orbifolds.                                                                 
                   All these topics are in the mainstream of research in                     
              topology.  It is appropriate to involve graduate students in                   
              their study.  For example, the geometrization conjecture of                    
              Thurston is a notoriously difficult problem.  It subsumes the                  
              Poincare Conjecture, which dates to the turn of the century.                   
              Nevertheless, pieces of it have been the stuff of numerous Ph.D                
              theses by Thurston's students for more than a decade.
