Title       : The Integrated Design and Optimization of Spectrometric Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9108707

Award Number: 9108707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Karolyn K. Eisenstein                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward G. Voigtman voigtman@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1990      CHEMISTRY EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Professor Voigtman will perform detailed, fully quantitative                   
              studies of five important spectrometric techniques (optical                    
              polarimetry, circular dichroism, thermal lensing, photothermal                 
              refraction, and thermal lensing/circular dichroism) with the                   
              goal of synthesizing complete pictures of how these techniques                 
              can be refined and optimized in their design and performance as                
              ultra-sensitive spectrometric techniques.  Detailed computer                   
              simulations, using a custom-programmed set of optical and                      
              electronic signal processing blocks, will be used to mimic and                 
              predict the performance of the techniques under a variety of                   
              experimental conditions.  The program libraries, used with a                   
              commercially available simulation program engine, will afford a                
              seamless integration of optics and electronics on a single                     
              computer screen worksheet.  The research will make it possible                 
              to design a new spectrometric technique from scratch as                        
              experience with the libraries of component blocks grows and as                 
              the behavior of the blocks is refined.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              With this award the Chemistry Division will support Dr. Edward                 
              G. Voigtman of the Department of Chemistry at the University of                
              Massachusetts,Amherst, for a project in course and curriculum                  
              development.  The project will attempt to gain a complete                      
              picture as to how five spectroscopic techniques may be refined                 
              and optimized.  The resulting optimized techniques will be of                  
              great use to researchers in both academia and industry and will                
              provide a powerful teaching aid for graduate students in the                   
              construction of optical systems.
