Title       : Selective Recognition Of Linear/Curvilinear Features In Remote-Sensing Imagery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1993 
File        : a9108638

Award Number: 9108638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo Ann Parikh parikh@SCSU.ctstateu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern CT State Univ
	      501 Crescent Street
	      New Haven, CT  065151330    203/397-4275

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                 This award is a Planning Grant in the Research Opportunities                
              for Women program.  The primary goal of this research is to                    
              develop a pattern recognition system for detection of desired                  
              groups of linear/curvilinear features in remote-sensing imagery.               
              The experimental portion of the proposed preliminary research                  
              will focus on the detection of lineaments (noncultural linear or               
              curvilinear features in imagery) which represent zones of                      
              structural weakness using Landsat Thematic Mapper (TM) data sets               
              of the Canadian Shield.  The desired set of linear features must               
              be distinguished from cultural and other non-cultural linear                   
              features.  For the proposed preliminary research, a neural                     
              network approach will be investigated.  Neural networks can                    
              conceivably be used for feature extraction, for classification,                
              and for grouping extracted linear elements.                                    
                 The proposed research planning activities are: (1) a                        
              comprehensive literature review, (2) development of image                      
              representation schemes, (3) construction of training sets for                  
              neural networks, and (4) design and preliminary assessment of                  
              neural networks for feature extraction, for recognition of                     
              desired pattern elements, and for grouping pattern elements into               
              desired linear/curvilinear features.  In parallel with the                     
              literature review, image representation schemes will be developed              
              to encode information for neural networks.  Candidate                          
              representation schemes for neural network classifiers include                  
              pixel representations (feature vectors associated with each                    
              pixel), edge/line representations (obtained as a result of neural              
              network feature extraction (such as boundary contour system                    
              representations).  Training sets will be constructed and                       
              preliminary experiments conducted using, as appropriate, computer              
              resources awarded by the Cornell National Supercomputer Facility               
              (CNSF).
