Title       : Collaborative Research: Patch Formation and Mycorrhizal Colonization During
               Succession on Glacial Till
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9108988

Award Number: 9108988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edith B. Allen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Plant succession may be initiated by patch formation by the               
              pioneer plants.  This research will consist of a series of                     
              experiments to determine whether the formation of these patches                
              is related to mycorrhizal colonization on recently deglaciated                 
              till.  Initial colonization by individual plants may be                        
              controlled by abiotic factors such as microsites for seed                      
              deposition and water catchment, while later patch formation may                
              be regulated by both abiotic and biotic factors.  These biotic                 
              factors are the focus of this study.  The initial colonizing                   
              plant may act as a "nurse " plant both by ameliorating the                     
              microenvironment and by providing a source of mycorrhizal                      
              inoculum for later colonists.  The investigators hypothesize that              
              the initial colonizers in boreal Alaska are facultatively                      
              mycorrhizal, and that they can survive in glacial till without                 
              mycorrhizae until inoculum is naturally dispersed.  The next wave              
              of plant colonists may be facultatively or obligately                          
              mycorrhizal, and they may establish more rapidly if their seeds                
              are deposited near a nurse plant.  Thus patch formation in the                 
              initial stages of glacial succession in Alaska may depend on                   
              mycorrhizal fungi.                                                             
                   Experiments will consist of planting both vesicular-                      
              arbuscular (VA) and ectomycorrhizal inoculated and uninoculated                
              nurse plants on glacial till, planting uninoculated seedlings                  
              around the nurse plant, and observing natural plant and                        
              mycorrhizal colonization.  The effects of microenvironmental                   
              amelioration by the nurse plants versus mycorrhizal inoculation                
              can be separated by comparing plant growth near and at a distance              
              from inoculated versus uninoculated nurse plants.  The                         
              physiological response of the individual plants to mycorrhizae                 
              will be measured under controlled conditions.  Many early to mid-              
              seral plants have been reported to be both VA and ectomycorrhizal              
              during succession on glacial till, and both types of fungi will                
              be manipulated and observed.
