Title       : Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Spectral Problems for Toeplitz and Other Structured
               Matrices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1991 
File        : a9108254

Award Number: 9108254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43330              (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Trench   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782123104    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   A family H of square matrices is efficiently structured if                
              the number of independent parameters required to specify an                    
              arbitrary n by n member of H is approximately proportional to n                
              when n is large.  Toeplitz, Hankel, and Toeplitz-plus-Hankel                   
              matrices are examples of efficiently structured matrices, as are               
              matrices of a given displacement rank, as defined by T. Kailath                
              and his coauthors. The purposes of the proposed research are (a)               
              to develop fast algorithms for finding individual                              
              eigenvalue-eigenvector pairs for general classes of efficiently                
              structured Hermitian matrices, analogous to the principal                      
              investigator's algorithms for Toeplitz and Toeplitz-plus-Hankel                
              matrices; (b) to study spectral properties of Toeplitz matrices                
              (especially, the relationship between the even and odd spectra of              
              real symmetric Toeplitz matrices); (c) to investigate the                      
              possibility of devising fast algorithms for finding the real                   
              eigenvalues of nonsymmetric Toeplitz matrices; and (d) to                      
              consider the spectral properties of Toeplitz-Sturm matrices.                   
                   Efficiently structured Hermitian matrices arise in many                   
              important physical and scientific applications, including                      
              statistical problems involving prediction of future values of a                
              random variable based on observations of its past values, signal               
              processing (the science of extracting information from                         
              transmitted signals), and geophysical applications including the               
              study of free oscillations of the Earth and seismic phenomena                  
              such as earthquakes.  In studying these problems it is often                   
              necessary to determine individual eigenvalues of                               
              efficiently structured matrices of very high order (in the                     
              thousands).  One of the main objectives of the proposed research               
              is to develop numerical methods for finding these eigenvalues by               
              methods whose complexity (computational requirements) is                       
              proportional to the second power of the order of the matrix,                   
              rather than to the third power of the order, as it is for                      
              standard computational methods that do not take advantage of the               
              special structure of the matrix.
