Title       : Culture and Moral Development: A Cross-Cultural Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1993      
File        : a9108924

Award Number: 9108924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean B. Intermaggio                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251285             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan G. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Existing psychological theories portray the domain of morality as              
              extending beyond justice considerations to encompass                           
              interpersonal responsibilities (i.e. obligations to be responsive              
              to the needs of family and friends).  They generally assume,                   
              however, that universally individuals conceptualize interpersonal              
              responsibilities as matters of personal choice rather than as                  
              socially sanctionable duties.  This research examines cultural                 
              influences on the moral status of interpersonal responsibilities.              
              Three experimental studies will be conducted assessing American                
              and Hindu Indian adults' and childrens' (second grade and sixth                
              grade) interpretations of obligations to help needy others.  The               
              research is expected to demonstrate that Americans tend to hold a              
              relatively voluntaristic "relationship-based" perspective on                   
              interpersonal responsibilities, in which commitments to others                 
              are seen as capable of being voluntarily abandoned, not                        
              personally demanding and as dependent, in part, on whether or not              
              the agent likes the other.  In contrast, it will be shown that                 
              Indians tend to hold a less voluntaristic "role-based"                         
              perspective, in which commitments to others are seen as based on               
              unalterable role expectations, potentially personally demanding                
              and as unrelated to the agent's liking of the other.  The                      
              investigation will make a theoretical contribution to social                   
              psychology in its demonstration that conceptions of interpersonal              
              responsibilities are culturally patterned rather than universal.               
              In identifying a system of interpersonal morality that has not                 
              been previously recognized within psychology, the project will                 
              also serve to expand current knowledge regarding the scope of the              
              moral domain.  Finally, in contrasting the reasoning of different              
              age groups of children from markedly different cultures, the                   
              research will enhance current understanding of the processes                   
              underlying social cognitive development.
