Title       : Research Initiation Awards: Enhanced Micellar Electrokinetic Capillary
               Chromatography for Bioseparations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1992     
File        : a9108875

Award Number: 9108875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheng S. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Micellar Electrokinetic Capillary Chromatography (MECC) is one                 
                                                                                             
              of the operational modes of High Performance Capillary                         
              Electrophoresis (HPCE) specifically designed for the                           
              separation of neutral compounds or mixtures of neutral and                     
              charged compounds.  Neutral compounds are separated based on                   
              their differential partitioning between the aqueous phase and                  
              the hydrophobic interior of the micellar phase.  MECC combines                 
                                                                                             
              the strengths of capillary electrophoresis with its high                       
              separation efficiency and liquid chromatography with its                       
              resolving power of neutral compounds.  MECC is an important                    
              new separation method for biological, biochemical, and                         
              pharmaceutical applications.  A fundamental problem in MECC is                 
                                                                                             
              its limited retention window.  This obstacle limits the                        
              separation resolution and the number of components capable of                  
              being separated by MECC.  An easy way for increasing the range                 
                                                                                             
              of the retention window involves the direct control of                         
              electroosmosis.  The use of an additional electric field                       
              applied from outside of the capillary  for directly and                        
              dynamically controlling electroosmosis is proposed.  The                       
              fundamentals of this approach are studied experimentally and                   
              theoretically with a proposed capacitor model.  The separation                 
                                                                                             
              resolution of amino acids as model systems are tested and                      
              compared to that of previous methods.
