Title       : Multi-Sensor Systems For Robot Navigation In Partially-KnownTerrains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9108610

Award Number: 9108610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nageswara Rao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6840,9264,
Abstract    :
              Navigation methods using multi-sensor systems are considered for               
              terrains whose geometric models are known only in certain parts.               
              Exact navigation algorithms, as well as those that obtain                      
              approximate paths with lesser computation time while compromising              
              the optimality are studied.  Navigational methods for terrains,                
              where polygonal approximations are inefficient, are explored                   
              based on fractal interpolation and approximate path planning.                  
              The navigation process involves the problem of extracting                      
              information about the geometry of the terrain by suitably                      
              combining the sensor outputs.  Techniques for (a) extracting                   
              integrated information, and (b) fusing the new information into                
              the existing terrain model, are investigated.  Two new paradigms               
              for sensing:  (a) active sensing where sensor operations are                   
              repeated using sequential statistical methods, and (b) learning                
              fusion rules from examples where the system is trained with                    
              examples using the methods of empirical and structural risk                    
              minimization, are proposed.  These two methods, together with the              
              existing Bayesian-based methods, provide the design paradigms for              
              the multi-sensor system.  For computational purposes, a general                
              distributed sensor system specified by a set of first order                    
              propositional sentences is proposed.  This system encompasses, as              
              special cases, the distributed versions of Bayesian inference,                 
              and geometric reasoning with logic and algebra.  In the case of                
              sensors whose outputs are real-valued vectors, the entire process              
              of sensor integration is shown to be implementable in hardware                 
              using combinational circuits and comparators.  This                            
              implementation is particularly suitable for real-time                          
              applications.  Also implementations on several other                           
              computational systems are studied.
