Title       : Molecular and Demographic Population Genetic Studies of Southwestern Indian
               Tribes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1991       
File        : a9108422

Award Number: 9108422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67641              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey C. Long   (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Q. North  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The primary objective of this project is to clarify the                        
              evolutionary relationships of a number of Southwestern American                
              Indian tribes through the analysis of blood samples gathered                   
              through the Albuquerque Indian Hospital.  The genetic                          
              relationships of these tribes have been a source of debate for                 
              many years.  With the development of DNA typing techniques, it is              
              now possible to estimate the genetic relatedness of the                        
              populations with much greater precision than previously.  As                   
              linguists have also developed measures of linguistic divergence                
              for the tribes, it will be possible to measure the similarities                
              between the trees of relatedness as judged by genetic and                      
              linguistic criteria.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Fifteen populations will be sampled and typings done on over 100               
              polymorphic loci.  Mathematical models which take into account                 
              both similarities due to descent from a common ancestor and those              
              due to migration and admixture will be employed.
