Title       : Endogenous Fertility and the Environment:Dynamics and Welfare Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1994  
File        : a9108978

Award Number: 9108978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39887              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Reardon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Delgado  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inter Food Policy ResInst
	      1776 Massachusetts Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200361904    202/862-8138

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              It is widely recognized that population pressure is one of the                 
              most important sources of environmental degradation, especially                
              in developing countries.  What is less fully appreciated is the                
              impact of environmental quality on people's motives for having                 
              children.  This project focuses on the implications of parents'                
              desire for children and concern with the children's future well-               
              being for the dynamic relation between population and                          
              environment.  The project also investigates whether a system of                
              taxes on children and subsidies to parents can be welfare-                     
              improving for members of the present generation and what affects               
              such tax/subsidy policies may have on the dynamics of                          
              demographic/environmental interactions.  The relation between                  
              population and the environment in developing countries is also an              
              important part of the human dimensions of global change because                
              environmental degradation in developing countries causes global                
              warming and because continued high rates of population growth in               
              developing countries will make it increasingly difficult if not                
              impossible to reconcile goals for economic growth with the                     
              protection of the environment.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The research is both theoretical and empirical.  Specifically, an              
              agricultural input demand systems model is derived, specified and              
              estimated.  This model includes age- and gender- specific labor                
              demand equations.   The empirical research relies on Burkina Faso              
              Survey Data and Pakistan Survey Data.  The former data set                     
              contains very detailed information on agricultural production in               
              Burkina Faso over the period 1981 through 1985, including the use              
              of household and hired labor, by age and sex, for a wide variety               
              of agricultural activities.  The latter data are representative                
              of poor households in three distinct agroecological zones in                   
              Pakistan and provide very detailed information on the                          
              socioeconomic and agricultural characteristics of these families.
