Title       : Mechanical Force Underlying Neuronal Shape and Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9108732

Award Number: 9108732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130307             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Heidemann heideman@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Buxbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The mammalian nervous system is analogous to an electrical wiring              
              system that sends messages to all parts of the body.  The axon is              
              an exceptionally long "electric wire" extension of the neuron and              
              conducts the electrical signals generated in the nervous system.               
              Though it is not fully understood how axons reach their targets,               
              it is known that axons expand as a result of the slow movement of              
              its front end, the growth cone.  As the growth cone slowly moves               
              around the body, the axon lengthens from behind.  Filamentous                  
              proteins of the cytoplasm, actin, microtubules, and intermediated              
              filaments compose a dynamic skeletal structure for cells, that                 
              underlies the ability of axons to elongate.  This research                     
              project will focus on describing the motility of the                           
              lammellipodial growth cone.  Mechanical tension is expected to                 
              regulate the cytoskeleton during axonal elongation.  This ideas                
              is supported by thermodynamic considerations that suggest the                  
              assemble of filaments is affected by mechanical forces.  The                   
              relationship between mechanical tension and two other known                    
              stimulators of axonal elongation; nerve growth factor and                      
              electrical fields will be investigated to determine whether                    
              growth signals transduce through tension or act independently.                 
              In conjunction with these studies, the Principal investigator                  
              will study the assembly of microtubules during the process of                  
              axonal initiation and ascertain what chemicals are responsible                 
              for the motility of growth cones by using tension measuring                    
              methods.  These cytomechanical investigations will provide new                 
              insight in understanding axonal development in the nervous                     
              system.
