Title       : Research Initiation: Economies of Production through Duplicating Bottleneck
               Machines and Subcontracting Bottleneck Parts in Cellular Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1993       
File        : a9108507

Award Number: 9108507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pius J. Egbelu                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70234              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rasaratnam Logendran logendrr@engr.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   Ideally in cellular manufacturing systems, a family of parts              
              will be processed in its entirety within a machine cell that                   
              consists of one or more machine types.  In most practical                      
              problems a non-ideal situation prevails, in that the individual                
              part and machine groupings are usually connected.  A part might                
              require processing in a cell other than its own (called a                      
              bottleneck part).  Similarly, a machine can process a part                     
              assigned to a cell other than its own (called a bottleneck                     
              machine).  Research investigations have been reported to attain                
              economies of production, either by duplicating bottleneck                      
              machines or by subcontracting bottleneck parts.                                
                   The research takes an integrated approach to develop a                    
              linear binary programming model for a cellular manufacturing                   
              system which simultaneously utilizes machine duplication and part              
              subcontracting to maximize net savings in costs.  As the linear                
              model representation has been proven to be NP-hard, a heuristic                
              solution algorithm will be developed.  Suitable measures of                    
              performance have been established to determine the accuracy of                 
              the solution and the effectiveness of the algorithm.  Given the                
              budgetary restriction a parts manufacturing company has to work                
              with, the solution algorithm for the model, and the subsequent                 
              development of hosts of computer programs, will determine the                  
              bottleneck machines that need to be duplicated and the bottleneck              
              parts that need to be subcontracted.
