Title       : State IUCRC for The Integrated Electronics Engineering Center Performing
               Research in Electronics Packaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1999      
File        : a9108850

Award Number: 9108850
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2240000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bahgat G. Sammakia   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry Kroger  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SUNY Research Foundation
	      P. O. Box 9
	      Albany, NY  122010009    516/246-7935

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   The mission of the Integrated Electronics Engineering Center              
              (IEEC) will be four-fold:  (1) to support the integrated                       
              electronics industry of New York State with short-and long-range               
              research and development and planning efforts, (2) to disseminate              
              the results of research which will advance the leading edge of                 
              technology in the field, (3) to provide a technology transfer and              
              training program to enhance economic development in New York State,            
              and (4) to deliver a unique educational experience in integration              
              of electronics design and assembly at the undergraduate and                    
              graduate level.  The goals and objectives for IEEC can be                      
              classified into three areas of activities:  (1) research and                   
              development, (2) collaborative activities with industry, other                 
              academic institutions and government agencies, and (3) economic                
              development, including business start-up and work force                        
              productivity and stability enhancement.                                        
                   The organizational framework will include an Industrial                   
              Advisory Board (IAB) for formal liaisons with industry.                        
              Additionally, there will be a cadre of Project Liaisons from                   
              industry working directly with faculty researchers on each                     
              technical project.  The IAB has representatives from IBM, GE,                  
              Universal Instruments, the State's University Industry Public                  
              Partnership for Economic Growth (UnIPEG), and the Watson School of             
              Engineering.  The purpose of the IAB is to provide a collaborative             
              technical interaction between the Watson School and the Electronics            
              packaging industry, by establishing broader industrial consensus               
              on the most critical packaging topics, and by encouraging                      
              interdisciplinary activities among university researchers.                     
                   Leading two-year academic institutions in the State will serve            
              as transmitters for amplifying the technology transfer mechanism               
              to other regions of the state.  Research results will be                       
              disseminated by: (i) reporting initially to IEEC members via                   
              regularly scheduled Center briefing sessions, followed by, (ii)                
              publications or presentations in public forums, followed by, (iii)             
              training workshops open to any member of the public on a course fee            
              basis.  Additional courses will be offered at the undergraduate and            
              graduate level beyond those already provided by the Watson School              
              in electronics packaging.      Aside from the transfer of research             
              results directly to sponsors, there is the prospect of transfer in             
              the longer term to other firms through the active involvement of               
              faculty with state agencies, such as the University/Industry Public            
              Partnership for Economic Growth (UnIPEG) and their Industrial                  
              Technical Extension Service (ITES).  The Continuing Education                  
              Office of the Watson School will develop a number of short courses             
              related to the Center's implementation  retraining programs for the            
              local microelectronics industry at the level of the individual                 
              employee, thereby improving productivity and/or employment                     
              stability.  The State of New York, industry and NSF will provide               
              matching funds totalling $750,000 in the first year.
