Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on the Application of Non-Destructive Techniques
               to Investigate Cavitation in Superplasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9108321

Award Number: 9108321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence G. Langdon langdon@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5942      KOREA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1446,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds to permit Dr. Terence G.                             
              Langdon, Department of Materials Science, University of                        
              Southern California (USC), to pursue with Dr. Ho Chul                          
              Kim, Professor of Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of                         
              Science and Technology (KAIST), for 24 months, a program                       
              of cooperative research on the application of non-                             
              destructive techniques to the investigation of                                 
              cavitation in superplasticity.  Their research formerly                        
              was supported under NSF Grant No. INT-8803709.  These                          
              scientists and members of their research groups will                           
              continue their collaboration through the use of                                
              destructive superplastic testing, at USC, with non-                            
              destructive ultrasonic velocity and photoacoustic                              
              spectroscopy (PAS) at KAIST.  They will (1) use                                
              metallography, at USC to verify PAS results obtained at                        
              KAIST, (2) extent their procedures to include lower                            
              elongations, and (3) expand their investigations to                            
              include materials other than metals.                                           
                                                                                             
              Superplasticity refers to the ability of some metals to                        
              exhibit exceptionally high, neck-free elongations, often                       
              in excess of 1,000%, when pulled in tension at elevated                        
              temperatures.  This phenomenon is of considerable                              
              commercial interest because  of the many potential                             
              applications in sheet-metal forming.  A major problem in                       
              superplasticity is the nucleation and growth of internal                       
              cavities.  These cavities may lead to a significant                            
              degradation of the post-forming properties of the                              
              material.  It is important, therefore, to estimate the                         
              volume of cavities, non-destructively, and to verify                           
              these estimates using metallographic techniques.  The                          
              collaborators are highly respected scientists in the                           
              field of this research.  Their past collaboration has                          
              resulted in significant contributions to the literature                        
              of this field.  The U.S. scientist will benefit from                           
              access to facilities for non-destructive testing,                              
              available at KAIST, but not at USC.  This project is                           
              relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative                       
              Science Program which seeks to increase the level of                           
              cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and                             
              engineers through the exchange of scientific                                   
              information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through                         
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean                           
              participation in the project is supported by the Korea                         
              Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
