Title       : Practical Determination of Force-Free Coronal Magnetic Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9108369

Award Number: 9108369
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth H. Schatten                     
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoran Mikic mikicz@saic.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander N. McClymont  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SAI San Diego
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92129    /   -

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The nature of the coronal magnetic field is of central                    
              importance to the understanding and prediction of solar flares.                
              The coronal magnetic field, however, cannot be measured directly.              
              It is proposed to develop and apply a new method for computing                 
              the force-free coronal field from the photospheric magnetic                    
              field, as measured by a vector magnetograph.  The coronal field                
              is obtained by solving the nonlinear force-free equation (with                 
              non-constant alpha). The proposed algorithm employs a novel                    
              formulation of the force-free problem in which the field is                    
              evolved from a potential field to a force-free field which                     
              satisfies the observed boundary data.  The field is required to                
              satisfy boundary conditions on the magnetic flux and the normal                
              component of the electric current density at the boundary.  It is              
              planned to study the practical considerations involved in the                  
              application of the method to necessarily imperfect magnetograph                
              data, using the Stokes Polarimeter and the Imaging Vector                      
              Magnetograph at Mees Solar Observatory, University of Hawaii.
