Title       : Development of Visual Stability in Human Infants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9108723

Award Number: 9108723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Aslin aslin@cvs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research project is to determine at what age and              
              with what underlying mechanism young infants perceive the visual               
              world as stable despite movements of the eyes, head, and body.                 
              Adults perceive the visual world as stable despite self-produced               
              movements primarily by means of reflexive eye movements triggered              
              by visual and vestibular stimulation.  These eye movements serve               
              to reduce or eliminate those movements of the retinal image that               
              are created by self-produced movements.  The vestibulo-ocular                  
              reflex (VOR), triggered by rotations or translations of the head,              
              counter-rolls the eyes in the direction opposite to head                       
              movement.  The optokinetic reflex (OKR) moves the eyes in the                  
              direction of retinal image movement.  These reflexes are                       
              supplemented by a fine-grained analysis of retinal image                       
              velocities located near the current direction of gaze and                      
              converted into eye movement signals for the smooth pursuit                     
              system.  In a typical visual environment with objects at many                  
              different distances, the observer must select a depth-plane for                
              fixation and suppress those retinal image motions created by                   
              objects at nearer and farther distances.  When the visual scene                
              moves, either because of object movement or movement of the                    
              observer, the three oculomotor systems -- VOR, OKR, and smooth                 
              pursuit -- are activated in concert to stabilize the attended                  
              object despite the movements of other retinal images.  These                   
              experiments will present 2- to 6-month-old human infants either                
              with moving visual displays while they are held in a stable                    
              head/body position or with stationary visual displays while their              
              head/body is moved laterally.  The former condition stimulates                 
              the OKR and smooth pursuit systems, while the latter condition                 
              stimulates all three systems to reveal the role of the VOR.  At                
              issue is how effectively infants are able to keep the object of                
              attention stabilized on the retina despite movements of the                    
              visual surround and/or movements of the head/body.  Based on                   
              earlier work showing that smooth pursuit does not emerge until 2               
              months of age and depth perception does not emerge until 4 months              
              of age, Aslin predicts that if the smooth pursuit system is the                
              critical factor, then effective stabilization should emerge at 2               
              months of age.  However, if segregation of objects in depth is                 
              the critical factor, then effective stabilization should not                   
              emerge until 4 months of age.  These results from normal infants               
              will provide a baseline for understanding the development of                   
              three oculomotor systems that are known to be essential for                    
              adults' perception of a stable visual world.
