Title       : Polarization-Agile, Multiple-Resonant Smart Antenna Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9900280

Award Number: 9900280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel W. van der Weide danvdw@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven S. Gearhart  (Principal Investigator former)
              Susan C. Hagness  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900280
Gearheart

The goal of this research project is to develop a new
              polarization-agile wire antenna element. A new four-terminal wire antenna
              geometry is proposed along with novel methods of tuning the resonant frequency,
              impedance, and radiation pattern of the antenna. The four terminal antenna can
              radiate in one of two modes: dipole mode or slot mode. Ideally, the radiation
              patterns and resonant frequencies of the two modes are identical and their
              polarizations are orthogonal in every direction. Furthermore, each terminal
              should see a matched impedance to the coaxial feed to reduce system
              reflections. Superposition of the two modes will allow for the synthesis of any
              linear, circular, or elliptical polarization, and identical mode radiation
              patterns and orthogonal mode polarizations will allow for synthesis of any
              polarization in any direction. The novel integrated tuning stubs will allow the
              polarization-agile wire antenna to radiate each mode effectively at multiple
              specified frequencies. Genetic algorithm optimization techniques will be used
              in the development of the polarization-agile multiple-resonant wire
              antenna.

The proposed polarization-agile wire antenna element will allow for
              significant improvement in smart antenna systems through inclusion of optimized
              polarization information. This represents a significant improvement over
              traditional polarization diversity systems that use two perpendicular antennas
              and use the strongest signal from one antenna or the other. Such antennas are
              not orthogonally polarized for all angles of arrival and the singular use of
              one antenna or the other does not allow for the synthesis of circular or
              elliptical polarization.

A national resource for the education of high
              school and undergraduate students on the design and measurement of antennas and
              microwave circuits is proposed. An internet site devoted the education of high
              school and undergraduate students is the key component of the proposal. The
              goals of the internet site are as follows:

Introduce high school and
              undergraduate students to the fields of antennas and
microwave circuits
              through design examples, measurement demonstrations, and real-time antenna
              radiation pattern measurements.
Provide a supplement for undergraduate
              microwave and antenna textbooks used in senior-level undergraduate courses
              nationwide.
Target inner city (e.g. minority) high school students in
              Milwaukee through the
offering of wireless data and voice network
              services.

In addition, a summer research program for undergraduate student
              researchers from institutions with large percentages of underrepresented
              minority groups will help increase the number of such students that
              successfully complete a degree in Electrical Engineering and encourage those
              students to consider graduate degrees in Electrical Engineering.


