Title       : Symposium B: Growth Instablities and Decomposition During Heteroepitaxy, Boston,
               Massachusetts, November 30 - December 4, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1998  
File        : a9900708

Award Number: 9900708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Pachavis pachavis@mrs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. A. Floro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Tersoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Voorhees  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel S. Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials Res Society
	      506 Keystone Drive
	      Warrendale, PA  150867573    412/779-3003

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9900708
Pachavis
A symposium will be held at the 1998 Fall MRS Meeting on
              "Growth Instabilities and Decomposition During Heteroepitaxy". The goal of the
              conference is to bring together both theoreticians and experimentalists from
              disciplines including physics, chemistry, materials science, and electrical
              engineering to address fundamentals and applications of growth instabilities
              occurring during a wide variety of thin film growth processes. A further
              objective is to stimulate collaboration and discussion between researchers,
              especially between young professionals and established experts and to identify
              critical issues for future research. The conference brings together industrial
              and academic scientists in an effort to encourage collaboration between these
              groups. Support from NSF will be used to partially compensate young scientists
              (junior faculty, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows) for travel and
              accommodation expenses. The conference is expected to provide an effective
              forum for discussion of critical scientific issues in growth instabilities
              during heteroepitaxy with a focus on elastic strain induced self assembly.
              Along with the opportunity to assess the field and future directions, it is
              expected that new ties will be established between universities, research
              institutions, and industry.
%%%
Elastic strains, induced either by lattice
              mismatch or compositional inhomogenieties, present both challenges and
              opportunities for the production of novel electronic and optoelectronic
              devices. In some cases, strain is deleterious, leading to defective or
              non-planar films. On the other hand, strain-driven islanding provides a direct
              route for the production of self-assembled nanostructures. Semiconducting
              lattice-mismatched materials have far reaching economic potential since
              applications range broadly across electronics and photonics associated with
              computing, communications, and information processing. An evaluation of the
              progress and status of this field along with current assessments of the most
              important developments will be of great value to the understanding and enhanced
              utilization of electronic/photonic materials in applications beneficial to
              society.
***

