Title       : Excitations, Kinetics and Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a9900434

Award Number: 9900434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $805065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raoul Kopelman kopelman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9900434 
Kopelman
The basic problems addressed here range from energy
              conduction in fractal-shaped conjugated polymers with nodes, intersections and
              directional bias (dendrimeric antenna and funnels) to the fractal-like pattern
              formation and anomalous kinetics of elementary reactions in compactified
              domains (capillaries and pores). The specific aims of this project are: (I)
              Study the mechanisms of energy transfer and excitation fusion in conjugated
              dendrimer supermolecules, as a function of the antenna design, via femtosecond
              resolved spectroscopy. Also, design and test specialized dendrimer
              supermolecules, towards potential applications to optochemical nanosensors,
              resulting in nano-biosensors for cellular applications. (2) Study
              experimentally the so-called "holy grail" of non-classical kinetics, i.e.,
              reactant self-segregation in an elementary bimolecular reaction, as well as the
              effects of long-term memory and convective momentum on elementary reaction
              kinetics and reactant pattern formation in confined domains. Regarding
              educational goals, the interdisciplinary teams we collaborate with range from
              physical to organic chemistry, from analytical chemistry to biophysics, from
              applied physics to neurotoxicology, and from electrical engineering to medical
              imaging. Combined with a concomittant wide range of facilities, this guarantees
              broad-based materials science training for the participating undergraduate,
              graduate and post-graduate students.
%%%
The study of dynamics in
              nano-domains is a multi-faceted enterprise, spanning many fields. This proposal
              covers issues of high priority to industry that will very likely influence US
              global competitiveness. This project unifies theoretical and experimental
              approaches and integrates education and research giving a particularly strong
              advantage to students being trained in important areas with potential
              applications ranging from chemical and biological nanosensors to catalysis and
              nitric oxide monitors.

