Title       : Gravitational Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9900776

Award Number: 9900776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kip S. Thorne kip@tapir.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              New designs will be invented for advanced gravitational-wave detectors to
              operate in LIGO (the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory) in
              the 2008--2010 time frame; and the performance of these new detectors will be
              predicted by theoretical analyses.  The principal goal of these new detectors
              will be to circumvent a new type of noise that will arise when the detectors
              are improved to the level expected in 2008-2010; noise due to the quantum
              mechanical behavior of the mirrors in LIGO, which move in response to passing
              gravitational waves.  These new detectors are called "Quantum-Nondemolition"
              (QND) gravitational-wave detectors because they will enable the
              gravitational-wave signal to evade being demolished by the quantum mechanical
              behavior of the mirrors.  Additional theoretical studies will focus on other
              types of noise that these QND detectors (and other advanced detectors in LIGO)
              must face, and on how to control these noises.  These other noises include
              fluctuating gravitational forces from turbulence in the earth's atmosphere and
              from weak seismic waves in the ground beneath the detectors, and noise from
              thermal vibrations of atoms in LIGO's mirrors.  Finally, theoretical studies of
              various sources of gravitational waves will be carried out, with the goal of
              providing guidance for the design of LIGO's data analysis software, and
              guidance for the planning of LIGO's gravitational-wave searches and
              observations.

This research will lay foundations for long-term improvements
              of LIGO's scientific and technical capabilities.  It will thereby help to
              expand greatly the volume of the universe through which LIGO can search for
              colliding black holes and other sources of gravitational waves.  The QND
              research also has broader implications: It is a forefront portion of the new
              field of "quantum metrology"---a twenty-first century technology that will make
              use of, manipulate, and control the quantum mechanical behavior of macroscopic
              objects, and will manipulate quantum mechanical information.

