Title       : Workshop: International Workshop on Power System Operation and
               Planning"Restructuring the Power Industry for the Year 2000 and Beyond" to be
               Held in Accra, Ghana, Summer 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9900330

Award Number: 9900330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Bofah   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9900330
Momoh

	This proposal intends to organize the first international
              workshop devoted to restructuring the power industry in Sub-Sahara Africa by
              involving new energy market players and experts. African and US power
              industries are undergoing significant changes towards a market-oriented
              structure, which is reflected in all aspects of power system planning, and
              operation.  The traditional vertical organization of utilities is being
              replaced by a decentralized structure to induce competition at all stages of
              energy generation and distribution.  Similarly, the UK, Brazil, several Asian
              countries and many other countries worldwide are at different stages of
              restructuring their power industries or studying the impact of deregulation. 
              In the emergence of a competitive environment, new planning and operations
              issues pose new challenges to power system managers, practicing engineers,
              researchers and developers.  They are investigating new paradigms,
              computational and informational  tools in support of high performance power
              systems. The objective of this proposal is to organize a new focus US-Africa
              workshop to address the following issues: (1) Promote effective planning and
              operation strategies and paradigms for competitive power systems. (2)  Obtain
              better understanding of the needs and views of key players in the power sector.
              (3) Evaluate software tools developed by US researchers and their African
              counterparts for high performance power system.  (4) Exchange information and
              experience between the US and African engineers, policymakers and managers. (5)
              Establish greater cooperation between companies, utilities and universities in
              the fields of generation and transmission planning, optimal power flow,
              production and reactive power pricing, stability and reliability issues,
              cost/benefit analysis in the deregulated environment. (6) Provide opportunities
              for US minority faculty, staff and students to engage in joint research
              activities.
To meet these objectives without repeating previous experience, a
              new international workshop devoted to planning and operation in the
              restructured US and Sub-Sahara Africa utility environment is proposed.  The
              workshop is scheduled for Summer 1999 and will be held over a four-day period
              in Accra, Ghana. The schedule dates will be confirmed with the host country
              once the award is granted. The US participants will benefit from the Workshop
              in terms of new skills, co-operation, and unique opportunities for the US power
              utilities, universities, business and government agencies.  This exposure will
              present opportunities for US-based consultants and software vendors to explore
              new markets for their expertise in direct competition in the UK and
              Europe-based companies.  The US industry can benefit from the potential market
              for tools and expertise in a deregulated environment.  Students will benefit by
              getting experience in power industry activities in Africa.  EPRI can increase
              its membership in Africa by attracting more customers among the African power
              utilities.  This experience will strengthen the research capability of the
              power program in the USA and Sub-Sahara Africa.  The exchange of ideas and
              information via workshop and panel sessions will provide an opportunity for
              collaborative and cooperative work necessary to build practical and reliable
              tools for high performance power systems.



