Title       : Advanced Temporal Imaging Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1999       
File        : a9900414

Award Number: 9900414
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian H. Kolner bhkolner@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900414
Kolner
This proposal seeks resources to support the evolution of new
              concepts in temporal imaging. The fundamental principles of this work grew out
              of the analogy between the equations of diffraction and dispersion. From this
              analogy comes the concepts of time lenses, waveform magnification, time
              microscopes and temporal imaging. The basic premise is that optical waveforms
              can be manipulated using linear systems concepts so that their time scales are
              altered but the shapes of their envelope profiles remain intact. The essential
              components of a temporal imaging system are dispersion, which is the analog of
              free-space diffraction, and quadratic phase modulation, which is the time
              analog of a lens. Applications for this technology include magnification of
              ultrafast optical waveforms to time scales accessible to conventional
              instrumentation, compressing of crafted waveforms to short time scales and
              enhancing performance in time division multiplexing. Under prior funding we
              laid the theoretical foundations of temporal imaging and demonstrated several
              important concepts including waveform magnification, local time reversal and
              pulse compression. We now plan to extend our work to encompass much higher
              performance time lenses so that fundamental limits of imaging may be explored
              and this technology may reach a broader audience.

Advancing the state-of-the
              art in this area will require sophisticated electromagnetic modeling of
              microwave dielectric resonators, theoretical investigations of ultimate
              modula-tion capability as predicted by the Manly-Rowe relations, materials
              science issues of loss tangent and electro-optic effect as well as
              investigating the tools of variational calculus for optimizing time lens
              design. Guided by our theoretical studies, we plan new experiments such as a
              regenerative time lens, capable of many thousands of radians of phase
              modulation, all-optical parametric time lenses based on femtosecond laser
              pulses and nonlinear frequency mixing, and an all- fiber time microscope, to
              name a few. We expect this work to have a significant impact by bringing time
              lens technology to regimes where it can be used as a standard laboratory or
              technology tool for magnifying femtosecond phenomena, wave-form crafting and
              communications applications. Owing to the multidisciplinary nature of the work,
              it will provide tremendous opportunity for training graduate and undergraduate
              students in basic optics, electromagnetics, linear systems, computer modeling,
              microwave theory, and nonlinear optics.
***

