Title       : Achieving High Performance with Co-Designed Virtual Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9900610

Award Number: 9900610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Smith jes@ece.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A virtual machine (VM) is a level of abstraction that implements a virtual
              instruction set architecture on a hardware platform executing a native ISA. 
              This research focuses on VMs implemented via the co-design of software and
              hardware using an implementation-dependent instruction set architecture. 
              Because the hardware-supported architecture is implementation-dependent,
              performance optimizations can be more easily passed from software through to
              hardware, and performance feedback information can be more easily passed from
              hardware up to the software.  Optimizations can be performed by software
              dynamically, as the program runs. A co-designed virtual machine will include
              adaptive hardware performance features, continuous hardware performance
              feedback, and on-the-fly optimizing re-compilation by the VM.

Specific
              research topics include:

1) The development of a VM co-design framework --
              this framework is based on the widely used Simplescalar architecture
              toolset.

2) Application of the VM framework to a number of currently
              important topics in high performance architecture -- these include (but are not
              limited to) advanced control flow prediction and speculation, hardware-assisted
              program specialization, and cache management techniques for object-oriented
              applications.

3) The study of higher level issues related to VM co-design
              and dynamic optimization -- these include performance tradeoffs involving the
              division of work between hardware and software and the development of
              performance monitoring architecture as an integrated part of an overall
              architecture.



