Title       : A Determination of the Cyclic Fatigue Crack Growth Properties of Human Teeth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9900296

Award Number: 9900296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sohi Rastegar                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33404              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwayne D. Arola darola@engr.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900296
Arola
Dental restorations play an integral role in the maintenance of
              lifelongoral health.  Consequently, the failure of dental restorations through
              reoccurring tooth decay, marginal discrepancies, and tooth fracture, are topics
              of substantial clinical significance.  The objective of the research is to show
              that cyclic fatigue crack growth in teeth is an important and largely
              unrecognized mechanism that contributes to dental restoration failure.   The
              hypothesis to be tested that that fatigue crack growth in teeth initiates at
              flaws introduced during cavity preparation with dental burs and is driven by
              cyclic mechanical and thermal loads which encompass standard oral activity. 
              The flaw propagates until reaching a critical crack length which enables the
              loss of biological tooth structure or bulk fracture of the restoration.  
              

In this study the cyclic crack growth rate in human dentin and the
              threshold crack length will be determined from an experimental analysis
              conducted with four-point-bend dentin specimens.  Fatigue specimens will be
              prepared from human teeth using a numerically controlled slicer/grinder.  A
              pre-fatigue crack will be introduced in each specimen, prior to zero-to-maximum
              four point bend fatigue loading, through the application of Mode I cyclic
              compression.  The cyclic flaw growth rate resulting from bend loading will be
              quantified in terms of the instantaneous crack length and maximum cyclic bend
              stress.  Using the cumulative fatigue crack growth data obtained from
              experimental analysis, the parameters describing cyclic fatigue crack growth
              according to the Paris Law will be determined.  Results from the experimental
              study will identify the significance of subsurface flaws introduced during
              cavity preparation on the  fatigue life of restored teeth.


