Title       : Understanding the Evolution of Stratocumulus Clouds in the Coastal Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a9900496

Award Number: 9900496
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273205             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Wang qwang@nps.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Postgraduate School
	      Code 09
	      Monterey, CA  93943    831/656-2099

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stratus and stratocumulus clouds regularly form and dissipate in many coastal
              regions of the world.  These clouds are not only an important element of
              regional weather, they also influence regional and global climate through their
              effect on solar radiation.  The goal of this project is to improve the ability
              to forecast low-level clouds in coastal regions.  The objectives are to
              determine the importance of mesoscale circulations and the microphysical
              properties of the clouds on cloud behavior.  The approach is based on
              observations with the instrumented Twin Otter aircraft operated by the Center
              for Interdisciplinary Remote Piloted Aircraft Study (CIRPAS) and ground-based
              equipment including a wind profiler/RASS system, a laser ceilometer, and a
              millimeter-wavelength radar.  Separate projects funded by the Office of Naval
              Research cover the cost of the airplane time, the radar analysis, and the
              installation on the airplane of new equipment for cloud physics research.  Dr.
              Wang will collaborate closely with Dr. Bruce Albrecht of the University of
              Miami and researchers from CIRPAS and Cal Tech to insure that the experiments
              of the different groups are effectively coordinated.  The research should lead
              to a more complete understanding of the evolution of stratiform clouds in
              coastal regions and better ways of incorporating these clouds in numerical
              forecasting models.
