Title       : GOALI/IUCP: Dynamic Analysis of High-Performance Drilling and Reaming Systems
               for Aerospace Manufactuirng
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9900108

Award Number: 9900108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip V. Bayly pvb@me.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremiah E. Halley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1445,1468,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The goals of this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
              (GOALI) project are to analyze the causes of tool vibration and hole roundness
              error in high-precision and high-speed drilling and reaming; and, to apply the
              results of this analysis to tool and process design for aerospace
              manufacturing.  The work is a collaborative effort between researchers at
              Washington University in St. Louis and engineers at the Boeing Company.  In
              metal cutting, vibrations are excited by forces on the tool's main cutting
              edges, as well as by impact and friction on the sides and clearance faces of
              the tool.  The project will develop accurate models of reaming and drilling,
              including drilling in high-speed, automated stations. These models will take
              into account bending, axial, and twisting motion, and the effects of these
              deformations on cutting forces and friction. Analytical and numerical solutions
              will be obtained from these models to explain the major causes of vibration. 
              Approximate nonlinear methods will be developed to find the amplitude and
              stability of vibrations in drilling. Experimental work will be conducted at
              Boeing's Advanced Manufacturing R&D facilities to validate the analytical and
              numerical results.  Cutting and vibration tests on physical machines will be
              performed to provide parameters for mathematical models and to validate
              theoretical predictions. 
     This project addresses the need to understand
              the precision hole-making process, which is critical to airframe manufacturing.
              A million or more holes may be drilled in the production of a single aircraft.
              Automated assembly, high-speed drilling, and advanced tool designs have the
              potential to dramatically increase productivity and decrease costs, but only if
              the complex dynamics of hole-making are understood.

