Title       : A Novel Process of Fabrication of Ultrafine Microvias for Advanced Electronic
               Packaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9900238

Award Number: 9900238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ajay P. Malshe apm2@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tarak A. Railkar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
9900238
Railkar

We propose to study and develop a novel, femtosecond (fs)
              excimer laser based process for fabricating ultra-fine (20-50 pm) high aspect
              ratio (> 5) microvias for next generation electronic packaging applications.
              These microvias will be metallized using copper by damage-free fs-laser seeding
              followed by low current electroplating techniques. The vias will be fabricated
              in polyimide flex, silicon (Si) and alumina (A1203) substrates which are
              commonly used in packaging applications. Subsequent to the ir fabrication, the
              vias will be undergo mechanical testing and electrical characterization. The
              research will be performed at High Density Electronics Center (HiDEC), and
              Materials and Manufacturing Research Laboratory (MRL) at the University of
              Arkansas at Fayetteville. In this collaborative research, Irvine Sensors, CA, a
              leading company in advanced packaging, will implement the fabricated microvias
              in real application (letter of commitment attached).
There is an ever growing
              need for ultra-fine microvias in packaging industry. As discussed in the
              National Technology Roadmap for Electronic Interconnections [issued by
              Institute for Interconnecting and Packaging Electronics Circuits (IPC)], the
              technological progress trend of via formation technology for packaging is
              significantly falling behind the progress in IC industry. Consequently, there
              is a extraordinary need for a technology that could fabricate such microvias on
              technologically important substrates. In this project, we identify polyimide,
              silicon, as well as A1203 substrates as those are widely accepted and used
              material for various high density multi-chip module (MCM) packaging assemblies,
              MCM-L, MCM-D and MCM-C, respectively.
In the proposed project, a 380
              femtosecond (fs), UV (Z=248 nm) excimer pumped dye laser will be used to
              investigate the through- and blind- microvia fabrication. Currently, various
              technologies such as wet etch, reactive ion etching, photosensitive polymer
              lithography and lasers - are used for fabricating vias for packaging
              applications. Dimensional uniformity, mechanical integrity and chemical
              cleanliness are critical for success of vias and thus the reliability the
              package. One of the leading candidates is pulsed nanosecond UV excimer laser.
              This laser is known [1,2] and typically used to etch vias of about 100 um
              diameter. The via diameter directly affects the ultimate density of vias
              possible within a unit area and volume, but the density indirectly depends also
              on the chemical degradation of the substrate surrounding the via. This, in turn
              completely relies on the process employed to fabricate vias. Recently, brittle
              fracture of high aspect ratio vias, drilled using nanosecond excimer laser has
              been observed [3]. The failure mechanism was identified as excessive polymer
              "burning" due to nanosecond laser induced heat affected zone [1]. This HAZ
              causes thermal run-away which further puts a natural limit on the ultimate size
              of the via fabricated using nano second UV laser.  Femtosecond laser processing
              is known to be superior [3]. Consequently, use of ultrafast fs pulse lasers is
              inevitable. In view of the recent exciting results of fs laser microvia
              drilling in our laboratory and significant technological advances in fs lasers,
              we propose that fs excimer laser is a serious candidate for the advancement of
              science and technology of microvias fabrication for advanced packaging
              applications. Further, with embedded passives becoming an integral part of high
              density packaging, the thickness of substrates is on the increase. Use of fs
              lasers is the best choice for realization of high aspect ratio vias (>5), and
              those could be drilled through integrated passive elements too, without
              thermally disturbing the surrounding geometry or chemistry, unlike ns lasers.
              Development of such technology will prove beneficial to companies such as
              Irvine Sensors, Motorola, Sheldahl, Cray, etc. and will provide us a cutting
              edge in the fierce global market. This program further benefits educational
              infrastructure, on and off campus, as students will be exposed to the
              state-of-the-art research experience and hands-on education. HiDEC and MRL are
              centers of excellence for packaging and surface engineering at the University
              of Arkansas (http://www.engr.uark.edu/~apm2). Our collaborations with
              industrial partners is unique and will benefit a wide range of applications in
              various fields such as electronics, bio-medical, automobile, telecommunication,
              and numerous other civilian and strategic applications.
***

