Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Multiresolution Approach to Remote Sensing of
               Fire Fuels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9900942

Award Number: 9900942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5330               (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Franklin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,9186,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Wildfires occur as a natural disturbance process in virtually all the world's
              ecosystems and dominate in many.  The type, intensity, and frequency of
              wildfire regimes are so inextricably entangled with vegetation pattern and
              climate that any change in one will invariably lead to changes in the others. 
              Profound changes in environmental structure and function spanning a great range
              of spatial and temporal scales can result from changes in these relationships. 
              Issues ranging from changes in fire regimes as a result of global warming to
              reintroduction of fire at local scales to promote ecosystem vitality have led
              researchers to develop more effective and less expensive for measuring,
              modeling, and mapping substances that can fuel fires.  This doctoral
              dissertation research project will apply geostatistical techniques to field
              measurements of fuels that can be consumer by wild fires at sites in central
              Colorado in order to develop multi-resolution remote-sensing techniques for
              biophysical estimation of fuel loads.  Using traditional field sampling
              techniques, the first stage of this project will empirically examine the
              scale-dependent aspects of fire fuels and their constituents (litter, duff,
              herbs, shrubs, downed woody material, and standing tree fuels).  In the second
              phase of the analysis, a biophysical approach will use geostatistical tools
              that model the fundamental spatial distribution of fuels loads to link the
              information needed on fire fuel characteristics and distribution to multi-scale
              remote sensing.  This project will constitute a new approach for estimating and
              mapping fire fuel loads within ecosystems through the use of remotely sensed
              imagery as a multi-scale problem.  It will provide new insights into the
              potential and current limitations of this approach, which could offer valuable
              new information for resource managers interested in monitoring fire fuels,
              managing fire risk, and modeling fire behavior at scales ranging from small
              parks and preserves to regional landscapes.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

