Title       : Integrating Planning and Design Activities in Material Handling Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9900039

Award Number: 9900039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sunderesh S. Heragu herags@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Graves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for development of a 'holonic' modeling
              framework for manufacturing system control.  It will be applied to the study of
              design and planning in the material handling systems domain.  Holonic
              manufacturing systems include individual units (part, material handling device,
              or machine controllers) that make autonomous decisions based on guidelines or
              system-wide constraints provided by higher level controllers such as a cell
              controller or system controller.  Entities (e.g, parts) and resources (e.g.,
              material handling devices and machines) are modeled as intelligent agents that
              function in a cooperative manner so as to accomplish individual as well as
              cell-wide and system-wide goals.  The framework will be used to study the
              impact of design decisions on planning aspects (e.g., effect of introducing
              three automated guided vehicles on part transportation time and traffic
              congestion in a material flow network).  In addition to developing a promising,
              alternative modeling framework, a major part of the research work will focus on
              developing a prototype simulation model for material handling system design and
              planning.  The model will be extensively validated as part of an assessment
              effort and tested for stability and convergence. Thus, a generic MHS model will
              be developed, a prototype of the framework implemented, and experimentation
              conducted to allow for quantifiable performance assessment. 
     If
              successful, results of this research will demonstrate applicability of the
              holonic modeling framework in the material handling systems domain.  This in
              turn will enable researchers to consider its application to higher level
              integrated manufacturing planning and design problems. This project has the
              potential of significantly benefitting the material handling industry,
              including designers, manufacturers and users of materials handling systems. 

