Title       : A Novel Solvent-Less Approach to Manufacture Pre-Pregs and Laminates with
               Improved Dimensional Consistency for Electronic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9900121

Award Number: 9900121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360631             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose M. Castro   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ly James Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This research project will investigate a new solvent-less process, based on
              the concept of continuous Resin Transfer Molding or Injection Pultrusion.
              Current processes used to manufacture electronic pre-pregs and laminates use
              solvent-based systems.  Solvents are environmentally unfriendly, pose potential
              hazards to workers and add no value to the final product.  Solvents are being
              increasingly regulated with permit costs expected to double by the year 2000. 
              Solvents can also be the source of defects, with voids forming if the pre-preg
              is dried too rapidly.  In this closed-system, the heart of the process is the
              impregnation/B-staging die, where high pressures can be used to promote resin
              impregnation into the glass fabric.  In more traditional approaches, where the
              laminate is constructed from copper foils and multiple layers of pre-preg
              materials, the batch process can induce variability through temperature
              differences during curing.  The injection pultrusion process will be a
              continuous in-line lamination process that allows vacuum techniques as well as
              flooding of the die chamber with gases other than air in order to minimize or
              eliminate voids.  The introduction of fillers to improve properties will also
              be investigated.
     It is expected that with the improved impregnation and
              reduced defects, this process will allow the manufacture of more dimensionally
              consistent pre-pregs with fewer voids.  Dimensional consistency is a key
              enabler for increased densification of printer circuit boards and is critical
              to decreasing internal registration scrap at the board shops, thus reducing
              costs and avoiding waste.

