Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Toward the Development of a Neolithic
               Sequence for Northern Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9900674

Award Number: 9900674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6850               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Brandt sbrabdt@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Steven Brandt,  Mr. Agazi Negash will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. Mr.. Negash has conducted an archaeological
              survey in the Tigray Province of Ethiopia and located a series of  rock
              shelters which, based on material exposed through erosion, contains
              archaeological remains which date to the Late Pleistocene and Holocene periods.
               He has conducted preliminary excavation at two of these sites and uncovered
              stratified sequences which, in addition to ceramics and stone tools, contain
              abundant animal remains. The presence of charcoal will allow dating of both
              sites and also suggests that floral materials will be preserved. At neither
              site has Mr. Negash reached bedrock and, based on ceramics recovered, it is
              likely that the excavated materials date to the last several thousand years.
              With NSF support the excavations as both sites will be continued downwards and
              a third open air occurrence will also be investigated. A central goal of the
              research is to recover dated sequences of domestic and non-domesticated plant
              remains to reconstruct the agricultural prehistory of Ethiopia.

The
              "Neolithic Revolution" - the domestication of plants and animals - constituted
              a fundamental and significant chance in human behavior and the growth of
              villages and cities, of states and the attributes which constitute civilization
              all arose from this subsistence base. This process took place, apparently
              independently, in many regions of both the Old and New Worlds and thus are not
              the result of historic accident. Through the comparison of individual cases
              scientists wish to understand the underlying forces responsible. Although much
              is known about domestication in the Near East, China, Middle America and the
              Andes, few realize that the same process took place in Ethiopia and adjoining
              regions. In part this is because the domestic plants such as ensete and teff
              are not widely used in the West; in part the lack of archaeological research in
              this area is also responsible. While many scenarios for domestication in
              Ethiopia have been proposed, the data to support any are lacking. The sites
              which Mr. Nagesh has located will likely provide relevant information and serve
              to establish a cultural sequence for a little known area. The results should
              allow archaeologists to select between several equally likely scenarios and
              will, therefore, be of interest to many scientists. This project will also
              assist in training a promising young scientist.

