Title       : Developing Organic Synthetic Approaches to Electronic Interface Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9900041

Award Number: 9900041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stacey F. Bent stacey@chemeng.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This multidisciplinary research project, which is supported jointly by
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry in the Chemistry Division, Solid State
              Chemistry in the Division of Materials Research, and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities, concerns the organic-semiconductor interface. 
              Using well-established methods of synthetic organic chemistry, primarily
              Diels-Alder and related chemistry, Professor Bent and her colleagues at
              Stanford University are fashioning organic-semiconductor interfaces. 
              Elaboration of the organic interface is carried out, following the anchoring of
              reactive species on the Si(100) or Ge(100) surface.  The work explores the
              mechanism of this chemistry, and considers the use of lithographic methods to
              extend these ideas to the construction of organic based electronic devices. 
              These hybrid organic-semiconductor materials show great promise for application
              in the next generation of electronic and optoelectronic devices.

The
              interface between organic thin films and semiconductor substrates is becoming
              more and more important as state of the art organic based electronic devices
              are conceived and implemented.  This research project focuses on understanding
              the chemistry of this important interface.  Professor Bent and her coworkers at
              Stanford University are developing this chemistry based on well-known methods
              of double bond activation, and are using this approach to develop more robust
              processing methods for this promising generation of new electronic devices.
              


