Title       : Efficient Simulation of Large-Scale Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9900117

Award Number: 9900117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189406             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Calvin calvin@cis.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marvin K. Nakayama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development of new methodologies for
              improving the efficiency of simulations of large-scale stochastic systems, such
              as those arising in manufacturing, telecommunications, production/inventory,
              finance, and transportation.  The basic ideas underlying many of the award
              techniques is to extract or utilize more information from a simulation than is
              done in the standard approaches.
The methods are related to existing
              variance-reduction techniques such as control variates, which collect
              additional data that are used to modify the estimator, leading to less
              variability.  The Principal Investigators propose to develop other approaches
              that similarly exploit ignored information from simulations to improve the
              estimator.  Several of the proposed techniques take a particular realization of
              the simulation output and construct many other possible realizations from it. 
              Estimates of the performance measure of interest are computed from each
              realization, and the estimates are then averaged.  This leads to lower
              variability than
the standard approach.
    The Principal Investigators plan
              to establish the validity of these methodologies under various assumptions and
              develop computationally efficient implementations of the ideas.  One of the
              desired outcomes is to show that the proposed methods are optimal under certain
              conditions.  If successful, the results of the project will lead to significant
              improvements in the efficiency of simulations of large-scale systems. The basic
              ideas underlying the methods are quite general and versatile, and they can be
              combined with other existing simulation techniques. 


