Title       : Evaluation of an Inorganic Resin for Strengthening of Reinforced Concrete and
               Steel Beams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a9900431

Award Number: 9900431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79814              (Estimated)
Investigator: Houssam A. Toutanji toutanji@cee.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              It is proposed to evaluate a recently developed inorganic resin for
              strengthening reinforced concrete and steel beams.  The new resin has some
              major advantages over the organic polymers; inclluding: (i) resistance to fire
              and high temperature, (ii) resistance to UV radition, (iii) easy handling
              because the resin is water based and emits no odor or toxins during
              construction or curing period, and (iv) better chemical bonding with concrete. 
              It is possible to replace the organic ploymers with the inorganic resin for
              most applications.  In addition, the use of the new matrix will enhance the use
              of advanced composites in applications that require fire resistance and
              long-term durability.  The primary objectives of the proposed research is to
              obtain: basic information for using the inorganic resin for strengthening of
              reinforced concrete and steel beams; study the behavior of strengthened
              reinforced concrete beams under sustained loading, and durability of
              strengthened reinforced concrete beams under wet-dry and freeze-thaw
              conditions.  The experimental evaluation will be conducted using fairly large
              size beams so as to simulate actual field conditions.  This project is a
              cooperate effort between University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) and Rutgers
              the State University of New Jersey.  Dr. H. Toutanji will be the principal
              investigator at UAH and Dr. P. Balagure will be the principal investigator at
              Rutgers.  The structural Lab at NASA's Marshal Flight Space Center at
              Huntsville, Alabama will be used for some of the work proposed in this
              proposal.
