Title       : MEMS Packaging for Reliability and Rapid Prototyping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9900366

Award Number: 9900366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheng Liu sliu@eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory W. Auner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zhengfang Qian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900366
Liu
This proposal focuses on several key issues for the reliability
              and rapid prototyping of microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) packaging. MEMS
              packaging is a nationally important and technologically critical area and it is
              impacting quite a few industries. Packaging of microdevices, especially
              surface-micromachined elements, presents unique challenges due to the presence
              of delicate moving structures, hostile environmental conditions, low cost, high
              reliability, and fast time to market. MEMS packaging can take up to 95% of the
              total microsystem cost and is becoming a bottleneck for rapid deployment of
              various new sensors, actuators, and other MEMS based microsystems. There is a
              significant lack in fundamental understanding of packaging material and
              structural behaviors in harsh environments, the effect of manufacturing induced
              deformation evolution and stress build-up on the final accelerating testing and
              field life, degradation and failure modes, optimal packaging processing
              parameters, optimal material selection and design. In terms or rapid
              prototyping of MEMS packaging, there is a lack of reliable material
              database/library, and coupled model and simulator that can handle complex
              processing and loading conditions. There is also a lack in micrometeorology
              tools for deformation and stress during the processing, accelerating testing,
              and operation. In terms of packaging technology, there is also a need for
              evaluating appropriate packaging method for certain micro devices.

The
              proposed research is to attack the above challenges. The objectives of this
              project are to address above key issues by a systematic approach, a well formed
              team consisting of university researchers and industrial collaborators, and
              working on real world MEMS packaging micro devices. The proposed research
              include: (1) to enhance our current material library in conventional IC
              packaging by testing those relevant materials needed for selected packaging
              devices, which is essential for rapid design, reliability prediction, and
              process mechanics and operation simulation; (2) to develop a new testing method
              and device for on-tine intrinsic stress measurement in MEMS processing and some
              packaging steps, which can evaluate local residual stress build-up via
              processing parameters, provide validation data for the modeling, and adjust the
              optimal processing windows; (3) to apply advanced multi-level measurement
              tools, such as micro-speckle under SEM, micro moire, AFM, acoustic microscopy,
              to measure real time, 2D/30 global/local deformation. stress/stain, and to
              monitor crack arid delamination growth, and damage evolution, for MEMS
              packaging materials and structures subjected to various environmental chambers;
              (4) to integrate the MEMS processing induced stress/deformation, accelerating
              quality/reliability testing1 and operation so as to provide B unified
              sequential modeling framework for yield learning, reliability prediction, and
              performance evaluation for typical micro device packages in terms of the
              material selection, structural design, packaging technology and processing
              windows. The MEMS devices will include a model MEMS stress test chip, a type of
              smart pressure sensor1 and a type of smart high temperature Sensor.

The
              proposed teaching plan addresses several methods designed to enhance both
              undergraduate and graduate teaching and mentoring which are consistent with the
              PI and co-PI career goals and those of Wayne State University. The educational
              activities to be undertaken are curriculum development for majors and
              non-majors wit more design and manufacturing contents, including
              cross-disciplinary courses such us MEMS Packaging Design, Manufacturing, and
              Reliability, MEMS and MEMS Packaging Processing Modeling. The proposed research
              with its industry partnership and comprehensive educational plan will broadly
              impact various industries. It is believed that the proposed proposal will help
              provide a solid knowledge base for the MEMS devices and its industries a
              fundamental understanding of their processes, materials, performance, and
              reliability, significantly enhance the infrastructure of fundamental sciences,
              engineering practices, and advanced education.
***




