Title       : Generalized Linear Model-Based Process Control of Multivariate Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1999       
File        : a9900113

Award Number: 9900113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211412             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Runger runger@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Montgomery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The objectives of this research are to develop model-based control
              algorithms for multiple variables that operate when the measurements are a
              mixture of normally and non-normally distributed variables.  Situations such as
              this arise frequently in industry, notably in the semiconductor industry, where
              the manufacturing and quality databases contain variables such as counts of
              defects or particle contaminates and electrical parameters, in addition to
              yield and other performance characteristics.  These situations are also
              frequently encountered in the chemical and process industries.  The research
              may also extend this algorithm to cascade processes; that is, processes with
              sequential manufacturing steps and significant added value processing occurring
              at each step.  Processes in semiconductor manufacturing and chemical and
              process industries often add value sequentially over a number of process steps.
               Several process and product characteristics might be measured at each step. In
              this type of process, a shift in an upstream subset of variables can propagate
              into downstream subset variables although nothing is wrong with the process at
              later stages.  A strategy that links the steps to improve process control will
              be incorporated into this algorithm.
     If successful, the results of this
              research will lead to better use of the data to improve the control of
              processes with many measurements of various types.  As automated data
              acquisition systems become more prevalent, more processes will require the type
              of analysis proposed.  In addition, the focus on cascade processes will improve
              the ability to detect and isolate process problems through a segmented design
              that considers the deviance from expected results at each processing step. 
              This approach should provide
better control of these processes, and greater
              knowledge of the interrelationships between process steps.  This integration of
              different measurement types in cascade processes should lead to new methodology
              for
the regression-adjustment of nonstandard data and contribute to the
              research in statistical deviancies. Furthermore, it is expected that the
              algorithms developed here will become benchmarks for other researchers to use
              for subsequent extensions to particular cascade processes.



