Title       : Methodologies for Modeling and Analyzing Sustained Product Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9900226

Award Number: 9900226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224889             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Allada allada@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for development of a modeling framework and design
              tools for sustained product design.  The research initiatives of this study
              include developing an environmentally oriented model of the product life cycle,
              scientific design guidance and evaluation tools, and a systematic procedure to
              enhance product sustenance.  This research will utilize analogous concepts from
              classical and statistical thermodynamics in order to comprehend the product
              transformation at its various life cycle phases and to develop quantitative
              guidance tools for sustained product design.  The design guidance tools will
              quantify various desirable and undesirable design scenarios pertaining to
              disassembly, servicing, re-manufacturing, reuse, and recycling.  A systematic
              procedure using a variant of the morphological matrix, called the 3-D
              morphological product matrix, will be deployed to achieve enhanced product
              sustenance by "exploring" the possibility of reusing the sub-assemblies (or
              components) in totally different product families.  The educational goal is to
              create and promote student awareness on sustained product development by
              integrating the research results in the curriculum.

If successful, the
              research results will provide theoretical underpinnings and practical insights
              for effective integration of product design and environmental product life
              cycle issues.  The model and new guidance tools developed in this study will
              help the designers to analyze the environmental profiles of products and
              provide specific solutions to guide the sustained design process.
