Title       : Large Scale Influences on Tropical Cyclogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2001   
File        : a9900671

Award Number: 9900671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329328             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Molinari molinari@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The objective of this research is to increase understanding of the genesis of
              tropical cyclones.  Of particular interest are the influences on genesis of
              phenomena whose scales are larger than the tropical cyclone and, therefore,
              more likely to be measured accurately.  There is considerable disagreement in
              the community regarding the relative importance of the large-scale phenomena
              and the specific ways in which they affect the process.
	This project consists
              of three related tasks.  One is a continuation of observational studies, using
              gridded analyses, of the pre-cursors to cyclogenesis in the eastern Pacific,
              particularly the relative roles of the background state, mountain interactions,
              upstream atmospheric waves, and wind surges.  The PI also will investigate the
              role of the monsoon trough in this region.  The other two tasks deal with the
              phenomenon of easterly waves.  A global climatology of sign reversals in the
              meridional gradient of potential vorticity and its influence on easterly waves
              and cyclogenesis will be completed.  In addition, numerical simulations of
              easterly waves will be conducted, beginning with a simple shallow water model
              and moving to the more complex MM5 model.
	Improved understanding of the
              processes involved in tropical cyclogenesis is a key step in improving the
              forecasting of tropical cyclones. 



