Title       : Intelligent Material and Process Design for Stamping of Structural Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a9900185

Award Number: 9900185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322025             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Sherwood James_Sherwood@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Chen  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jian Cao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              	Structural or continuous fiber composites possess the unique qualities of high
              strength, high stiffness, and lightweight, as well as tailorable thermal and
              electrical properties. Despite demonstrated success in low volume aerospace and
              defense applications, structural composites remain at the periphery of high
              volume industries such as construction, automotive, and consumer goods because
              of long cycle time. Stamping, the target manufacturing process of this project,
              provides a means of making composite sheet products at rates ten to a hundred
              times faster than any existing continuous fiber processes. However, to make
              composites stamping a viable process, one must understand how the fibers
              deform, what causes defects such as wrinkling and tearing, and how process
              parameters such as temperature, stamping rate, and boundary constraints all
              affect the material response. These challenging issues will be addressed by
              collaborative research between two universities and Ford. The investigators
              will apply their collective knowledge in the areas of sheet metal stamping,
              textile mechanics, and composites forming. 
	The primary goal of this research
              project is the development of a composite stamping model to assist designers
              with optimizing material selection and tool/blank/process design for
              manufacturing. This knowledge will create opportunities for stamped structural
              composites to be utilized in high volume applications. The knowledge gained in
              this research will have not only a substantial impact upon industry but will be
              widely disseminated to industry practitioners and graduate and undergraduate
              students.	
  
