Title       : Mechano-Chemical Interaction in Ultrafast Reactions of Solid Reactants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9900451

Award Number: 9900451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23886              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hendrik J. Viljoen chrdhjv@engvms.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Prof. Hendrik J. Viljoen will study heterogenous chemical reactions under
              mechanic excitation. New macroscopic models will be developed to account for
              non-equilibrium energy distribution within shock and reaction zones,
              considering energy distribution among translational, rotation, and vibrational
              modes, mixing, and supersonic transitions. Molecular dynamics will be used to
              simulate atomistic behavior in the reaction zone, and distributed continuum
              dynamics equations will incorporate the atomic model into the macroscopic
              behavior. These atomistic-macroscopic models may find applications in the
              description of cryochemical self-propagating reactions; mechanical alloying and
              sonochemistry as techniques to reduce ignition temperatures and activation
              energies for reaction; shock-induced reactions of solids, in which chemical
              reaction energy must be transformed into translational energy in order to
              sustain the shock wave. The authors will investigate by molecular dynamics the
              ultrafast reaction between sulfur and aluminum microcrystallites subjected to a
              shock wave. To develop the continuum model, they will simulate high pressures
              above the Hugoniot elastic limit, and add equations describing pore collapse
              and solid compaction to the classical conservation equations. Finally, the
              molecular dynamics and continuum models will be matched by identifying the
              critical energy  exchange modes and integrating over the characteristic times
              for the exchange modes. This grant is being funded by the Kinetics and
              Catalysis and the Process and Reaction Engineering programs.

