Title       : A Novel Single-Step Superfinish Hole Making Process for Maximum Fatigue Life
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9900169

Award Number: 9900169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Richard Liu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   A hole is the most common feature in machining.  The conventional process
              for making quality holes consists of many steps: centering drill, rough drill,
              hardening, boring, reaming, grinding, burnishing or cold expansion.  A hole
              gives rise to severe stress concentration.  As a result, fatigue failure often
              originates at the hole in cyclically loaded structures such as aircraft and
              automobiles, which can be catastrophic as well as costly.  A new concept of
              using single-step machining to pre-stress the machined surface, which was
              previously shown to have the capability of improving the fatigue life of
              rolling contact over thirty  times, is applied in this research project.  The
              objective of the project is to realize the significant potential benefits of
              using single-step machining to pre-stress the machined surface in hole drilling
              for maximum fatigue life at a reduced cost.  The tasks to be performed include:
               (1) developing a process model that relates the drilling conditions to the
              residual stress distribution; (2) developing a performance model that relates
              the residual stress distribution to fatigue life;  and (3) linking the process
              model to the performance model so the final residual stress distribution, thus
              the fatigue, can be optimized.
     The research results will benefit the
              industries manufacturing aircraft, automobiles, and other structures subject to
              cyclic loading.  Because of the vast scale on which drilling operations are
              carried out, even a slight increase in the efficiency would yield important
              practical and economic benefits.

