Title       : Geometry of Moduli Spaces and Topology of Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9900543

Award Number: 9900543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Domingo Toledo toledo@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project studies geometric structures on moduli spaces.  The recent
theorem
              of the investigators and Allcock that the moduli space of stable
cubic
              surfaces is complex hyperbolic suggests that complex hyperbolic
structures on
              moduli spaces  are more common than previously expected.   The
project will
              develop the complex hyperbolic geometry of the moduli spaces of
stable del
              Pezzo surfaces and of  stable cubic threefolds.  The consequences
of this
              geometry to the topology of these spaces will be studied.  It is
expected that
              the moduli spaces of smooth del Pezzo surfaces and smooth cubic
threefolds are
              Eilenberg-MacLane spaces, and that their fundamental groups
are not linear
              groups, perhaps not even residually finite groups.  The real
hyperbolic
              geometry of the real points of these spaces, and the relation to
the real
              algebraic geometry of del Pezzo surfaces and cubic threefolds, will
also be
              developed.   Connections with symplectic geometry and automorphic
forms are
              also expected.


The general area of research concerns the study of spaces
              known as moduli
spaces.  The central  idea is that a collection of geometric
              objects has
itself its own geometry.  This new geometry is called the moduli
              space of the
original objects.  There is a rich interplay between the geometry
              of the
original objects and the geometry of the moduli space, for example
              the
symmetries of one reflect themselves in the symmetries of the other. 
              The
simplest example would be the shapes of triangles in the plane: each shape
              is
determined by the ratios of the sides, the moduli space is the collection
              of
these ratios, a triangle in the plane with its own geometry.  This
              simple
example leads quickly to very intricate ones:  one could take
              more
complicated polygons or polyhedra.  Or one could reduce the study of
              shapes
of lattices in the plane (thus flat tori, thus elliptic curves, thus
              cubic
curves over the complex numbers) to this example.  Algebraic geometry
              gives
many interesting examples of moduli spaces whose geometry is very
              actively
studied.

