Title       : 13th International Symposium on Flavins and Flavoproteins to be held August
               29-September 4, 1999 at the University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9900534

Award Number: 9900534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Alexander Claiborne ALC@INVADER.BGSM.WFU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie B. Poole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest U Sch of Med
	      Medical Center Blvd
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27157    336/716-4549

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9900534
Claiborne
The area of flavins and flavoproteins is a broad, but
              clearly and
simply defined one.  It covers all aspects of work pertaining to
              the
chemistry and biology of compounds based on the isoalloxazine nucleus
and
              on a very few closely related structures.  Because of the
extraordinary
              versatility of flavin as a prosthetic group and its
involvement in a variety
              of important biological oxidation and reduction
processes, this area continues
              to expand rapidly.  Interest in flavins
ranges from theoretical chemistry to
              medical aspects. The 13th
International Symposium on Flavins and Flavoproteins
              is at
the University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany, August 29-September
              4,
1999, as one of a series which has been organized at 3-year
              intervals
since 1965.  The last symposium was held in Calgary, Alberta in
              1996.
Because of the continued and increasing pace of research in this
              area,
it is important that regularly scheduled meetings be held. 
              Review
lectures will cover the entire field and the meeting should
              bring
together scientists from all over the world from a wide variety
              of
disciplines, and promote valuable discussion and exchange of
information. 
              In addition, it should serve the purposes of keeping
existing workers fully up
              to date with all aspects of the subject and of
initiating young investigators
              into this important area of research.

Riboflavin (vitamin B2) is an
              essential nutrient in humans; the
biochemical basis for this requirement can
              be explained by the fact that
riboflavin derivatives (FMN and FAD, as
              abbreviated) serve as essential
coenzymes for a large number of chemical
              processes important in human
metabolism and nutrition.  In many cases the
              corresponding flavo-enzymes
are involved in the conversion of chemical energy
              from foodstuffs,
directly or indirectly, into ATP, which is the cellular form
              of stored
energy required for essential biochemical functions.  Therefore
              the
study of flavins and flavoproteins has direct consequences for
              human
physiology and since 1965, researchers from the U.S. and around the
              world
have convened every three years to share and discuss their
              latest
findings in flavin and flavoprotein research.  In 1999 the
              13th
International Symposium on Flavins and Flavoproteins is in
Konstanz,
              Germany; the funds provided by this NSF award are used
specifically to assist
              young investigators (primarily Ph.D. students and
post-graduate fellows) from
              the U.S. in attending this conference.


