Title       : Board on Earth Sciences and Resources and Its Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2000  
File        : a9900760

Award Number: 9900760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony R. de Souza adesouza@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig M. Schiffries  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1575,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900760
Schiffries

Partial support is provided to the board on Earth
              Sciences and Resources and its activities.  Other support is from the following
              agencies: Department of Energy (Geothermal division, Office Basic Energy
              Sciences, and Office of Fossil Energy), Department of the Interior (Bureau of
              Land Management, minerals Management Service, and U.S. Geological Survey),
              National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
              and National Science Foundation.  The board on Earth Sciences and Resources
              coordinates the National Research Council's activities on solid-earth science
              issues.  The Board identifies opportunities for advancing basic research and
              understanding, analyzes the credibility of earth science information for policy
              decisions, and reports on the applications of earth sciences to important
              societal issues.  Through its actions, the Board addresses the overall health
              of research and education programs related to earth sciences and resource
              issues.  The Board and its multidisciplinary committees also serve as a forum
              for discussions and exchange of information among scientists, engineers, and
              policy makers from government, universities, and industry.  The activities of
              the Board are subject to NRC bias and review procedures to ensure balance and
              impartiality.  As enunciated in the Board's 1993 report, Solid-Earth Sciences
              and Society, earth scientists are currently challenged to develop an integrated
              understanding of the solid earth and its resources.  Improving worldwide living
              standards and population increases pose new problems that will require
              solutions from a broad range of the basic and applied earth sciences.  The
              Board keeps these global issues in perspective while focusing on the
              requirements for specialized analyses of technical issues.  At present, the
              Board is giving great emphasis to environmental concerns through its studies.

