Title       : SGER: Use of Small Remote Video Systems to Provide the First Test of the Skutch
               Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9900343

Award Number: 9900343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25206              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Martin tmartin@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Food limitation is widely accepted as the primary evolutionary driver of life
              history traits of birds, particularly clutch size.  A half century ago, it was
              argued that small clutch sizes of tropical and southern hemisphere birds were
              caused by nest predation constraining parental visits to the nest during the
              nestling stage (Skutch hypothesis).  Recent broad comparative studies suggest
              that nest predation may, in fact, represent a much stronger determinant of life
              history strategies of birds than food limitation.  However, the Skutch
              hypothesis has never been directly tested.  A direct test will gain enormous
              attention, because the hypothesis is a longstanding, but untested and has major
              ramifications for our current understanding of life history evolution in
              birds.

Direct tests of the Skutch Hypothesis depend upon quantitatively
              measuring parental visitation rates to the nests.  Video cameras provide a
              means for obtaining broad quantitative measures of parental visitation rates. 
              However, standard video camera systems are too large and have been found to
              influence parental visitation rates in some species because they are cautious
              about approaching the nest with a large camera setup on a tripod with the
              distance (ca. 10m) needed to monitor the nest. Birds in Latin America, where
              these tests need to be made, appear to be particularly sensitive to presence of
              cameras, possibly because of high predation there.  This bias severely
              compromises tests of the Skutch Hypothesis.  Dr. Martin has developed a small
              remote camera system that is camouflaged and appears to be ignored by even
              sensitive bird species.  However, this system has not been tested in Latin
              America and responses of birds there are not yet known.  Dr. Martin will
              conduct a test of this system in Latin America (Argentina) to validate whether
              this approach can provide an unbiased measure of parental visitation rates even
              among the most sensitive species.  He will simultaneously directly test the
              Skutch Hypothesis for the first time by examining whether parental visitation
              rates are negatively correlated with nest predation rates across 8 species in
              Argentina for which he has already measured nest predation.  This group of
              species includes broad variation in nest predation rates (varying from 24 to
              76% of nests lost to predation), thereby increasing statistical power for
              examining a negative correlation.  Ultimately, if this approach works, it will
              provide strong support or rejection of the Skutch Hypothesis for the first time
              and will provide a new approach that will rapidly catalyze changes in the way a
              large number of research groups are approaching field work in tropical and
              southern hemisphere regions of the world.

