Title       : Theory and Applications of Observability of Classical And Quantized Radiation
               Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9900246

Award Number: 9900246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Ziolkowski ziolkowski@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900246
Ziolkowski

In the classical theory of electromagnetic radiation,
              there are certain localized charge-current distributions which do not radiate.
              Such sources, commonly referred to as nonradiating sources, generate fields
              which are themselves confined within the region of localization of the source
              [1]. Investigations on nonradiating sources have addressed both scalar [2, 3,
              4, 5] and electromagnetic sources [1, 6, 7, 8] as well as both deterministic
              and random sources [9, 10, 11]. The question arises whether nonradiating
              sources have (or not) a counterpart in the quantum theory. Surprisingly, this
              fundamental question does not appear to have been addressed before. The main
              goal of the proposed program of research is to develop a new theory of
              nonradiating sources for both classical and quantized fields and to address
              potential and concrete applications of the developed theory. Specific
              theoretical and applicational aims of the projected research are described
              below.
We propose to deal (classically and quantum-electrodynamically) with
              both monochromatic and transient (e.g., pulsed) sources and fields. The
              classical component of the proposed research will focus on developing new tools
              for analysis and synthesis of nonradiating sources in the time and frequency
              domains. The objectives of this portion of the project include: 1.) developing
              a new inverse source and nonradiating source theory in the time domain, 2.)
              developing complete sets of vector functions to represent monochromatic as well
              as transient nonradiating sources of compact support, and 3.) exploring
              fundamental (and potentially practical) connections between nonradiating
              sources and other wave objects, such as the scalar and vector potentials and
              minimum energy solutions to the inverse source problem of electromagnetics. The
              proposed work along those lines is expected to parallel (and generalize)
              previous work by the proposers for scalar sources and fields. That work
              includes new formulations of the inverse source problem [12] as well as new
              descriptions of nonradiating sources [13] and of their connection with minimum
              energy sources and perfect radiators [14]. The theoretical component of the
              outlined effort is expected to give light, also, into the nature of
              nonradiating sources in the quantum theory, thereby contributing to a more
              fundamental understanding of the observability of sources and scatterers and
              their fields. The purpose is to answer conclusively the question of existence
              of nonradiating sources in the quantum theory. Furthermore, the developed
              theory could have impact in fundamental aspects of quantum theory and, in
              particular, in a controversial, not fully-understood, quantum-mechanical
              phenomenon, namely, the Aharonov-Bohm effect, wherein charged particles can be
              influenced by classical, localized sources and their fields in regions where
              the fields (and therefore the forces on the particles) vanish [15, 16]. Thus,
              we propose also to examine the connection between the Aharonov-Bohm effect and
              the observability of quantised radiation fields.
The developed theory could,
              potentially, set the stage for novel communication schemes (based on
              nonra-diating sources), as well as new techniques for interrogation of sources
              and scatterers (in both hardware and algorithms). The latter aspects constitute
              the focus of the second part of the proposed research, aimed at ap-plications.
              The applications of interest rely on the possibility of sensing via
              quantum-mechanical experiments (i.e., new field-sensing devices) certain
              features of a source (e.g., information) which would be otherwise (i.e., via
              classical sensors (antennas)) inherently unobservable. Thus, system-level
              designs for new field-sensing devices based, e.g., on the Aharonov-Bohm effect
              and/or other unconventional, quantum-mechanical field-particle interaction
              effects, are also potential outcomes of the proposed effort. Of particular
              relevance to communication technologies is the possibility of generating fields
              that are confined (localized), classically, within the source's region of
              support (antenna's structure), but that are not such quantum-mechanically. The
              latter possibility opens, potentially, a window for efficient, secured
              transmission of field-observables (sig-halS), generated by conventional sources
              (antennas) but sensed via unconventional, quantum-electrodynamic field-sensors.
              In this way, one would obtain, e.g., added flexibility (not available in
              antenna-to-antenna communication) for transmitting either all or part of the
              to-be-transmitted information via a "channel" that opens only to
              quantum-electrodynamic field-sensors while being unavailable to traditional
              field-sensors (receiving antennas). In summary, the main areas of technological
              impact - to be explored as part of the proposed effort - are 1.) novel
              field-sensing devices, 2.) new communications technology and 3.) new algorithms
              and hardware for interrogation of sources and scatterers.
***
