Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Basic Morpho-syntax of Yaitepec Chatino
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9900925

Award Number: 9900925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4881               (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip W. Davis pwd@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9900925
Davis

The main goal of this project is to complete an in-depth
              morpho-syntactic description of Yaitepec Chatino, a Zapotecan language spoken
              in Oaxaca, Mexico. In order to accomplish this, the secondary investigator will
              spend a total of 12 weeks during the coming year in Yaitepec, collecting data
              in the form of word lists, transcribed oral texts, and utterances of native
              speakers in response to questions asked in an interview setting designed to
              elicit specific kinds of grammatical structures. Two native speakers of Chatino
              are already transcribing texts, and will continue to do so. To some extent,
              they will also be involved in the analysis of grammatical patterns. The
              organization and analytical investigation of the data will be carried out both
              in the field and at Rice University, between field trips. Texts will be entered
              into computer databases to facilitate the analysis of the functions of
              particular morphemes and constructions.

Yaitepec Chatino has received some
              attention by linguists during the past three decades, resulting in the
              publication of several articles, two word lists, and a book-length taxonomic
              syntactic description. The kind of in-depth functionalist description that will
              result from this project, however, does not yet exist for Chatino. As part of
              the data-gathering phase of the project, the secondary investigator, in
              collusion with native speaker consultants, will transcribe a number of
              narrations of folk stories and oral histories. This will result in a
              significant increase in the quantity and variety of literature in Chatino. In
              addition to collecting data for a work on the morpho-syntax of the language,
              the secondary investigator will continue to gather lexical items for inclusion
              in the dictionary of Yaitepec Chatino on which he worked for three summers as a
              project linguist with the Project for the Documentation of Meso-American
              Languages headed by Terrence Kaufman and John Justeson (NSF grant #
              SBR-9511713). The three works which will ultimately result from this project-a
              morpho-syntactic description, a collection of texts, and a dictionary-will be
              of immense value to the field of linguistics, and especially for the further
              study and documentation of Zapotecan languages, Chatino in
              particular.






















