Title       : Social Networks, Social Resources, and Hurricane Georges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9900911

Award Number: 9900911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne S. Hurlbert jhurlbert@lapop.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Beggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research to study social responses and
              communication patterns in the context of a natural disaster.  Hurricane Georges
              struck the Gulf Coast of Mississippi and Alabama on August 29. With wind gusts
              of over 115 miles per hour, the storm left Gulf Coast residents with
              considerable damage from both winds and flooding. The three Mississippi coastal
              counties of Hancock, Jackson, and Harrison suffered the greatest effects of
              Georges' wrath. This project will study the processes surrounding preparation
              for and recovery from Hurricane Georges among residents of three communities in
              two of these counties. 

Using random-digit dialing, this research will
              sample 250 households within each community, randomly selecting an adult
              household member to interview in each household by means of Computer-Assisted
              Telephone Interviewing (CATI) techniques. Questions will cover such issues as
              the structure of respondents' core social networks prior to the storm and their
              use of formal versus informal sources of information and support. It is
              essential to gather information on (1) core network members, (2) support
              providers who lie inside and outside the core, and (3) the connections between
              core network members and nonroutine support providers who lie outside the core
              network. The research will use the information from Hurricane Georges to ask
              such questions as: Did ties to core network members link respondents with
              support providers outside the core? If they did, then are these links and
              resource transfers consistent with theoretical arguments for the strength of
              weak ties (a focus of the social resources strand of network analysis)?
              Answering these questions will allow us to understand better the implications
              of resource partitioning in social networks for resource activation in them.

