Title       : RUI: Differentiation of Cultured Guard Cell Protoplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9900525

Award Number: 9900525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246485             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Tallman gtallman@willamette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Willamette University
	      900 State Street
	      Salem, OR  973013930    503/370-6300

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Stomata are microscopic pores in the otherwise gas-impermeable surface of
              leaves.  Each stomatal pore (stoma) is flanked by two opposing guard cells that
              change in shape in response to environmental signals (e.g. light quality and
              intensity, intercellular leaf carbon dioxide levels, and apoplastic
              concentrations of abscisic acid [ABA]).  The shape changes of guard cells allow
              the dimensions of each stoma to be varied as an integrated response to
              prevailing environmental conditions, thus regulating the rate of gas exchange
              between leaves and the air, and, therefore, rates of transpiration and
              photosynthesis.  A great deal is known about the guard cell signal transduction
              mechanisms that result in stomatal changes.  Because guard cells are highly
              specialized to transduce such signals, historically they have been considered
              among the most highly differentiated plant cell types.  Recent experiments have
              shown, however, that in response to hormonal signals, guard cell protoplasts
              (GCP) cultured at 32C can reenter the cell cycle, de-differentiate, and divide
              to produce callus from which plants can be regenerated; thus guard cells are
              totipotent.  These data suggest that guard cells are not as far from a
              meristematic state as was once thought, and that like other plant cells, they
              must be actively maintained in their differentiated state.  Little is known
              about the signal transduction pathways or genes that might be involved in
              maintaining guard cells in their differentiated state in situ.  Elevated
              temperature and ABA are the only signals required for maintenance of cultured
              GCP in their differentiated state in vitro.  Several lines of evidence suggest
              a model where heat shock proteins (HSP) might be involved in maintaining the
              differentiated state.  The working hypothesis is that HSP inhibit
              hormone-dependent re-entry of cultured GCP into the cell cycle by limiting
              translation of the transcripts induced by hormones.  More specifically, it is
              hypothesized that at 38C activation of the heat shock transcription factor HSF
              results in production of HSP that reduce production of cyclin-dependent kinases
              and cyclin D3.  Because at 32C inhibitors of ethylene synthesis also prevent
              cultured GCP from completing the cell cycle, it is further hypothesized that at
              32C the plant hormone auxin stimulates the production of
              aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) synthase and/or ACC oxidase,
              resulting in increased production of ethylene.  It is envisaged that ethylene
              then acts through a two-component regulatory system to activate a MAPK pathway
              that is required for cells to re-enter and/or complete the cell cycle. 
              Following this basic hypothesis, it would be expected that transcripts for ACC
              synthase and ACC oxidase are either not produced or not translated at 38C and
              that MAPK is, therefore, not activated at 38C.  The initial experiments to be
              conducted are aimed at elucidating the primary characterisctics of the
              responses of guard cells to elevated temperature.  Among the characteristics to
              be studied are: 1) the effects of the length of exposure to 32C and 38C on the
              capacity of GCP to re-enter the cell cycle; 2) an analysis of the
              reversibility/inter-convertiblility of cell fates; 3) whether other conditions
              such as nutrient starvation can mimic the effects of cuture at 38C; and 4) the
              point in the cell cycle to which GCP cultured at 38C are able to proceed. 
              Further experiments aimed at exploring the plausibility of the model described
              will include investigation of: 1) whether genes for cyclin-dependent kinase
              homologs, cyclin D3, ACC synthase, ACC oxidase, and MAPK are transcribed at
              32C, at 38C, or both; 2) whether known HSP are produced at 38C, but not at 32C;
              3) whether kinetics of HSP production are correlated with kinetics of loss of
              responsiveness of cultured GCP to auxin and/or cytokinin; and 4) whether MAPK
              is activated by an ethylene-dependent mechanism.  Investigation of the proteins
              required to maintain plant cells in a differentiated state could provide
              insight into the question of a universal mechanism involving a small number of
              expressed proteins that maintain differentiated states in multicellular
              organisms. Such studies could also tell us whether the expression of these
              proteins makes some plant cells recalcitrant to culture.  If marker proteins
              for GCP maintained in the differentiated state can be identified, it should
              eventually make it possible to clone the genes for these proteins such that
              they can be expressed in plant tissues under the control of selected promoters
              for control of plant cell differentiation in response to various environmental
              conditions.
