Title       : US-India/Bangladesh Cooperative Research: Architecture, Dynamics, and Hazards of
               the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a9900487

Award Number: 9900487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43935              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Steckler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin E. Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonardo Seeber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander van Geen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304030   Flood                                   
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900487
Steckler 

Description:  This award supports the project
              "US-India/Bangladesh Cooperative Research:  Architecture, Dynamics, and Hazards
              of the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta."  Michael Steckler, Lamont-Doherty Earth
              Observatory, Columbia University will collaborate with Pradip Dasgupta,
              University of Calcutta and Md. Hussain Monsur, University of Dhaka, Bangladesh
              to characterize the subsidence and stratigraphy of the Ganges-Brahmaputra (GB)
              delta and the geologic processes which have shaped them.  Deltas have long been
              centers of civilization; however, their environment is fragile, dependent upon
              the delicate balance between all processes causing subsidence and sedimentation
              filling in the available space.  Monitoring and analyzing the prominent changes
              affecting the world's largest and most active delta offers unique opportunities
              for understanding fundamental geologic processes.  The GB is an extreme example
              of a deltaic coastal region susceptible to natural disaster from storm surges,
              flooding, salt-water intrusion, and tectonic activity due to its situation at a
              plate boundary.  Additionally, groundwater pumping over the past few decades
              has mobilized naturally occurring arsenic from the underlying sediments and
              poses a major arsenic-poisoning calamity. 

Scope:  This research initiates a
              major multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional international project to study
              the GB delta.  The degree of interaction among elements active in the delta
              requires an integrated approach.  The principal objective is to link an
              improved understanding of the geologic, geodetic, seismologic, and geochemical
              processes of the delta with ongoing and planned engineering activities and with
              societal development.  Combining fundamental research with immediate and
              long-term applications will be important to a variety of national and
              international agencies interested in hazard mitigation.  This project is
              supported jointly by the Marine Geology and Geophysics Program, Division of
              Ocean Sciences and the Division of International Programs.

