Title       : Information Theoretic Learning for Pattern Recognition and Signal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9900394

Award Number: 9900394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219558             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose C. Principe principe@cnel.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900394
Principe

The focus of this research is the development and
              evaluation of a new class of algorithms for information
theoretic learning
              (ITL). Conventional learning designs are usually based on an effort to minimize
              either square error or a measure of entropy which can be computationally
              difficult to handle.  This project will attempt to estimate  and use a new
              measure of entropy, based on concepts from Renyi.  The appeal of the algorithm
              is that it can be easily integrated with a Parzen window estimator yielding
              several practical criteria to adapt universal mappers, either under
              unsupervised or supervised paradigms.

If the research is successful a novel
              and quite general class of algorithms will be made available to
the scientific
              community interested in studying and applying learning systems. The natural
              goal of this research is to further develop the ITL algorithms, an study their
              application to a variety of important problems in learning. Specifically, the
              project will study the properties of the estimator for both entropy  and mutual
              information, ways to decrease the computational complexity of the algorithm,
              extend it to time signals, set its parameter and access its scalability.  It
              will also investigate new distance measures for mutual information optimization
              and the feasibility of imple-menting an "entropy chip" in analog VLSI which
              will use the laws of physics to do the computation.

The research team/will
              be investigating issues in information filtering, independent component
              analysis and blind source separation using the newly developed ITL class of
              algorithms. These areas are important in their own right, and have a momentum
              that will be further advanced in this research. But the team will also use the
              common computational infra-structure of estimating entropy and mutual
              information from examples to compare the proposed ITL algorithms' performance
              with the best available techniques in each field.  Specifically, (1) They will
              extend the present state-of-the-art in the blind source separation of
              convolutive mixtures.  They will apply the new
learning algorithm to the
              co-channel interference in mobile communication channels, and noise reduction
              in hearing aids. (2) They will apply ITL to system identification and dynamic
              modeling and com-pare it to our previous results using the mean square error.
              (3) The problem of sparse representa-tions is crucial to understand the brain
              and design intelligent artificial systems. We will be researching how to learn
              sparse representation from data, using both overcomplete bases and the ITL
              algorithm to implement independent component analysis. 
***

