Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: In Situ Conservation of Food Legumes in Highland
               Ecuador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9900743

Award Number: 9900743
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8158               (Estimated)
Investigator: Connie Weil   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although the loss of biodiversity frequently is framed in the context of
              extinction of species occurring naturally in different biomes, reductions in
              genetic, taxonomic, and functional diversity among crop species also has been
              common during the 20th century.  A standard response to this problem during
              recent decades has been the establishment of seed banks and other repositories
              at selected locales, thereby preserving germplasm in presumably safe isolation
              from a species' natural habitat.  These ex situ approaches have made living
              material readily available to plant scientists seeking to develop new hybrids,
              but they have not enabled plants to develop natural responses to new pests and
              diseases, and they have reduced the knowledge and awareness of people who
              previously grew these crops.  More recently, so-called "in situ" approaches
              have been developed to broaden crop diversity within growing regions This
              doctoral dissertation research project will identify socioeconomic factors that
              encourage the success of conservation programs designed to promote practices
              within growing regions designed to broaden crop diversity rather than the more
              traditional means of maintaining seed banks elsewhere.  This research project
              will draw on political ecological theory and will be conducted through a
              comparison of two comparable villages in southern Ecuador, one of which has a
              legume seed-production program while the other does not.  Field observations
              and oral interviews based on memory-banking procedures will provide critical
              data on the levels of legume diversity as well as the social and economic
              factors that affect production in these communities.  This project will
              contribute to the analysis of the relative merits of ex situ vs. in situ
              conservation methods for preserving biodiversity, and it will provide knowledge
              for those seeking to develop more effective in situ conservation programs.  As
              a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
              provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.
