Title       : NSF-CNPq Collaborative Research on Design Environments for Application-Specific
               Programmable Processors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9900881

Award Number: 9900881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharad Malik Sharad@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1085,5913,9215,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is on embedded systems design tools for building
              custom
application-specific instruction processor (ASIP) architectures that
              are no
bigger, or no more complex than necessary. Developing an ASIP, not
              only
requires hardware design, but also requires the use of a set of
              evaluation
tools such as an assembler, compiler and simulator. This
              investigation uses
a processor description to serve as a common starting point
              for the
development of these tools, as well as for hardware synthesis. The
              ISDL
language, being developed at MIT, for exactly this purpose is being used
              in
developing a complete software development environment, as well as
              hardware
generation. The simulator is used to obtain clock cycle estimates
              on
application code, and to evaluate the overall architecture
              performance.
Synthesis of processor datapaths enables hardware generation and
              provides
accurate, cycle-time estimates. To support software compilation,
              a
retargetable assembler, code generator and optimizer will be developed
              that
receive as input both a machine description in ISDL, and the program to
              be
compiled onto the described machine. New optimizations to produce code
              of
the highest quality in a reasonable amount of time are being evaluated.
              The
base of our retargetable compiler is SPAM, an embedded compiler
              framework
that has been developed by researchers at MIT, Princeton and
              UNICAMP,
Brazil. In many cases, application code is not written in
              high-level
programming languages, and it is necessary to deal with assembly or
              legacy
code. Thus automatic methods for optimized binary-to-binary translation
              are
being investigated. To do this, the legacy binary/assembly code
              is
decompiled to intermediate forms used by our compiler infrastructure
              and
then using the optimizing compiler technology to generate
              high-quality
assembly for the target architecture.

