Title       : Probabilistic Simulation of Fracture by Meshless Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a9900196

Award Number: 9900196
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharif Rahman rahman@engineering.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Crack propagation is an important failure mechanism in structural and mechanical
              systems requiring accurate numerical models to implement essential simulation
              supporting failure prediction.  The existence of system uncertainty and risk in
              loads, material properties, and crack size requires a reliability-based
              fracture-mechanics analysis to be taken into account.  The objective of this
              proposal is to develop a new stochastic meshless methodoloy for predicting
              fracture response characteristics and reliability if two-and three-dimensional
              structures containing crack-like defects.  This effort will be based on:  (1)
              well-established theories of fracture mechanics involving both linear-elastic
              and elastic-plastic models, (2) meshless and integrated meshless/finite element
              methods for determining crack-tip stress and strain fields and continuum design
              sensitivity analysis, (3) probabilistic models of uncertainties in loads,
              material properties, and crack size by random variables and random fields, and
              (4) stochastic meshless and simulation methods for probabilistic
              characterization of fracture response and reliability of cracked structures. 
              For the integrated meshless/finite element method, the meshless method will be
              used to model material behavior in areas close to cracks and the finite element
              method in areas further away from cracks.  Such a coupling has the potential to
              greatly simplify crack-growth analysis while simultaneously achieving a
              substantially improved level of accuracy.  The proposed research represents an
              innovative and timely approach to computational modeling of fracture process by
              meshless methods and random field theory.  The proposed meshless methods
              demonstrate significant potential for application in the field of probabilistic
              fracture mechanics.  In particular, these methods can be used for fracture
              control and life extension of and aging structure remains lower than the huge
              capital expenditures associated with designing and building a new aircraft, the
              life extension philosophy will continue.  However, in order to define
              maintenance requirements of an aging aircraft to ensure it's continued
              structural integrity and safety, advanced predictive tools for life and
              residual strength, such as the ones proposed in this study, are necessary. 
              This is not unique to the aerospace industry.  Identical conditions prevail in
              others, such as in fossil and nuclear power industries, which are also
              attempting to use aging power plants far beyond their intended design lives. 
              As such, the stochastic meshless methods proposed in this study can help solve
              many real-world fracture-related problems shared by aircraft, civil, nuclear,
              aerospace, automotive, and other industries.  To date, reliability problems
              involving meshless methods have yet to be solved.  The development of
              stochastic meshless and integrated meshless/finite element methods under this
              prorgram will significantly advance the state-of-the-art in the field of
              fracture mechanics as well as address a wide range of practical engineering
              issues encountered in probabilistic structural mechanics.
