Title       : Chaos Control of Nonlinear Electrical Activity in the Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2001      
File        : a9900350

Award Number: 9900350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sohi Rastegar                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262048             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Mogul   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900350
Mogul
Epileptic seizures are a common disease that afflicts over 2.5
              million Americans.  These seizures represent a disorder of the electrical state
              of the brain that can sometimes be prevented with pharmaceutical treatment;
              however, over 25% of epilepsy patients cannot be helped by antiepileptic drugs.
               For these patients in whom seizures are sufficiently severe, the only
              remaining option is surgical removal of brain tissue which can sometimes result
              in severe neurological deficits.  The ultimate goal of the research described
              in this proposal is to understand these nonlinear electrical states of the
              brain such that it would be possible to engineer a less invasive and
              potentially far less damaging alternative to surgery for drug-refractory
              epilepsy patients.  The overall goal is to engineer a device similar in concept
              to an implantable cardiac defribrillator in that it would detect the earliest
              stages of a seizure and prevent or revert it using electrical stimulation. 
              This research requires exploration in diverse but related fields such as
              nonlinear chaos theory and computer programming as well as expertise in
              experimental biology.  Experiments will be focused on the hippocampus, a region
              of the brain that is a frequent foci for generation of epileptiform electical
              activity.  Initial experiments will perform nonlinear mathematical analysis and
              testing of control algorithms on rat hippocampal slices which can be induced to
              produce spontaneous discharges analogous to epileptic behavior seen in whole
              animals.  Electrical stimulation will be applied via an electrode according to
              control algorithms to revert the bursting.  Subsequent experiments will then
              take these findings and apply them to in vivo studies in rats to see whether
              the same dynamics and control principles apply as in the slice and, if not, how
              these control algorithms could be modified appropriately.  Recent advances in
              understanding and controlling chaotic systems have provided an invaluable
              opportunity to apply these principles toward manipulation of pathological
              electrical activity in the brain.  It would ultimately permit the ability to
              prevent or revert seizures in the brain which would have enormous benefits to
              public health as well as overall cost savings to society.

