Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Geography of Hunting, Habitat, and Human
               Settlement in Panama: Spatial Analysis and Implications for Neotropical
               Wildlife Conservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9900818

Award Number: 9900818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4950               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Herlihy herlihy@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,9186,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Neotropical rain forest regions are home to growing indigenous populations that
              depend on forest resources for many of their basic needs.  The impacts of their
              subsistence activities on native flora and fauna remain poorly understood, but
              it is clear that indigenous peoples are not always in perfect harmony with
              their natural surroundings.  Game depletion by indigenous hunters has been
              documented in several rain forest settings, resulting in "empty forests" with
              potentially devastating ecological ramifications.  The spatial dimensions of
              game extraction, the importance of agricultural lands as hunting grounds, and
              traditional wildlife management practices are three important facets of
              indigenous hunting that have received especially little scientific
              investigation.  This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the
              cultural ecology of hunting among eleven Bugle communities in the Rio Grande
              watershed of Bocas del Toro, Panama, over a year-long period.  The study will
              focus on the spatial dimensions of hunting yields. habitat, and human
              settlement in order to measure human impacts on different wildlife species at a
              regional scale; to delimit zones of game depletion and analyze the relationship
              between human population density and hunting yields; and to document the
              relative importance of primary rain forest versus agricultural lands as sources
              of game and evaluate the conditions under which human-managed habitats become
              important sources of game.  Field research methods will include participant
              observation during agricultural, gardening, and fishing activities; direct
              observation during hunting expeditions; independent research and traveling with
              local guides to gather GPS points; and innovative participatory research
              methods that directly involve five Bugle surveyors in implementing a census,
              collecting toponym information, and administering biweekly hunting activity
              questionnaires.  This project will be an ethnographic investigation of a
              virtually unstudied Central American indigenous group.  It will help fill a
              significant gap in our basic understanding of the relationship between culture
              and environment in the rain forest setting.  By documenting indigenous wildlife
              management practices, this project will help explain how indigenous peoples
              adapt to the rain forest environment.  It also will demonstrate that indigenous
              peoples are not passive foragers independent of their cultural background but
              knowledgeable resource managers with the skills to participate in new
              conservation initiatives.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
              award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
              establish a strong independent research career.

