Title       : Non-Lithographic Routes to Functional Nanostructures and Characterization of
               their Electronic Behaviors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9900073

Award Number: 9900073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Feldheim feldheim@chemdept.chem.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate fundamental chemistry and materials science
              aspects of functional nanostructures with relevance to their characteristics
              and potential use as electronic devices constructed from single metal
              nanoparticles(ligand-capped Au nanoclusters) in a scanning tunneling
              microscope. In situ capping ligand chemical reactions will be explored as a
              means of device gating. The project includes characterization of electron
              transport in individual nanoscopic gold clusters and molecularly bridged
              cluster arrays. Elements of the project include: (1) Effects of capping ligand
              chemistry on single electron tunneling in Au clusters. (2) Characterization of
              a scanning single electron tunneling microscope tip. (3) Assembly of
              molecularly bridged Au cluster dimers and trimers and characterization of their
              electronic properties. The scanning single electron tunneling microscope tip
              will be used to characterize the electronic properties of nanoscale metal
              semiconductor junctions. The approach involves a non-lithographic method being
              developed to make electrical contact to single nanoclusters and other
              molecular-scale objects (molecules, dendrimers, etc.) to "wire up" single
              clusters using entirely solution-phase assembly methods. 
%%%
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science having
              high potential technological relevance.  The research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to new aspects of
              electronic/photonic devices.  The basic knowledge and understanding gained from
              the research is expected to contribute to developing advanced devices and
              circuits beyond the current silicon device and IC paradigm.  A variety of
              fundamental issues are to be addressed in these investigations. An important
              feature of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. 
              
***

