Title       : Integrated Studies on Cellular and Physiological Roles of Higher Plant
               Plasmodesmata
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9900539

Award Number: 9900539
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $762123             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Lucas wjlucas@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	In plants, cell-to-cell contact is established by special intercellular
              organelles, termed plasmodesmata.  These unique cytoplasmic bridges
              interconnect the protoplasm of the cells within an organ, such as a leaf,
              forming a symplasmic state, which potentiates the exchange of both metabolites
              and information molecules.  In recent years, genetic, molecular, cellular and
              physiological studies provided direct evidence that plasmodesmata have the
              capacity to mediate the transport of macromolecules, such as proteins and
              nucleic acids (RNA and DNA).  Importantly, it has been shown that nucleic acids
              move cell to cell in the form of nucleoprotein complexes.  Based on these
              studies, the emerging concept is that plasmodesmata have evolved to (a) enhance
              the efficacy of biochemical processes occurring within specific organs, and (b)
              facilitate the coordination of both physiological and developmental events, via
              the selective trafficking of information molecules.  To better understand the
              mechanisms by which plants exert control over these plasmodesmal functions,
              experiments are described that will allow identification and cloning of the
              component parts involved in the selective trafficking of macromolecules between
              plant cells.  An integrated approach will be taken to achieve this goal, and
              will incorporate the use of biochemical, cellular, molecular and
              ultrastructural techniques.  Methods developed for the identification of the
              components involved in protein trafficking between the cytoplasm and the
              nucleoplasm will be integrated into these experiments.  The specific
              involvement of chaperones in the overall process of protein and nucleoprotein
              transport to and through plasmodesmata will also be explored.  Attention will
              be focused on a class of cytoplasmic chaperones termed the heat shock proteins.
               These studies will be integrated with an analysis of the symplasmic pathway
              that exists within the vascular system of higher plants.  This vascular system
              is comprised of the xylem, which conducts water and mineral nutrients from the
              root to the aerial regions of the plant, and the phloem, which translocates
              fixed carbon (sugars) and nitrogen (amino acids) to developing organs.  Two
              cell types, the companion cells and the sieve elements, form the conducting
              tissue of the phloem.  The plasmodesmata that interconnect these cell types
              fulfill an important function in the operation of this long-distance
              translocation system.  Experiments will be conducted to identify, at the
              genetic level, ways by which the plant can control this pivotal symplasmic
              route, from the photosynthetic tissues of the leaf, all the way to the phloem
              conducting tissue.  These studies will provide a framework for understanding
              how the plant employs the phloem long-distance translocation system to
              orchestrate processes at the whole-plant level.


