Title       : Radioisotopic and Light Imaging Instrumentation: Maximizing Faculty-Student
               Research Time and Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9900380

Award Number: 9900380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97072              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew F. Mehl amehl@knox.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Brodl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne M. Houtman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Knox College
	      2 E South St
	      Galesburg, IL  61401    309/341-7000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9900380


Abstract:

   This grant is for the acquisition of  state of the
              art radioisotopic and light imaging instrumentation.  Currently there is no
              comparable imaging equipment at Knox College and the proposed instrumentation
              will significantly increase faculty and student research productivity.  The
              instrumentation will enable research that will answer questions not accessible
              with technology currently available at Knox. These instruments will support
              research in the labs of three major and two minor users.  In the laboratory of
              A. Mehl, the proposed research investigates how the structure of a protein
              relates to its function and activity.  Two proteins under study are the GrpE
              heat shock  protein from E. coli and the cAMP phosphodiesterase enzyme that is
              found in a variety of tissues within numerous mammalian species.  One approach
              ito studying these proteins requires that new mutant proteins be constructed
              that contain specific regions of the protein; the instrumentation will
              dramatically reduce the time needed to generate these deletion mutant proteins.
               In addition, numerous biochemical assays will be carried out that require
              rigorous quantification of proteins and protein-protein complexes which will
              only be possible with the acquisition of the proposed instrumentation.  M.
              Brodl's laboratory investigates the regulation of mRNA stability during the
              heat shock response of plant cells.  mRNA stability is a critical mechanism for
              regulating the process of gene expression, yet it is not well understood. 
              Radioisotopic probes are used to monitor the stability of genetically
              engineered mRNAs to identify components of the stability-regulating mechanism. 
              The instrumentation will markedly improve the sensitivity and speed of these
              experiments.  A. Houtman's laboratory studies the reproductive success of the
              house sparrow.  With this instrumentation, a database of DNA "fingerprints"
              will be developed to differentiate between genetic and social parentage, so
              that predictions about the relationship between alternative reproductive
              strategies and their fitness consequences can be tested.  The instrumentation
              increases the speed at which parentage can be assayed. The minor users research
              looks at temperature effects on the response of mononuclearphagocytic cells to
              Gram-negative endotoxin, and investigations into the structure, function,
              origin, and development of urns and other coelomocytes to wounding,
              regeneration, and heat stress. 
 


