Title       : Minority Research Opportunities in Science and Engineering at the Naval Research
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9900902

Award Number: 9900902
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Spector mspector@cbnse.nrl.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce P. Gaber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Research Lab
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    703/545-6700

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9900902
M. Spector/NRL

Due to cultural and historic barriers,
              minorities continue to be underrepresented in science, mathematics, and
              engineering.  Despite some growth in the number of minorities receiving
              undergraduate degrees in science and engineering, there has been little
              increase in the number of minorities at the doctoral level.  It is essential
              for the scientific community to provide training opportunities and role models
              for promising young students in order to encourage them to pursue advanced
              degrees in science, mathematics, and engineering and careers in research. 
              Cooperatively with the National Science Foundation, the Center for
              Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering (CBMSE) at the Naval Research Laboratory
              (NRL) has developed a summer internship program for minority students which
              gives the interns the opportunity to experience professional laboratory
              research first hand focussing uniquely on training future scientist and
              engineers.  During the first seven years of the program, fifty-eight
              outstanding students have spent ten weeks working in the CBMSE on exciting
              projects at the leading edge of science and technology.  Of the students who
              have completed their undergraduate degrees, most have gone on to receive
              master's degrees and many are currently in doctoral programs.  Based upon the
              success, it is proposed to renew and expand the program with special attention
              paid to chemical engineers and materials scientists.  Other divisions at NRL
              will be included and recruiting efforts will be increased to pursue students at
              additional HBCU/MI/TCU's (Historically Black Colleges and Universities,
              Minority Institutions, and Tribal College and Universities).

It is also
              proposed to establish joint research programs between NRL scientist and faculty
              members at HCBU/MI/TCU's in which students would perform work leading to a
              master's degree or undergraduate thesis jointly at the two institutions.    
              


