Title       : New Methods for Exploiting Program Structure and Behavior in Computer
               Architecture, and their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9900584

Award Number: 9900584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gurindar S. Sohi sohi@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Applications, such as multimedia processing, digital signal, image and vision
              processing, and scientific computing, generate computation tasks that are
              structured and repetitive exhibiting varying degree of instruction-level
              parallelism (ILP). Moreover, the demands to compute certain functions and
              their
resource needs vary with applications and time. The overall goal of this
              project is to develop and use novel ideas such as reconfigurable functional
              units (FUs), cache memory, and reconfigurable bus architectures to achieve
              balanced computing, i.e. match the computing bandwidth to the memory
              bandwidth.
The research will address issues in designing architectures that
              allow reconfiguration of resources to make the following architecture level
              parameters dynamically variable: number and types of FUs, amount of on-chip
              register and cache memory, an ability to trade the on-chip memory resources
              with the number
of FUs dynamically, and the interconnectivity between these
              units. A processor core with reconfigurable logic blocks to make the
              architecture adaptive to the applications' computing and memory bandwidth needs
              will be developed. Effects of integrating reconfiguration schemes into the
              on-chip FUs and cache memories
on a processor chip will also be studied and
              evaluated.  A high-level design for the ABC (Adaptive Balanced Computing)
              architecture will be developed and analyzed. It is expected that the research
              results will significantly improve the efficiency of computation.              
                                                    

