Title       : The Actionary: A Dictionary that Portrays Natural Language Expressions as
               Context-Sensitive Simulations of Human Actions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a9900297

Award Number: 9900297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $563634             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman I. Badler badler@central.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aravind K. Joshi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


IIS-9900297
Badler, Norman I.; Joshi, Aravind, K.; & Palmer,
              Martha
University of Pennsylvania
$178,712 - 12 mos.

The Actionary:  A
              Dictionary that Portrays Natural Language Expressions as Context-Sensitive
              Simulations of Human Actions

	The `Actionary' is an action database that
              associates natural language expressions with context-sensitive graphical
              simulations acted out by ``smart'' virtual human agents.  It rests on a
              foundation of Parameterized Action Representations (PARs) that explicitly link
              Lexicalized Tree-Adjoining Grammar structures to the Parallel Transition
              Networks that drive virtual human motion generators.  PARs provide a conceptual
              representation of different types of actions: changes of state, changes of
              location (kinematic), and exertion of force (dynamic). To date, only change of
              state actions have been addressed by natural language processing systems.  It
              is known that there are no linguistic distinctions between `running,'
              `jogging,' or `loping,' and that these can only be distinguished by making
              reference to visual models and context.  The Actionary approach defines actions
              involving continuous changes or process execution with reference to situated
              concrete models suitable for a visualized performance.  The Actionary will
              facilitate:  Translation of human action instructions into different languages
              for sample action execution for education (e.g., foreign language learning) and
              training (e.g., machinery operation and repair).  Low bandwidth communication
              of multi-person activities: by transmitting compact textual instructions
              locally interpreted via the Actionary, smart agents can execute instructions
              for potential applications in remote skill training, virtual
              video-conferencing, and 3D virtual communities.


