Title       : NSF-CNPq Collaborative Research: Mathematical and Engineering Foundations for
               Interoperability via Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9900326

Award Number: 9900326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John McCarthy mccarthy@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn Talcott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9900326  John McCarthy and Carolyn Talcott
Large software systems are
              increasingly complex and costly.  The design, development, and maintenance of a
              system can be greatly helped by good documentation of its architecture, that
              is, of how it is structured into meaningful subsystems or components, and how
              those subsystems are glued together to form the overall system.  A key
              unresolved problem is the interoperability problem, namely, how the
              architectural pieces and their multiple and possibly heterogeneous semantic
              descriptions corresponding to the different views fit together to make a
              coherent whole, and how these different descriptions impose constraints on each
              other.  The main objectives of this collaborative project are (1) developing
              mathematical foundations for integrating and interoperating in a coherent and
              mathematically rigorous way diverse architectural descriptions, formal
              specifications, and executable prototypes of object-based distributed systems
              and (2) based on such foundations, developing a methodology for system design,
              development, and evolution that supports a seamless integration of the
              different formal and informal system descriptions and makes explicit the
              constraints that these different views of a system impose on each other.  The
              development of mathematical foundations will be driven by substantial case
              studies and will begin with an in-depth study of a wide range of notations and
              formalisms and of their mutual relationships that seem particularly promising
              for describing systems at different levels.  Rewriting logic will play an
              important role, not only as an executable specification formalism, but also as
              a reflective metalogical framework in which the chosen formalisms and their
              relations can be formalized.  These formalizations can be executed using the
              meta tools developed in the Maude
language, an implementation of rewriting
              logic.  It is expected that these foundations and experimental methodology will
              advance the state of the art in software development and evolution, and will
              lead to new tools and methods that, when used properly, will substantially
              reduce the cost and effort of software development and maintenance.

