Title       : High-Speed, High-Resolution 3-D Machine Vision for Automated Inspection of
               Highway Pavement Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a9900337

Award Number: 9900337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peisen S. Huang peisen.huang@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelvin C. Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fu-Pen Chiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The highway system is vital to the economy of the United States.  According to
              the survey conducted by the Federal Highway Administration, 90 percent of
              personal travel and 25 percent of freight movement is served by highways.  In
              1998, federal, state, and local governments are expected to spend a combined
              sum of over $106 billion on highways.  A significant portion of it will be used
              for system preservation, in particular, pavement 3R (reconstruction,
              rehabilitation, and resurface).  Inspection of pavement surface conditions
              plays a pivotal role in pavement 3R.  Currently, these inspections are dome
              mostly by manual visual inspection.  This is a slow, labor-intensive, tedious,
              dangerous, expensive, and subjective method.  To solve these problems, an
              automated inspection system needs to be developed.  In this research, we
              propose to develop a novel 3-D machine vision technique for automated
              inspection of pavement surfaces.  This technique is based on a color-encoded
              fringe projection and phase shifting concept that provides high-speed (limited
              only by the frame rate of the camera) and high-resolution (limited only by the
              number of pixels in the camera) 3-D surface contouring capability.  Integrated
              with a specially developed vehicle, the system can provide real-time
              inspections of pavement surface conditions at normal highway speeds (55 mph). 
              With advanced algorithms developed based on wavelet analysis, automatic
              detection, identification, and measurment of various types of pavement
              distresses can be realized.  Moreover, if global positioning system (GPS) and a
              map software are used, it is possible to pinpoint the locations of pavement
              distresses and if necessary, lead the repair engineerrs of workers to the
              sites.  The objectives of the proposed research are as follows:  1.  Develop a
              novel 3-D machine vision technique based on color-encoded fringe projection and
              phase shifting for high-speed, high-resolution pavement inspection.  2. 
              Develop a special vehicle that incorporates the 3-D machine vision system and
              GP5 for automated pavement data collection at highway speeds.  3.  Develop
              algorithms for sutomatic detection and quantitative evalutation of pavement
              surface distresses based on wavelet analysis techniques.
