Title       : Integer Programming Methods for Short Term Scheduling of Batch Operations in
               Process Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9900183

Award Number: 9900183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248579             (Estimated)
Investigator: Monique Guignard-Spielberg guignard@wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this project is to develop a robust methodological framework
              for solving some multistage batch production scheduling problems in process
              industries, particularly chemical industries. These are encountered when
              standardized products are produced in high volumes.  A batch is the process of
              transforming some product or mix of products on a machine into a different
              product.  In the flow of products one occasionally sees lines merging or
              dividing, as well as loops, as some products may have to be reprocessed.  One
              may be able to temporarily store some products, and some machines may need to
              be cleaned according to predetermined schedules. The objective is either the
              minimization of the total time necessary to produce
certain amounts of final
              products, or the corresponding costs, or the determination of appropriate
              inventory capacities and production rates. The research will concentrate on
              modeling and solving these problems as integer programming problems.  Discrete
              time simulation can generate feasible schedules extremely rapidly.  Lagrangean
              substitution, a flexible scheme that artificially induces a block-diagonal
              structure in the model, will be developed, as a means of obtaining strong
              bounds. Column generation will be considered as an alternative way of
              generating these bounds.  The Lagrangean solutions will be used as starting
              points for Lagrangean heuristics.  The last step will be a Lagrangean probing
              scheme for fixing variables based on strong bounds and good feasible
              solutions.
     If successful, this research will lead to improved
              optimization tools for chemical processes.  More generally, this research will
              provide improved computational tools and methodologies for solving hard
              combinatorial problems.  It will in particular lead to a more effective use of
              good feasible solutions within Lagrangean relaxation and branch-and-bound.  New
              insight into the design of column generation schemes equivalent to complex
              Lagrangean substitutions will be gained, providing more options for
              the
computation of strong bounds.

