Title       : Atmospheric Chemistry of Low Volatility Organic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9900404

Award Number: 9900404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario J. Molina mmolina@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed research is to improve the understanding of the
              chemical and microphysical properties of atmospheric organic aerosols.  These
              aerosols play important roles in the atmosphere: their impacts range from human
              health effects in urban and regional air pollution to scattering of solar
              radiation in climate change.

The work proposed here is designed to provide
              quantitative measurements on heterogeneous chemical processes involving
              prototype low volatility organic compounds.  The technique to be employed
              utilizes a low pressure flow tube with a moveable injector coupled to a
              chemical ionization mass spectrometer for analysis of gaseous reactants and
              products; the low volatility organic reactants will be deposited as films on
              the flow tube surface.  The composition of the films will be monitored by
              infrared and/or Raman spectroscopy.

Specific projects to be carried out
              include investigations of the reactions of the low volatility organic species
              with OH, O2, NO and NO2, to be injected into the flow tube sequentially and/or
              simultaneously.  The organic species to be studied are alkanes, polycyclic
              aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) and acids.  The reaction of isoprenoids with ozone
              will also be studied. The hygroscopic behavior of the organic films will be
              investigated before and after exposure to the various gaseous reactants by
              monitoring the uptake of water vapor.  Furthermore, the adsorption properties
              of the various types of organic compounds under study will be investigated on
              several different substrates.

