Title       : Dissertation Research: Academic Decisions, Group Dynamics: The Effects of Family
               Life on the Educational Experiences of Chinese American Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9900889

Award Number: 9900889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kai Erikson kai@minerva.cis.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This doctoral dissertation research project will assess the role of the family
              in creating gender differences in the academic careers of Chinese American
              students. The influence of family dynamics on Asian American academic
              achievement has been well-documented. However, the role of gender has largely
              been overlooked. Compared to their male counterparts, Asian American women are
              less likely to participate in higher education and to major in math, science
              and engineering. Yet, when compared to women of other racial and ethnic groups,
              they are more likely to choose quantitative fields of study. This research
              seeks to provide a point of departure for shedding light on the processes that
              create this phenomenon through an examination of family, peers and school.
              Chinese Americans will be studied because there is a gender gap in educational
              access, and the population is stratified by economic class, date of entry into
              the United States, place of origin and nativity status. This research will
              focus on second-generation Chinese American undergraduates, and will address
              several questions: (1) To what extent do immigrant parents influence their
              children's choice of academic major and career plans, and are there gender
              differences in this influence? (2) How do family background and environment,
              particularly in relation to migration, affect women and men's educational
              experiences? (3) To what extent are women's choices related to their
              interaction with faculty and peers, and social pressures outside the family?
              This project will explore these questions through in-depth interviews with men
              and women attending two New York City colleges and their families, as well as
              through participant observation conducted at school and in the home.
