Title       : Dissertation Research: Market Transition and Entreprenerial Success in the
               Ukraine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2001   
File        : a9900927

Award Number: 9900927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8220               (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca Matthews rebecca-matthews@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin T. Leicht  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5998,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Research project will examine the roles
              that human, social and political capital play in promoting entrepreneurial
              activity and small business success in the Ukraine.  The 1990s has produced
              considerable economic upheaval in the Ukraine and in other parts of the former
              Soviet Union as newly independent nations attempt to create viable institutions
              that support market economies.  Researchers who study social stratification and
              policy analyst have debated the nature of the relationship between location in
              the stratification system produced by Soviet State Socialism and social
              stratification during market transition.  The primary goal of this research is
              examine the role that human, social and political capital plays in decisions to
              enter into private business ventures (the leading source of new jobs in
              transition economies) and the role these same factors play in fostering
              relative success in these ventures.

The projects seeks to improve on prior
              research on social stratification during market transition in major ways by:
              (1) systematically sampling registered and unregistered entrepreneurs to gauge
              the full range of entrepreneurial activity and its correlates, (2)
              systematically comparing the general population to entrepreneurs so that
              systematic differences between those who start private businesses and those
              that do not can be compared, and (3) developing more nuanced measures of human,
              social and political capital so that different types of personal capital and
              the timing of acquisition can be assessed.  The research has the potential to
              create an important foundation for future research on the development of
              private business ownership in the rapidly transforming economies of the Ukraine
              and other former state-socialist countries.

Data will be collected from
              subsamples of entrepreneurs (N=550) and the general population (N=550) in the
              city of Kharkov, Ukraine.  A survey will be conducted of these two to collect
              information on educational attainment, social network contacts, political
              positions and political network connections. Logistic regression analyses will
              be performed to examine differences between entrepreneurs and the general
              population and assess the probability of being an entrepreneur; and ordinary
              less squares regression used to estimate the contribution of human, social and
              political capital to entrepreneurial success.

