Title       : Triangle Research Data Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a9900447

Award Number: 9900447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie B. McElroy chair@econ.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank A. Sloan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Census Research Data Centers (RDC) provide secure access to highly
              confidential longitudinal micro-data from Census surveys of business
              establishments and firms and from demographic surveys of households and
              individuals.  This project covers part of the start up and operating costs of a
              new RDC at Duke University to provide data access to the intellectual community
              in the "Research Triangle."   Duke University, the University of North Carolina
              at Chapel Hill, and North Carolina State University constitute the intellectual
              and geographic vertices of the Research Triangle.   This Triangle is home to
              two major medical schools, historically black Central Carolina University,
              Research Triangle Institute, major research arms of US Government Agencies
              (such as the Environmental Protection Agency and the Forrest Service), and a
              number of additional institutions of higher learning.  Over one hundred
              researchers drawn from all of these nonprofit institutions and over a dozen
              disciplines support this project.  The majority of those hundred plus
              researchers have on going projects whose scientific merit would increase
              substantially if the research could take advantage of the unique opportunities
              offered by access to particular sets of confidential Census Data. Projects on
              heath, the environment, crime and education are among those
              proposed.

Individually and collectively the researchers who have lent their
              name to this proposal are well-funded and have long-experience with all the
              responsibilities, extra measures, secure environment, and vigilance required to
              maintain the integrity of confidential data. This project contains a financial
              plan to make the Triangle RDC self-funded over a period of about six years. It
              also has a governance structure with a Review Board  to ensure an open and fair
              review and selection process as well as excellent facilities for researchers at
              the Triangle RDC. The proposed Review Board, Faculty Research Coordinator, and
              an Executive Director work closely with the Census Bureau to ensure fair and
              objective access to the resources of a Triangle RDC while maintaining the
              "culture of confidentiality" essential to the success of the RDC program.



