Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Globalization and Class Relations in the Public
               Space of Rio de Janeiro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9900910

Award Number: 9900910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan R. Pred apreda2socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although substantial variations exist in contemporary cities of the world among
              different economic classes of residents, public spaces often serve as locales
              where people with different incomes and social standing meet and interact. 
              Peaceful interactions among a city's diverse residents in these settings
              generally has been the product of the continual redefinition of historically
              produced rules and boundaries.  This has been especially evident in Rio de
              Janiero, the cosmopolitan Brazilian city whose coastal zones have been the
              historic site for interaction among the economical diverse residents of the
              city.  A dramatic rise in the crime rate and in confrontations in some mixed
              public areas over the last decade has raised questions as to whether recent
              structural changes in the world economy have adversely affected local social
              processes.  This doctoral dissertation research project will address those
              questions through the conduct of a case study of the impact of global economic
              changes on social conflict and cohesion associated with public spaces in Rio de
              Janeiro.  Research methods will draw both on large-scale economic data analyses
              traditionally associated with economic geography and ethnographic methods
              associated with anthropology, including observations, surveys, and taped
              interviews with individuals and groups.  This project will provide new insights
              into the dynamics of social and economic conflict and change in modern world
              cities, and it will enhance understandings of the interplay of local, national,
              and global processes that influence urban social order, stability, and unrest. 
              As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
              provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.


