Title       : A Multi-Scale Approach for Understanding the Role of the Interphase in Polymer
               Matrix Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a9900383

Award Number: 9900383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon J. Kellar jkellar@silver.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Cross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lidvin Kjerengtroen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
	The focus of the research is a multi-scale
(molecular-nanometer-micrometer)
              investigation of the interphase and its
relationship to polymer matrix
              composite (PMC) performance.  The first
objective of the research is to
              monitor the chemistry of the interphase
region in situ, and in real-time
              during the polymer curing cycle.  The
second objective is to measure the size
              and the mechanical properties of the
interphases that result as a function of
              silane coupling agent surface
treatments.  The third objective is the
              measurement of the micromechanical
performance of a model PMC system. 
              
	Several tasks are involved to meet the research objectives.  The
first task
              will involve in situ reaction monitoring of a model polymer using
a novel
              Fourier transform infrared fiber optic sensor system which allows
direct
              monitoring of interphase chemistry.  Experiments will be performed
using
              polymer/curing agent mixtures on unmodified glass fibers, and polymer
curing
              followed as a function of time at elevated temperature.  Next, silane
coupling
              agent surface treatments will be performed on the glass fibers and
the
              organofunctional reactivity determined simultaneously with
              curing
agent/polymer reactivity.
	The second task in the proposed research
              will be the nano-mechanical
property characterization after surface treatment
              and polymer curing.
Atomic force microscopy and nanoindentation will be used
              to characterize the
interphase region.  These results will be correlated with
              the in situ
infrared data from the first task, in particular, the role
              of
organofunctional reactivity and polymer curing on the resultant
              interphase
properties. 
	The third task will involve measurement of the
              micromechanical
behavior of the model PMC through the use of the microbond
              test method.
Results obtained during this portion of the research will be
              correlated with
the first two tasks mentioned above. 


