Title       : RF Power Amplifier Spectral Regrowth -Causes and Cures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9900085

Award Number: 9900085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175290             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Jemison w.d.jemison@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. M. Hwang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900085
Jemison

This proposal describes a systematic investigation into the
              fundamental mechanisms that contribute to radio frequency (RF) power-amplifier
              spectral regrowth, a critical issue for the wireless communications industry.
              These mechanisms include transient (i.e. memory) effects associated with
              trapping and phase-distortion due to the intrinsic transistor device structure,
              input/output match, and bias network impedances. Previously reported work in
              this area is incomplete, fragmented, and contradictory. The proposed research
              is divided into several easily identifiable tasks:

	Task I	Detailed modeling
              and analysis ofFET phase distortion
	Task II	Investigation into transient
              memory effects on spectral regrowth
	Task III	Wide-band behavioral signal
              modeling development
Task I is intended to determine the cause of phase
              distortion in the FET, an issue that is still hotly debated. Task II, which
              comprises the majority of our total effort, will leverage the recent work of
              Leoni, et. al. at Lehigh University which addressed transient effects in a GaAs
              FET power-amplifier under pulse modulation excitation[I]. This work will be
              extended to include, for the first time, the effects of transients on the
              output spectrum of a complex signal such as Code Division Multiple Access
              (CDMA). Spectral regrowth effects associated with input/output match and bias
              circuit impedance )which have not been systematically studied to date) will
              also be investigated. The goals of Task H are to develop a fundamental
              understanding of the effects of transients on spectral regrowth generation and
              to develop design techniques to mitigate these effects. Task IH leverages
              recent behavioral modeling work at Lafayette College [2]. The goal of this task
              is to develop a behavioral model that can be applied to new waveforms such as
              wide-band CDMA.

The knowledge gained from these investigations will be
              applied to develop better large-signal transistor models and behavioral circuit
              models that can handle complex digitally modulated signals such as CDMA. These
              models will be validated by novel and extensive measurements using devices
              provided by our industrial partner, Anadigics, Inc., a leading worldwide
              supplier of RF power-amplifiers for the wireless communications industry. The
              results of this work will lead to the development of improved RF
              power-amplifier modeling and design procedures for digital communication
              applications.
***



