Title       : Travel Grant Program for the IXth International Congresses of Mycology and
               Bacteriology in Sydney Australia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9900517

Award Number: 9900517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Pramer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc For Microbiology
	      1752 N Street
	      Washington, DC  200362804    202/737-3600

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1158,1171,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Microbiologists from around the world are meeting in  Sydney,
              Australia in August, 1999 to explore  a wide-ranging set of research frontiers
              in bacteriology and mycology. Some of the notable bacteriological topics to be
              discussed include extremophiles,  molecular evolution,  intercellular
              signaling, and bioremedation. Major mycological topics include fungal
              resistance, species concepts in fungal taxonomy, population genetics of fungi,
              biodiversity in yeast, and secondary metabolite production.  These are among
              the many meaningful subjects to be addressed at the joint Congresses of the
              Bacteriology and Applied Microbiology Division and the Mycology Division of the
              International Union of Microbiological Societies (IUMS). Hosted by the
              Australian Society for Microbiology and the Australian Academy of Sciences, the
              Congresses will give microbiologists a broad perspective on advances in their
              disciplines. Organized as a mixture of invited symposia and  paper sessions, it
              is estimated that the Congresses will attract 5,000 scientists.  To support the
              participation of U.S. scientists in the Congresses a competitive travel grant
              program has been organized. Travel grants in the amount of $2,000 will be
              offered to investigators who are in the early stages of their careers who plan
              to attend and present their research at the Congress. Teams of established and
              apprentice investigators who apply jointly will receive a combined $3,000
              award. Experience has shown that International Congresses provide "young"
              investigators with a unique educational experience that has a lasting impact on
              their research careers. The meeting brings those in attendance in contact with
              a new world of potential collaborators and foreign colleagues in the same and
              related fields, leading to working partnerships and lifelong friendships.
              Attendees gain the opportunity to listen to internationally distinguished
              scientists explain the cutting edge of research across the breadth of
              microbiology. The International Congresses provide scientists with insight
              into, and understanding of, the global impact of microbiological research. 

