Title       : Novel Synthesis and Fabrication of Hybrid Coatings for Manufacturing
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9900459

Award Number: 9900459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213362             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashok Kumar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Hard and wear-resistant coatings are an important segment in the US and
              world economy; for instance, machine tools are a $15 billion per year industry
              worldwide.  The focus of this research program is to fabricate ultrahard
              coatings based on mixed amorphous/nanocrystalline (e.g., Si3N4/TiN composite
              coatings) phased by ion assisted pulsed laser deposition method for
              manufacturing applications.  A lubricant will be added to reduce the friction
              coefficient.  The research aims to elucidate the understanding of the
              mechanisms controlling processing structural and micro-mechanical relationships
              in nanostructured coatings and thereby demonstrate routes for improved
              mechanical properties with engineered interface and surface modification.  The
              state-of-the-art analytical techniques will be used to evaluate the structural
              and mechanical properties. 
     The above results will be related to the
              mechanical and tribological properties of the coated surface, such as: 
              critical load, elastic modulus, and friction and wear behavior against a
              variety of counterfaces in dry and lubricated atmospheres. The principal
              investigator will also involve a  local high school teacher and student into
              the experimental works related to the research. Through this outreach
              activities, both the teacher and student will learn the fundamentals of the
              scientific principles involved as well as learning the different experimental
              tools related to thin film processing of materials.  The efforts will be  made
              to work with industry to achieve the objectives of the  research.  Results of
              the project will be disseminated by  presentations in regional and national
              conferences, and published in journals.

