Title       : Investigations of Ultra-High Surface Area Carbon Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9900344

Award Number: 9900344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore Kuwana tkuwana@eureka.chem.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project, a joint effort of Professor Theodore Kuwana at the University of
              Kansas and Professor Richard Kelly at Merrimack College and funded by
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry, is a continuation of fundamental studies on
              the electrochemistry of ultra-high surface area carbon fibers, and the use of
              these fibers as platforms on which dehydrogenase-based sensors can be
              developed.  The fibers of interest are those that are formed by a process of
              fracture, which increases the surface area and the associated capacitance of
              the fiber tip.  The electrochemical characteristics observed in a cyclic
              voltammetry experiment using these fractured fibers as electrodes also changes
              significantly.  Fracture of the carbon fibers is accomplished electrically, and
              the conditions under which reproducible fracture surfaces can be attained are
              investigated.  The fracture surfaces are characterized with surface
              derivatization and species adsorption, and with scanning electron microscopy
              and atomic force microscopy.  The reproducibly fractured carbon fibers are used
              as the supports for a multienzyme sensor used for the analysis of
              L-phenylalanine.  Levels of L phenylalanine are an important early indicator of
              phenylketonuria.  The project is carried out by collaborative efforts of
              undergraduate researchers at the University of Kansas and at Merrimack College.
               
Small carbon fibers that are cleanly fractured at their ends have special
              properties that make them very useful as supports for small biosensors.  This
              project, a joint undergraduate research project between Professor Kuwana at the
              University of Kansas and Professor Kelly at Merrimack College, studies how to
              accomplish the fracture process in a reproducible fashion, and how to build an
              enzymesensor based on the fractured fiber.  The fiber sensor is used in the
              early detection of phenylketonuria by monitoring levels of L-phenylalanine.
