Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Short-term Network Organizations: The Emergence
               and Institutionalization of Flexible Production Practices in the U.S. Movie
               Industry, 1930-1950
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9900920

Award Number: 9900920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne S. Miner aminer@bus.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Doctoral Dissertation Research

Short-Term Network Organizations: 
The
              Emergence and Institutionalization of Flexible Production Practices
in the
              U.S. Movie Industry, 1930-1950

Abstract
Scholars and practitioners report
              that mass production and large, integrated firms are giving way to more
              flexible and fragmented organizational forms. However, research has focused on
              long-term relationships (e.g., strategic alliances) and neglected the equally
              important short-term relationships (e.g., single project collaborations). 
              Consequently, today's implementations of short-term flexible relationships
              suffer from a lack of understanding of how they work and when they should be
              applied.
As a starting point for the investigation of flexible production
              relationships, this work will examine the U.S. movie industry which has
              utilized short-term single project collaborations over many decades.  Focussing
              on the period when this flexible production regime emerged in Hollywood, this
              study will examine factors which enhanced participants' performance on several
              hundred movie projects over a twenty year period.
For example, theory implies
              that making the names of mid-level participants visible to the broader
              community should enhance overall project performance; disclosure of names makes
              it more likely others in the community will judge project participants on the
              basis of the focal project's success, affecting the reputations of all
              participants. This in turn motivates participants to provide their best
              efforts. 
Preliminary results support this prediction, with early data
              suggesting this effect becomes stronger the more the project is a 'stand-alone'
              project with little or no prior contact between participants. 
The
              dissertation also argues that short term collaboration performance will be
              higher when there are taken-for-granted practices in a whole industry about how
              things should work  (e.g. standardized coordination practices or sanctions for
              opportunistic behavior). Projects can save the cost and time needed to develop
              organization-specific coordination devices by using these standardized
              practices.  As paradoxical as it may sound, this implies stability and
              continuity on the industry level is needed in order to enable flexibility on
              the organizational level.
This dissertation contributes to theory by
              conceptualizing short-term collaboration projects/networks and impediments to
              their success. It tests predictions from theories of opportunism and
              psychological contracts about how to enhance performance in short term
              collaboration.  It considers strategies used by the movie industry to make
              short term collaboration effective. This dissertation will provide
              practitioners with useful guidance on how to enhance performance in short-term
              network projects, an increasingly important organizational form. 


