Title       : A Survey of Undergraduate Programs in the Mathematical and Statistical Sciences
               in the United States and the Publication of a Statistical Abstract of the
               Results
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9900736

Award Number: 9900736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard E. Morrison                     
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241498             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Maxwell jwm@ams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Lutzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 8807      HUMAN RESOURCES STATISTICS PGM
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This three-year project, endorsed by the Conference Board of the Mathematical
              Sciences (CBMS), will be the eighth CBMS survey of undergraduate mathematics
              education in the United States.  As in past years, the survey will report on
              curricular, enrollment, and personnel issues in undergraduate mathematics,
              creating a longitudinal data base of information not available anywhere else. 
              Publications from these surveys have assisted governmental and academic
              administrators as they make resource allocation decisions, have assisted the
              mathematical community in understanding the curricular and personnel problems
              that it faces, and have served as a data source for almost every national
              report on the mathematical sciences community.

CBMS2000, as the survey is
              called, will include more than 600 of the 2,500 U. S. departments of
              mathematical sciences (broadly defined) in two-and four-year institutions.  The
              impact of calculus reform, the teaching of statistics in mathematics
              departments, and the pre-service education of K-12 mathematics teachers are
              likely to be among special focus areas.

Changes from earlier surveys will
              include a greater emphasis on undergraduate statistical education, enhanced
              parellelism between the two-year and four-year college questionnaires, the use
              of a university statistical laboratory to carry out the analysis of survey
              data, and wider dissemination of the final report to federal decisionmakers. 
              The entire report will be made available for electronic dissemination through
              the internet.
