Title       : Gordon Research Conference on Electronic Materials: Chemistry, Excitations, and
               Processing; Plymouth, New Hampshire; July 4-9, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9900217

Award Number: 9900217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Horia Metiu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A Gordon Conference will be held in July, 1999 on Electronic Materials:
              Chemistry, Excitations and Processing. The conference focuses on the most
              exciting developments in the processing and usage of electronic materials.  New
              materials, new uses, new probes, and new methods are emphasized rather than
              incremental developments in existing technologies and methodology.  The
              conference seeks to attract participants from industry, academia, and
              government laboratories, to help those communities learn from each other.  It
              provides a stimulating environment for students planning a career in electronic
              materials, a field of research that is exciting, is important to the national
              economy, and is not yet represented in the traditional curriculum at the
              leading Universities. Support from NSF will be used to partially compensate
              young scientists (junior faculty, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows)
              for travel and accommodation expenses. The conference is expected to provide an
              effective forum for discussion of critical scientific issues in
              electronic/photonic materials.  Along with the opportunity to assess the field
              and future directions, it is expected that new ties will be established between
              universities, research institutions, and industry.  
%%%
 Electronic/photonic
              materials have far reaching economic potential since applications range broadly
              across electronics and photonics associated with computing, communications, and
              information processing. An evaluation of the progress and status of this field
              along with current assessments of the most important developments will be of
              great value to the understanding and enhanced utilization of these materials in
              applications beneficial to society. 	 
***

