Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cooperation and Conflict between "Old" and "New"
               Social Movements: The Case of Organized Labor and the Environmental Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9900608

Award Number: 9900608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7292               (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela E. Oliver oliver@ssc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Historically, popular mobilization has centered around economic interests with
              labor unions serving as the primary vehicle for political action. However
              social movement scholars have identified new forms of mobilization in recent
              decades which focus instead on non-material goals such as environmental
              protection. These "new social movements" contrast with their traditional
              counterparts not only in their goals, but also in their organizational
              structure, class make up and culture. Social movement and class theorists are
              in disagreement as to how these new movements should be conceived of in
              relation to the traditional class antagonists and what political alignments
              will emerge among them. Using labor unions and environmental organizations as
              the basis, this doctoral dissertation research  will examine both the
              conditions which influence relations between these "old" and "new" movement
              organizations and the process by which these relationships develop. The first
              stage of the study involves a national survey of state labor federations in
              order to determine the status of labor/environmental relations around the
              United States. Data from the survey will be used to test several hypothesis
              regarding the influence of political, economic and organizational factors on
              the type of relationships which develop. Then, using relevant contrasting cases
              as determined by the survey, six states will be selected for a comparative case
              study designed to examine the process of relationship development between these
              two movement sectors. Through interviews with relevant actors and the use of
              organizational documents a more precise understanding of the forces governing
              the relations between "old" and "new" social movements will be determined.
