Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Changing Landscape of Rental Housing in
               South African Cities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9900915

Award Number: 9900915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Gaile gaile@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Because of the stringent policies of apartheid, South African cities were among
              the most racially segregated cities in the world.  With the end of apartheid
              and the dramatic social, economic, and political reorganization of South Africa
              have come comparable changes of the nation's urban areas.  The growing demand
              for housing coupled with chronic shortages in the housing stock have
              exacerbated urban change.  Differences in the quality and quantity of housing
              coupled with various governmental policies and programs designed to alleviate
              the housing crisis have begun to alter the social geography of South African
              cities, but it is not clear whether these changes and policies are challenging
              the legacy of apartheid or reinforcing the apartheid landscapes of segregation.
               This doctoral dissertation research project will focus on a case study of the
              rental housing market in Cape Town in two phases.  The first phase will focus
              on the collection of empirical data about the changing geography of the rental
              housing market.  The second phase will use three kinds of surveys to gather
              quantitative data and qualitative information from rental households, local
              residents, and local officials.  Structured interviews with 600 rental
              households drawn from a stratified clustered random sample will provide data
              about changing social and spatial patterns of rental housing as well as
              changing perceptions and key issues of concern among rental households. 
              In-depth semi-structured interviews will be conducted with at least 60 rental
              households to qualitatively explore changing social realities and mental
              landscapes of tenants.  Finally, individual and group open-ended interviews
              will be conducted with non-governmental as well as other local organizations
              involved in issues related to housing provision and policy.  This project will
              advance understandings of the changing character of housing markets in
              contemporary South African cities, and it will have practical utility for those
              engaged in policy making for rental housing in that nation.  The significance
              of this research extends beyond South Africa's borders, however, because this
              project will examine the difficulties in transforming urban systems that have
              been stratified territorially based on ethnicity and race.  As such, it will
              offer insights into the interplay between formal government policies,
              socioeconomic dynamics, and cultural factors that affect the ways that
              different groups of people relate to each other as they reorganize the spaces
              they occupy and use in urban settings.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.
