Title       : Amino Ketones in the Stereoselective Synthesis of Densely Functionalized
               Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9900402

Award Number: 9900402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert V. Hoffman rhoffman@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510603   Synthetic Organic Chemistry             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Robert Hoffman, of
              the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at New Mexico State University,
              studies the use of amino ketones in the stereoselective synthesis of densely
              functionalized compounds.  Using protected alpha-amino ketones in which the
              protecting group is chosen to exert either steric or electronic control, 1,2-
              and 1,3-stereocontrol is obtained in the introduction of chiral centers
              downstream from the amino group.  This strategy affords access to complete
              stereoisomeric families of 1,2-difunctional, 1,2,3-trifunctional, and
              1,2,3,4-tetrafunctional compounds.  Through the application of this general
              strategy to the steric and chelation controlled reduction of protected amino
              ketones and analogous 1,3-stereocontrol in the electrophilic functionalization
              of enol derivatives of amino ketones, Professor Hoffman is developing
              procedures for the synthesis of amino sugars, phytosphingosines, azasugars, and
              monofluorinated peptide isosteres.

Many of the organic compounds which have
              been discovered to display important biological properties contain a rather
              dense array of functional groups.  The development of methods for the
              preparation of such compounds, particularly with good control over the relative
              geometries of each of the carbon atoms bearing the functional groups,
              represents an ongoing challenge for synthetic chemists.  With the support of
              the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Robert Hoffman, of the Department of
              Chemistry and Biochemistry at New Mexico State University, is developing
              synthetic methodology for the preparation of densely functionalized compounds. 
              Starting from comparatively simple precursors, amino ketones, Professor Hoffman
              introduces groups which simultaneously protect the functionality of the amino
              ketone from undesirable reactions and control the outcome of desired reactions.
               This efficient protocol affords access to a number of important classes of
              compounds.
