Title       : Spatial Linkage Computer Aided Design Primitives for the Mechanical Inventor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9900391

Award Number: 9900391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273493             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael McCarthy jmmccart@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research integrates algebraic geometry and computer aided design to provide
              a new capability for the invention of devices that provide controlled spatial
              movement.  Each mechanical constraint defines a specific algebraic manifold
              that characterizes the movement that it allows for a workpiece or end-effector.
               The workspace of an articulated chain such as a robot is the intersection of
              several of these manifolds.  The design process consists of inverting the
              relationship between the workspace and manifold, that is the manifolds that
              intersect to define the workspace, or task space, that is prescribed by the
              designer are sought.   There are three primary challenges to be addressed:  (1)
              the interactive graphics and spatial visualization needed for task definition
              using positions and orientations; (2) high speed solution of non-linear
              algebraic equations to intersect the constraint manifolds and identify
              candidate designs; and (3) the implementation and automation of design metrics
              to provide advice to the inventor.  This research builds on experience with an
              inventor's tool for planar and spherical linkages, and seeks to construct a
              general theory implemented in design software to provide a new capability for
              the invention of spatial mechanical systems.

If successful, the results of
              this research will provide an opportunity for systematic invention of
              articulated systems that provide controlled spatial movement.  This approach
              allows the inventor to match a specific spatial movement task with a system
              that may have as few as one or two actuators.  Resolution of the fundamental
              challenges both of specifying the higher dimensional task manifolds of
              positions and orientations, as well as of evaluating the resulting constraint
              manifold can have benefits in a range of applications such as robot motion
              planning, human movement evaluation and virtual reality.  Furthermore, this
              system allows the invention of simplified robotic systems with as few at one or
              two actuators that combine increased performance with decreased in cost and
              complexity.  These devices can find use in applications ranging from home,
              office, and factory automation to assistive devices for the disabled.
