Title       : Workshop on Learning on Cognitive Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1999 
File        : a9900498

Award Number: 9900498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jing Xiao                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Juyang Weng weng@cps.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ida J. Stockman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              IIS-9900498
Weng, John
Michigan State University
$30,000.00 - 15
              mos.

Workshop on Development and Learning 

There is a growing interest in
              the study of cognitive and behavioral
development and the interactions between
              what is innate and what is
learned during the development. New theories and
              architectures for
development are being studied in fields related to both
              artificial and
natural intelligence.  Scaling up from ground, both in size and
              functionality,
is required for dealing with real-world problems and for
              better
understanding natural intelligence.  How does an individual, biological
              or
artificial, scale up its cognitive and behavioral capabilities through
              interactions 
with the environment?  What are the common mechanisms
that
              enable scaling up for a variety of cognitive and behavioral
capabilities and
              their integration?  Since this important subject is
interdisciplinary, this
              workshop will bring together researchers from
closely related fields,
              including artificial intelligence, machine learning,
computer vision, pattern
              recognition, speech recognition, robotics,
animal learning, developmental
              psychology, neuroscience and computational
linguistics.  The aim is to discuss
              (1) the role that development and
learning can play in the development of
              artificial and natural intelligent
agents, (2) the common principles that are
              shared by the development for
very diverse cognitive and behavioral
              capabilities such as vision, speech,
language, reasoning, planning, decision
              making, locomotion and
object manipulation. (3) important directions for
              future research on
development and learning, and (4) short-term and long-term
              applications.
Findings of the workshop will be documented in a report which
              will be widely
disseminated in the various related research communities.  A
              website on
development and learning will be created from this workshop as a
              long-term
cross-disciplinary information center for those who are interested
              in
artificial and natural intelligence.

