Title       : The Product Family Reasoning System: Design Methods for Enabling Product Variety
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a9900259

Award Number: 9900259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168218             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Rosen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The problem to be addressed in this research is how to assist designers in
              designing several related products from a common base.  This problem has two
              aspects: (1) how to design common platforms for a family of products, and (2)
              how to synthesize and reason about the variety that can be supported from the
              common platform.  A Product Family Reasoning System (PFRS) is proposed to
              provide the computational foundation for determining suitable common product
              family platforms and synthesizing individual products within a proposed family.
               The proposed approach is to study the application of discrete mathematics to
              the configuration design of platforms and products within a product family. 
              Configuration design involves the identification of which components are in a
              design and which relationships should exist among these components.  Since
              discrete mathematics deals with the study of objects and their relationships,
              it is an appropriate foundation for studying configuration design, platform
              commonization, and product family design.  Additionally, the area of
              decision-based design will guide this research to ensure that design decisions
              are properly formulated and made.  Automobile platform design will be the
              primary application area for this project.
     Expected results of this
              research include a new product family design approach that will consider
              product and process aspects, and computational methods for designing common
              platforms and products within a product family.  Potential new discoveries from
              this research include a discrete mathematical foundation for configuration
              design, algorithms for synthesizing product platforms and products, and design
              methods that enable trade-offs among product architecture choices to be
              evaluated.  The significance of these discoveries includes guidance to
              designers on rationalizing product family platforms.  Such guidance involves
              the appropriate consideration of product and assembly facility capabilities
              during design, and the opportunity to make appropriate decisions given
              preferences among possibly competing objectives.

