Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement: Rethinking Thuggery: Landed Elites
               and Geographies of Agrarian Violence in Chiapas, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9900641

Award Number: 9900641
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Watts mwatts@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During previous times when small-scale producers attempted to seize control of
              land from large-scale landowners in developing nations, the landed elite
              generally responded by using violence to evict the "squatters" from the
              disputed parcels.  In the Chiapas state of Mexico, for example, violent
              reactions characterized peasant insurgencies in the 1970s and 1980s.  This
              history made it all the more surprising when, in the wake of peasant seizure
              control of about ten percent of the privately held agricultural land in the
              state during the 1994 Zapatista uprising, most affected landowners instead sold
              the disputed property to the state government, which in turn made it available
              to the peasants.  This dramatic shift in the use of violence by landowners
              whose property rights are directly challenged provides a context for this
              doctoral dissertation research project.  Through interviews with large
              landowners, an extensive survey of economic production, narrative analysis, and
              mapping of violent incidents, the doctoral student will examine the rise and
              fall of the landowners' economic power, changing political support for their
              use of violence against land invaders, and the landowners' complex
              understandings of violence.  This project will contribute new understandings at
              a variety of scales.  It will provide new insights into the dynamics of social
              change in contemporary Mexico, placing special emphasis on southern Mexican
              groups that previously have received little attention.  It also will provide a
              new framework for conceptualizing long-standing debates regarding the
              connections between property relations, agrarian transitions, and violence.  As
              a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
              provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

