Title       : EQUIPMENT: Aerodynamic Particle Sizer for Industrial Air Quality Sampling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9900078

Award Number: 9900078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20425              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Sutherland jwsuther@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Industrial air quality is of growing importance due to the fact that
              aerosol waste streams generated by manufacturing processes represent a
              significant health hazard.  Much of this airborne particulate matter can be
              attributed to cutting fluid mists.  In the absence of cutting fluid (i.e., dry
              machining), dust particles may be created during machining and become airborne.
               Inhalation of these solid particles may pose an even greater health hazard
              than mist droplets.  The concern over worker exposure to airborne particulates
              has prompted regulatory scrutiny by several organizations.  Particle
              concentrations based upon number, surface area, and mass are important metrics
              for engineering purposes as well as for assessing health impacts.  The
              equipment associated with this project, an Aerodynamic Particle Sizer
              Spectrometer, provides measurements based on each of these metrics, thereby
              giving a complete profile of all important characteristics of the aerosol being
              sampled.  This device (which measures particles between 0.5 and 20 microns), in
              conjunction with a Scanning Mobility Particle Sizer (which measures particles
              less than 0.5 microns), will provide a complete picture of temporal and spatial
              behavior of the particle sizes that can adversely affect human health.  Plans
              for use of the Spectrometer (and Particle Sizer) emphasize the characterization
              of the dominant mechanisms that influence aerosol formation in machining.
    
              The ultimate goal of the project to develop and validate theoretical aerosol
              formation models may lead to machining process redesign that minimizes aerosol
              formation, thereby eliminating or reducing the need for costly machine
              enclosures and air filters.

