Title       : AMP: Houston Alliance for Minority Participation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a9900893

Award Number: 9900893
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Bear 4800 Calhoun Blvd.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9900893
Bear

The primary goal of the Houston LSAMP, propelled by a
              partnership among the NSF, the University of Houston and Texas Southern
              University, six academic institutions of higher education, the Houston
              Independent School District, and numerous corporations, is to double, within
              five years, the number of minority students earning baccalaureate degrees each
              year in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) fields from
              the participating universities and prepare them for entry to graduate
              programs.

The Houston LSAMP will implement a comprehensive and vigorous
              strategy to eliminate two well-documented causes of attrition in SMET fields at
              the university level; financial need and lack of academic support.  To address
              these two important issues, the Houston LSAMP will create and maintain a
              challenging, yet nurturing learning environment in which students who work hard
              will have every opportunity to succeed.  The Alliance will promote and
              capitalize on industry and university participation to stimulate the interest
              of university undergraduates in SMET careers and graduate education and provide
              the resources, academic support, and environment for them to successfully
              complete their degrees and transition to careers or graduate school.  Financial
              support from NSF funds, institutional resources, and corporate partnerships
              will play a critical role in assuring that students are not diverted from their
              goals by employment unrelated to their fields of study.  Finally, Houston LSAMP
              leadership will continue to improve the integration among participating
              institutions, government agencies and industry partners and expand the network
              of participants to sustain the program indefinitely beyond the five-year term
              of an NSF award.


