Title       : Development of a Microsatellite Gene Library for Sceloporus grammicus (Squamata,
               Phrynosomatidae), and a Preliminary Assessment of Male Mating Success in the
               Tulancingo Hybrid Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9900975

Award Number: 9900975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elisabeth Arevalo earevalo@providence.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Providence College
	      River Avenue and Eaton Street
	      Providence, RI  02918    401/865-1000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program
Nontechnical Abstract

Proposal #:  9900975
PI:
              Elisabeth Arevalo Holder
Title:  Development of a microsatellite gene library
              for Sceloporus grammicus (Squamata, Phrynosomatidae), and a preliminary
              assessment of male mating success in the Tulancingo hybrid zone

Lizards are
              an excellent model system for ecological, behavioral and population genetic
              studies.  The genetically variable species Sceloporus grammicus complex,
              consisting of at least eight different chromosomal races, provides a unique
              resource for such studies.  This project is aimed at developing markers for
              genetic characterization of individuals and populations in the S. grammicus
              complex.  These markers will be used to examine a variety of basic questions. 
              The mating system of this group will be characterized and the reproductive
              success of females and territorial males will be assessed.  It will be possible
              to compare the territory sizes of males from a single chromosomal race versus
              that of males that are hybrids.  

This research will provide basic
              information concerning the maintenance of hybrid zones and the process of
              speciation.  It integrates across the organismal and population levels of
              analysis and constitutes an integrated approach to behavioral components of
              reproductive success and subsequent population level consequences.  In
              addition, it will foster collaboration between Providence College and the
              University of Mexico. 


