Title       : Dissertation Research: Improving Educational Outcomes for Disadvantaged
               Students: The Effects of Community Context, School Capacity and Social Capital
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9900875

Award Number: 9900875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reeve D. Vanneman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Bidwell cbidwell@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed dissertation research will examine how a school's capacity to
              prepare students for post secondary success is linked to its ability to provide
              resources that meet the specific needs of the student population it serves. The
              study focuses on two types of resources: traditional educational resources and
              planning and strategic action resources. Each is hypothesized to affect
              educational outcomes in specific ways. The research considers how structures
              and practices in a school context that generate social capital resources affect
              a school's capacity to influence outcomes for disadvantaged students. This
              research will contribute to knowledge in this area by considering a wider range
              of educational outcomes, and by employing network analytic theory and measures
              to understand how qualitative differences in knowledge-based social capital
              resources affect the schooling experiences and post secondary outcomes of
              students from different backgrounds. The study considers the implications of
              traditional approaches to school reform for the educational opportunities of
              students attending two urban high schools. It will employ both qualitative
              (archival, ethnographic, interview) and quantitative (student- and school-level
              surveys) data and methods to model the relationship between school and
              community resources and their effects on students' educational outcomes.
