Title       : MAPP: A Matrix Architecture for More Effective Process Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a9900204

Award Number: 9900204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331094             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline C. Hayes hayes@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development of a matrix architecture
              that organizes the information, activities and decisions used by automated
              computer planners in generating process plans. In particular, the work will
              focus on integration of fixture and setup planning tasks for machined prismatic
              parts.  It is a major challenge to organize process planning activities in an
              effective manner because many planning sub-tasks, such as setup and fixture
              planning, are tightly interrelated.  Strict sequential ordering of such
              subtasks often leads to suboptimal planning decisions.  In this work, the goal
              is to provide an architecture that allows solutions to interrelated planning
              subtasks to be incrementally developed, interleaved, and information shared
              between them.  This will allow decisions in each subtask to influence each
              other, resulting in choices that make more sense in the context of the plan as
              a whole.  The work will entail development of efficient representations for
              multiple possible part shapes, setups and fixturing options, and use of least
              commitment techniques for increased incremental plan development.  The
              effectiveness of these principles will be implemented and assessed in a
              manufacturing planner for 3 and 5 axis milling.  The work will focus on
              prismatic parts for a wide variety of applications such as the aerospace, and
              automotive industries.
     If successful, this work will advance approaches
              to modeling and organization of process planning, providing a richer and more
              accurate representation.  Expected benefits include more effective process
              planning tools that make more informed global setup and fixturing decisions and
              trade-offs while reducing the need for re-planning cycles.  It is hoped that
              the availability of such tools will help process planners to create
              manufacturing plans more quickly, accurately, and with greater consistency,
              thus increasing the feasibility of small batch planning needed for just-in-time
              practices.

