Title       : An F-plasmid Tra Protein Linkage Map
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9900533

Award Number: 9900533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip M. Silverman silvermanp@omrf.ouhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Okla Medical Res Found
	      825 N.E. 13th Street
	      Oklahoma City, OK  73104    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1132,1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Silverman, Philip M.
MCB- 9900553
Abstract

	The long-term goal of this
              research is to elucidate the structural biology of conjugal DNA transfer
              between F+ and F- strains of Escherichia coli. Among several considerations
              that make this research both timely and important are the facts that conjugal
              DNA transfer is inextricably connected to the dissemination of antibiotic
              resistance and one of a growing number of mechanisms by which bacterial cells
              secrete macromolecules across their surface barriers. This research seeks to
              define how the DNA transfer (Tra) proteins encoded by the F plasmid are
              organized at the bacterial cell surface to create the organelle(s) that
              actually mediate DNA transfer. To simplify the project initially, the focus
              will be on the 15 or so Tra proteins (of about 30) that are required by F+
              cells to elaborate F-pili.  F-pili are filaments extending from the donor cell
              surface and required for the earliest, cell-cell contact stages of DNA
              transfer.  They are built from a single subunit, F-pilin, though more than a
              dozen other Tra proteins are required for F-pilus biogenesis or affect F-pilus
              structure or function without abolishing filament assembly. The organization
              and functions of these Tra proteins are not at all understood. The first
              specific aim of the research is to identify protein-protein interactions among
              these Tra proteins by yeast two-hybrid assay, with the goal of creating a Tra
              protein linkage map.  The second aim is to establish which of the interactions
              identified in yeast also occur in E. coli and are required for F-pilus
              biogenesis, with special attention paid to sets of Tra proteins suggested by
              two-hybrid assay to span the bacterial cell envelope. A combination of
              conditional (temperature-sensitive) interaction mutants, biochemical assays,
              and immunoelectron microscopy will be used to provide a secondary confirmation
              of the interactions predicted to occur by the linkage map in E. coli. The third
              specific aim of the research is to characterize selected Tra proteins,
              particularly those with purine nucleotide binding motifs, since these suggest
              specific biochemical functions. Biochemical and genetic approaches will be used
              to determine which, if either, of two Tra proteins with Walker box A motifs is
              an ATPase and, if so, whether or not this activity is essential for F-pilus
              biogenesis and function. 
	This research will address the structural aspects
              of conjugation, which is a fundamental process in bacteria.  The outcomes of
              this research may increase our understanding of the transfer of genetic
              material, including antibiotic resistance genes,  in nature and should provide
              insight into the protein interactions that are essential for F-pilus formation
              and function. 

