Title       : GOALI: Physically Realizable Magnetic Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9900159

Award Number: 9900159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. O'Sullivan jao@ee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Indeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              O'Sullivan
9900159

Integration issues for magnetic information systems are
              studied in terms of the impact of media, recording heads, and recording
              strategies on system performance.  Specifically, write-field gradient and
              rise-time effects, signal stability, demagnetizing and thermal effects, novel
              medium design, and probe technology will be examined.  System performance will
              be quantified through system capacity, signal to noise ratio, signal
              degradation over time, and impact on state-of-the-art data encoding strategies.
               The proposed work includes: quantifying the impact of applied fields, time,
              and temperature on read signals; expanding existing system simulations;
              developing experimental techniques to estimate parameters in our medium model;
              developing, simulating, and experimentally verifying models that relate system
              performance to medium and head models.  The work involves a unique interplay
              between experimental studies, simulations, and theoretical studies to assess
              impacts of component changes on system performance.  This broad research plan
              builds on years of research effort and the combination of the investigators'
              strengths.

Research at Washington University on magnetic information
              processing has been a detailed study of the physics of magnetic recording
              system components, coupled with information theoretic analysis that views
              magnetic information storage and retrieval as a communications system, and with
              model-based evaluation of system performance.  This work, together with
              cognizance of new results, techniques, and tools as they appear, yields
              insights into the limits imposed on information processing capacity by the
              physics of system components.  Such knowledge can point to new approaches not
              subject to present limits, and serves to assess their promise and prospects. As
              researchers continue to propose both evolutionary and radically new magnetic
              recording system designs, the utility of and need for a versatile and reliable
              guide among the many options and directions is apparent.  This proposal builds
              on research previously funded by NSF through the NCR and ECS programs, and
              funded by NSIC, ARPA, Department of Commerce (ATP), and industry to put
              together a systems-oriented research program in magnetic information
              systems.

Central to much of this work is the measurement, modeling, and
              analysis of waveforms resulting from the magnetic microstructure of the medium.
               This microstructure effectively processes the written signal, and the
              synthesis of new systems should be guided in part by this processing.  The
              medium magnetization is peak-limited, nonlinear, hysteretic, and granular.  The
              very ability to retain information recorded also ultimately limits a medium's
              potential performance.  The dependence of system performance on varying
              fundamental medium parameters such as exchange coupling, anisotropy energy,
              granularity, and film thickness will be pursued.  Using more powerful
              analytical tools to model these medium effects, the performance of systems
              designed to compensate for repeatable medium noise effects will be quantified. 
              Signal degradation due to applied field, time, and temperature, is quantified
              using unique experiments developed using the magnetic force microscope arid
              recording testers at Washington University.

A physically based simulation of
              magnetic recording systems, including media, read heads, and write heads has
              been developed.  This computational model forms a bridge between theoretical
              and experimental research.  Many of its features have been verified by
              comparison of its simulations with VSM and spin stand measurements, including
              some fairly detailed recording procedures.  The model has now reached a stage
              of development where it is envisaged as a tool for system synthesis.  As the
              tool is refined, it must be kept modular so that new head designs, new media,
              and new signal processing blocks may be incorporated easily, and their
              interactions evaluated.  It must retain an ability to simulate single
              realizations of media and corresponding waveforms, and to run Monte-Carlo
              simulations to predict system level performance for a variety of performance
              metrics.  This model will be expanded: to predict signal dependence on applied
              fields, time, and temperature; to include current communications signal
              processing techniques used and proposed for magnetic recording channels; to
              include perpendicular and patterned media models; and to incorporate models for
              probes such as the magnetic force microscope.
***

