Title       : Collaborative Research: Did the Laurentine Ice Sheet Control Abrupt Climate
               Change?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9900477

Award Number: 9900477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399549             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence J. Hughes terry.hughes@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Fastook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a collaborative project with the University of Maine and Ohio State
              University.  The Principal Investigators will model the late glacial Laurentide
              Ice Sheet from near steady-state equilibrium at - 25,000 BP (years before
              present), through reversible stadial/interstadial transitions associated with
              Laurentide iceberg outbursts (Heinrich events 2 and 1), and across the
              threshold of irreversible Laurentide collapse after the last iceberg outburst
              at - 1 1,000 BP (Heinrich event 0).  The goals are to determine if ice-sheet
              changes could have triggered climate changes by abrupt ice sheet change and to
              investigate the structure of these changes.  The Principal Investigators will
              isolate mechanisms of abrupt change over hundreds of years in the ice sheet
              that are large enough to trigger climate changes captured as time "snapshots"
              by coupled global and regional atmospheric climate models.  Specific modeling
              tasks are: 1) to provide the climate settings surrounding the Laurentide Ice
              Sheet at "snapshots" of time during this late glacial period.  This includes
              the wind field over the ice sheet, proglacial lakes along the border, the
              fine-resolution mesoscale climate of North America, and global climate; 2) to
              provide the basal boundary conditions that, together with the internal flow and
              temperature fields, are used to calculate the basal mass balance.  This
              includes the pattern of basal temperatures, melting and freezing rates, and the
              associated subglacial hydrology; 3) to model the Laurentide Ice Sheet basal
              thermal, hydrological, and mechanical conditions within the imposed and basal
              boundary constraints for the chosen timeframe; and 4) to determine whether
              modeling will isolate mechanisms of abrupt change that allow rapid advance and
              retreat of Laurentide ice, with areal, elevation, and volume changes large
              enough to trigger climate changes that are captured by our "snapshots" of
              regional and global climate.

This project has significance for educational
              outreach and the possible behavior of present-day ice sheets.  The education
              outreach program will be interactive with high school students.  They will be
              able to manipulate the major variables so that they can view three-dimensional
              computer simulations of how the Laurentide Ice Sheet responds to each variable.
               This program will be disseminated on the world-wide web.  If fluctuations in
              the Laurentide Ice Sheet triggered climate changes, then the possibility exists
              that present-day ice sheets covering Greenland and Antarctica could trigger
              similar climate changes, with major social, economic, and political
              consequences.  A way to assess this possibility is to understand the internal
              instability mechanisms that could have caused abrupt changes in Laurentide ice
              extent, and to tie them firmly to known late glacial climate changes.





