Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Urban Commitments to Greenhouse Gas Emissions
               Reduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9900876

Award Number: 9900876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7312               (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Angel dangel@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              For more than a decade, a popular slogan among environmentalists has been "Think
              Globally, Act Locally."  The potential viability of this advice has been
              assessed in geographic research recently through economic and political
              analyses of the character and impact of local actions as they become manifest
              at a range of other geographic scales.  This doctoral dissertation research
              project will assess local community efforts to reduce global environmental
              change through participation in the Climate Change Prevention campaign, an
              program through which local governments promote local initiative to reduce
              greenhouse-gas emissions.  This project will consist of a set of parallel case
              studies in Seattle, Minneapolis, and Tucson.  In addition to analyses of local
              political, economic, and environmental conditions within each community,
              in-depth interviews will be conducted with local environmental, commercial, and
              government leaders.  The theoretical value of this project will be evident in
              its contributions toward a deeper understanding of how locally oriented,
              urban-based political movements can address global-scale problems.  It also
              will explore whether commitments by cities to lower greenhouse-gas emissions
              represent a breakthrough in the political economy of emissions abatement
              through new coalitions of environmentalists, commercial interests, and city
              government officials that have formed to address the demands of economic
              development and environmental protection.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.


