Title       : Environmentally-Assisted Fatigue Crack Growth in Concrete
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9900064

Award Number: 9900064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48565              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred B. Soboyejo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Noriko Katsube  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Winston O. Soboyejo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9102,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed program will develop a multiparameter probabilistic
              fracture
mechanics and finite element framework for the prediction of fatigue
              crack
growth in a selected grade of concrete. Fatigue crack growth
              experiments
will be used to establish a fracture mechanics framework for the
              prediction
of fatigue crack growth in concrete as a function of multiple
              mechanical
driving forces. The results will be synthesized into a single
              multiparameter
equation using multiple linear regression techniques. The
              Principal
Investigators will also use funds from the proposed program to
              continue
their outreach and teaching programs to minority engineering
              students,
initiated with NSF support over the past few years. At the graduate
              level, a
new college-wide course will be introduced on Probabilistic
              Engineering
Methods for the Analysis of Failure using examples from the
              Principal
Investigators' prior work on fatigue, fracture, creep, and wear of
              structral
materials. The proposed program will, therefore, contribute
              significantly to
teaching and research in the area of engineering mechanics
              and materials.
Furthermore, it willl establish a new methodolgy for the
              combined assessment
of the effects of multiple parameters on fatigue crack
              growth in concrete.
The resulting single multiparameter equation could form
              the basis for the
development of a fracture-mechanics based approach for the
              prediction of
fatigue crack growth in concrete structures. It could also
              establish a
framework for future research on the effects of concrete chemistry
              and
microstructure on fatigue crack growth. This could result ultimately in
              the
design of concrete compositons and microstructures with better fatigue
              crack
growth resistance than existing grades of concrete. The optimization
              of
concrete composition and microstructure could also lead eventually to
              lower
life cycle costs and improved durability of concrete structures
              and
infrastructure.


