Title       : Quantum Foundations and Information Theory Using Consistent Histories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9900755

Award Number: 9900755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Griffiths rgrif@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A number of unresolved paradoxes were left over from the development of quantum
              mechanics in the 1920's and 1930's.  While these have not prevented the
              application of quantum theory to a large number of different problems in
              physics and chemistry, they make it hard for students to learn the subject, and
              might suggest that there is some logical incoherence in quantum mechanics as
              currently understood.  These paradoxes, and the associated nonlocal influences
              which they are often thought to imply, will be studied using some relatively
              new ideas coming out of the consistent histories formulation of quantum theory,
              an extension of standard quantum mechanics which allows it to be applied in a
              consistent way to sequences of events involving three or more successive times.
               The study will focus on whether these purported nonlocal influences are real,
              or result from failing to apply quantum ideas in a way which is consistent with
              the basic mathematics which underlies quantum theory.
	Standard quantum theory
              makes use of density matrices to provide a statistical description of a quantum
              system. However, the physical interpretation of density matrices is not very
              clear.  This will be studied by regarding density matrices as just one aspect
              of a more general formulation of quantum statistical mechanics made possible by
              the use of consistent history methods.  In this context, certain extensions to
              standard density matrix theory that are used in quantum optics and atomic
              physics will be taken into account.  Advances in this area will be of value for
              both quantum foundations and quantum information theory.
	Quantum information
              theory is concerned with developing the conceptual and mathematical tools
              needed when using quantum effects for purposes of transmitting quantum states,
              quantum cryptography, and quantum computation.  Mathematical methods which play
              a central role in many topics in quantum information theory will be studied by
              looking at simple examples, and looking for properties which can be shown to
              hold in more general situations.  In addition, the problem of improving
              efficiency in quantum communication and quantum computers will be addressed
              using ideas based upon consistent histories.

