Title       : Dissertation Research: Individual Differences in Attachment Behavior of
               Free-Ranging Rhesus Macaques and Their Social and Cogitive Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9900939

Award Number: 9900939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marina Cords mc51@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bowlby's original formulation of attachment behavior relied heavily on ethology,
              especially nonhuman primate studies.  Shedding light on behaviors by analyzing
              nonhuman primate behavior, especially in naturalistic settings, is one of the
              longstanding goals of ethological studies. This study of free-ranging rhesus
              macaques will further our understanding of the lasting effects of infant
              attachment behavior and the extent to which evolution may have limited an
              infant's ability to choose individuals other than its mother as a secure base
              in emergencies or during day-to-day exploration of the social and physical
              environment. Specifically, we will test whether: (1) individual differences in
              early infant-mother attachment bonds influence certain cognitive assessments
              and social behaviors that can be expected to be vital to an individual
              throughout its life-span, and (2) whether infants choose among alternative
              secure bases and risk-reducers or rely exclusively on their mothers for these
              functions.
The project develops methods for measuring infants' abilities to
              assess risk, to choose among monkeys that might reduce risk to the infants, and
              to engage in exploration of the social and physical environment.  These
              measures will be made throughout infancy and related to individual differences
              in secure base use to determine whether differences in secure base use predict
              later differences in these cognitive and social abilities.  To measure
              individual differences in secure base use traditional ethological sampling
              methods will be compared with scores on a Q-sort procedure recently modified to
              assess secure base use in macaques and the two procedures are assessed for
              efficiency and reliability.  The study population is the free-ranging
              population of rhesus macaques on Cayo Santiago, Puerto Rico.  All monkeys are
              individually recognizable and their genealogies known; their relative ranks
              will be determined during the study.
Our results are expected to increase
              understanding of the sources and significance of individual differences in
              secure base use.  Methods developed to identify individuals that act as secure
              bases and to evaluate the quality of secure base use will enable us to explore
              whether and when individuals other than mothers serve as secure bases.

