Title       : Photodissociation Dynamics of Small Molecules: Collisionless and Collisional
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9900745

Award Number: 9900745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $521000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanna Reisler REISLER@USC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hanna Reisler of the University of Southern California is supported by the
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to continue her studies of the
              unimolecular and bimolecular dynamics of open shell molecular species such as
              free radicals and electronically excited molecules that react via multiple
              pathways.  Photoinitiated unimolecular decomposition of molecules and radicals
              relevant to processes in the atmosphere will be examined, emphasizing
              nonadiabatic transitions, competitive pathways, correlated distributions, and
              the dependence of branching ratios on excitation energy.  State-to-state
              studies will be extended to larger molecules, important in a variety of
              environments, where pathways are controlled by several multidimensional
              potential energy surfaces.  The photofragment velocity map imaging technique
              will be exploited and further developed to afford simultaneous product
              resolution in the mass, frequency, velocity, and angular domains.  The systems
              chosen for photodissociation studies include halomethyl and nitrogen trioxide
              radicals, and a weakly bound species such as nitric oxide dimers.  As well,
              infrared laser-induced vibrational predissociation of ammonia dimers (such as
              ammonia-carbene and ammonia-acetylene) will be examined by imaging techniques. 
               

Recent advances in laser and detection methodologies are providing the
              technical capability to achieve understanding of complex chemical reaction
              systems that have potential environmental and technological importance.  The
              present effort capitalizes on these new technologies, to examine in microscopic
              detail the chemistry of molecules that can react by competing pathways when
              energy is added to them by the absorption of light. This research project is
              additionally expected to provide broad training for graduate students and
              postdoctoral associates in the experimental and theoretical foundations of
              reaction dynamics.   

