Title       : Flexible Architectural Cores for Commerical Computing Systems: A
               University-Industry GOALI Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9900605

Award Number: 9900605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196909             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Lilja lilja@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven VanderWiel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Commercial computing workloads, such as on-line transaction
processing,
              file-serving, data mining, and web-serving, currently
represent about 85
              percent of the overall market for large computing
systems.  Nevertheless, much
              of the computer architecture research
to date has focused on improving the
              capability of computer systems
to access, process, and store the large arrays
              of data common to
numerically-intensive workloads.  The implicit assumption
              has been
that all types of computer systems would benefit from
              the
architectural innovations developed for these applications.  To
address
              this disparity between the economic importance of commercial
computing systems
              and the traditional architecture development focus
on technical computing
              systems, this project is developing the
Flexible Architectural Cores for
              Commercial Computing Systems
processor architecture.  This new architecture is
              based on the
observation that the constantly changing behavior in a
              commercial
computing environment causes different architectural innovations
              to
be applicable during different phases of execution.  A unique aspect
of
              this project that will significantly enhance its relevance to
commercial
              computing environments is the close collaboration of the
IBM Corporation's
              commercial microprocessor development group in
Rochester, Minnesota.  This
              project will make substantial
contributions to educational and human resource
              development through
graduate student research and interaction with
              industry.



