Title       : Technology and Modernity: The Empirical Turn--Proposal for an International
               Research Workshop, November 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9900894

Award Number: 9900894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20933              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Misa misa@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5948,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***
SBR 99-00894
Misa, Thomas J.  (Illinois Institute of Technology)

This
              workshop will bring together two largely-separate communities of scholars, and
              will seek to create a new field that examines the co-construction of technology
              and modernity. While the term "modern technology" is a staple of popular
              discourse, the scholars who have most closely examined technology and
              modernity, respectively, have proceeded largely in isolation from each other.
              Scholars with backgrounds in philosophy, anthropology, cultural studies, and
              social theory have created an elaborate and theoretically dense literature that
              we may call "modernity studies."  Meanwhile, historians, sociologists, and
              certain economists have created a large empirically grounded literature in
              "technology studies."  This workshop will confront the barriers that have
              separated these communities (principally disciplinary jargons and differences
              in the level of analysis) and develop a joint research agenda. The sustained
              intellectual work necessary for such an ambitious, international
              agenda-building effort will require a multi-day workshop, carefully prepared in
              advance, and significant follow-up activities. We are seeking NSF support to
              enable 12 U.S. scholars to participate in this effort.

We will hold the
              workshop at the University of Twente, The Netherlands, in November 1999. Twente
              is especially well situated to be the center for these activities. Not only
              does the university have comfortable, accessible conference facilities, its
              departments of Systematic Philosophy and STS have in the last three years
              grappled with these same vexing issues (of disciplinary jargon and levels of
              analysis) in developing a joint research theme in "technology and modernity." A
              semester-long seminar on this theme during Spring 1997 (coordinated by Misa)
              helped define the most promising intellectual problems for the workshop we
              propose here. One finding was a growing awareness, in both the modernity and
              technology studies communities, of the promise of cross-fertilization. A
              workshop designed to catalyze international collaboration between these two
              communities is timely. Such an effort, we believe, will have ramifications not
              only for how we as scholars understand technology's place in the modern world
              but also for how we as citizens may manage technology in society.

***

