Title       : Employee Training and Assignment for Team-Based Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9900057

Award Number: 9900057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald G. Askin ron@sie.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant supports the development of a mathematical model and solution
              procedure for the assignment of workers to specific tasks in a system composed
              of manufacturing cells.  Given a specification of worker skill
profiles,
              machine groups, and part families, the model will determine a training plan,
              team assignment, and workload schedule for each worker to minimize total
              training cost while satisfying all skill requirements and
achieving team
              synergy in each cell.  Several solution techniques will be developed and
              tested.  The techniques will span a range of computational and implementation
              complexity.  General purpose random search heuristics
will be compared to
              problem specific partial enumeration heuristics based on filtered-beam search
              and problem structure based decomposition strategies.  The solution procedures
              will be tested on problems developed with input from users of cells and
              consultants on team formation.  Procedures will be compared on the basis of
              computational efficiency and quality of solution.  Finally, the results will be
              used to extend existing models for cell design to incorporate the process of
              worker assignment and operational strategies.
     The results of this
              research will lead to improved performance, both in terms of quality and cost,
              of team-based manufacturing systems.  The goal is to make optimal use of the
              existing pool of labor skills while
determining the most effective manner for
              further developing and utilizing human resources.  Although the model is
              formulated and tested for the environment of cellular manufacturing, the model
              can be applied to general team formation and training problems and thus
              constitutes a basic contribution to human resource management as well as
              manufacturing.  In addition, by comparing enumeration based heuristics, random
              search heuristics, and decomposition strategies, the results will contribute to
              the general body of knowledge on solving hard mixed-integer problems.



