Title       : Applied Analysis of the Navier-Stokes and Related Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2001       
File        : a9900635

Award Number: 9900635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Doering doering@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This fundamental research in mathematical physics and applied mathematics
              focuses on the challenges presented by the incompressible Navier-Stokes and
              related equations of fluid dynamics.  The Navier-Stokes equations constitute
              the basic mathematical model for fluid flow, and are believed to contain
              turbulent dynamics among their solutions.  Turbulence in fluid mechanics
              remains one of the outstanding challenges for theoretical physics and applied
              mathematics with important applications in many fields of science and
              engineering.  The work is carried out via modern applied and numerical analysis
              by the principal investigator and a mathematics graduate student doing doctoral
              dissertation work.
The project has three specific objectives.  The first is to
              extend a rigorous technique for deriving theoretical bounds on turbulent flow
              quantities to new applications for heat transport in Marangoni convection, and
              more generally to turbulence in fluid systems with imposed stress boundary
              conditions.  Second, we aim to extend the background field method for
              applications to unbounded flow domains to derive theoretical limits on
              turbulent drag coefficients for flows past a compact body.  It remains an open
              problem, for example, to establish a limit on the drag experienced by a sphere
              moving at high speed through a viscous fluid which is both mathematically
              rigorous and physically relevant.  The third objective is to investigate small
              length scales appearing in turbulent flows by means of a set of dynamical
              equations derived for an analytic extension of solutions of the Navier-Stokes
              equations.  Mathematical results in this area will produce strict lower bounds
              on the small length scales associated with high wavenumber exponential decay of
              the Fourier power spectrum in turbulent velocity fields.

