Title       : Active Control for Large-Scale Dynamic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a9900116

Award Number: 9900116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Alleyne alleyne@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Name: Andrew Alleyne
PI Institution: University of Illinois,
              Urbana-Champaign
Proposal Number: CMS-9900116
Proposal Title: Active Control
              for Large-Scale Dynamic Systems
Project Abstract:
The goal of this research
              project is to develop a fundamentally sound approach to the active vibration
              control of large scale dynamics systems.  The motivation is to isolate large
              dynamic structures from external disturbances; particularly large, brief
              disturbances.  Examples of these would be underwater shock events on submarines
              or bomb blast events on buildings.  The desire is to minimize the damage done
              to crucial components by actively isolating an internal structure from a rigid
              external structure. In doing so, this investigation will develop the overall
              control strategy but will also pay close attention to the actuation scheme used
              to carry out the control strategy.  The actuation scheme turns out to be an
              extremely non-trivial and essential component to the overall control strategy. 
              The significance and impact of this project are increased damage tolerance and
              survivability of the internal structure.  This would lead to increased safety
              for the occupants as well as a reduction in the cost of preparing the internal
              structure for extremely high acceleration levels.
The focus of this project
              will be on systems that are large in size, necessitating an actuation scheme
              that is able to provide high forces in a rapid manner.  Electronically
              controlled fluid actuation will be chosen as the appropriate technology.  The
              project will involve a blend of theoretical and experimental activities.  New
              ways and combinations of controlling nonlinear systems will be analyzed and
              developed.  These will then be tested and implemented on a vibration isolation
              testbed that will be developed under the first phase of the project duration.

