Title       : JASMINE: The Joint Air-Sea Monsoon Interaction Experiment: A Pilot Study of
               Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction During Active and Break Phases of the Summer
               Monsoon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9900710

Award Number: 9900710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anjuli S. Bamzai                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Houze houze@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed experiment is a collaborative two-year study of the air-sea fluxes,
              air-sea interaction, convection and the upper ocean response to the variations
              of the summer monsoon as it oscillates between active and the lulls in between
              (break periods). A pilot study, the joint air-sea monsoon interaction
              experiment (JASMINE) will conduct an oceanographic and meteorological survey of
              the Bay of Bengal region. Air-sea fluxes, the state of the atmosphere and
              convection within the atmosphere will be determined in a region that has been
              observed to be a centroid of intraseasonal variability in the summer monsoon.
              JASMINE is a collaborative project of the University of Washington, University
              of Hawaii, and the University of Colorado.

This  component of the
              collaboration will examine the form of convection and its role in the
              intraseasonal and large scale variability. Scientific questions regarding the
              role of convective-large-scale interaction, active and break phases of the
              monsoon system responses to convection, predictability of  convection over the
              Indian Ocean, and role of diurnal cycle in modulating convection activity in
              the Indian Ocean, will be addressed. 

The study is important since gathering
              and subsequent analysis of a comprehensive set of data, will yield insights
              into the air-sea interactions during break and active periods of  the  monsoon.
              The accurate prediction of monsoon onset and monsoon rainfall is a scientific
              challenge that also has enormous economic consequences.


