Title       : Health Cognitions Conference, to be held in December 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9900702

Award Number: 9900702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11286              (Estimated)
Investigator: Meg Gerrard mgerrard@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick X. Gibbons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The belief that cognitions play an important role in health behavior has a
              long-standing history in social psychology. In his initial statement of
              dissonance theory, Festinger (1957) discussed the predicament of a hypothetical
              smoker who had recently learned that smoking was harmful. Festinger proposed
              that individuals who choose to continue smoking under these circumstances could
              deal with this information in two ways: They could deny the relation between
              their behavior and potential negative consequences, or they could engage in
              various cognitive strategies that would enable them to continue smoking (e.g.,
              decide that the benefits of smoking outweigh the danger or that the risk is
              negligible in comparison with that of other activities). Either way, the
              cognition is likely to have a significant impact on the smokers' behavior and
              health. The last decade has seen an explosion of research on cognitive
              processes, like those described by Festinger, that are related to health
              behavior. In this domain some researchers have primarily addressed pressing
              societal problems, such as the HIV epidemic, while others have been primarily
              interested in theoretical issues. Until relatively recently, however, few
              social psychologists have designed research that served the dual purposes of
              making fundamental contributions to the development of theory relevant to
              health cognitions, while generating knowledge that is likely to have
              significant "real world" applications. This conference will bring together a
              select group of 15 to 20 established scholars to critically examine the theory,
              methods, empirical data, and applications of this relatively new and rapidly
              expanding area of scholarship, plus five promising junior investigators
              interested in health cognitions. There are three primary objectives of the
              conference. The first is to provide a forum for integrating the scientific
              literature on the relation between health cognitions and health behaviors. The
              second objective is to focus attention on methodologically rigorous research
              that has made both applied and theoretical contributions, thus promoting these
              studies as models for future research. The third objective is to provide an
              opportunity for junior investigators to interact with established scholars in
              this new field of health cognitions. In addition, conference participants will
              contribute to an edited volume characterized by this dual goal of theory
              development and meaningful application that should have a significant impact on
              the development of future research on health cognitions.


