Title       : How Do Humans Learn to Control Unstable Objects? Studies of Model-Based Planning
               and State-Dependant Force Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9900684

Award Number: 9900684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ferdinando A. Mussa-Ivaldi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher D. Mah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rehab Inst of Chicago
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60611    /   -

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900684
Mussa-Ivaldi
While significant progress has been made in our
              understanding of the mechanisms for executing coordinated arm movements, little
              is known yet about the sensory-motor processes involved in the skillful
              manipulation of objects.  Common activities such as handling silverware and
              brushing teeth involve the control of potentially unstable objects.  The term
              'instability' refers to situations in which small deviations in one's actions
              can have radical consequences.  For example, a small tilt of the hand can spill
              the contents of a spoon.  The proposed research will study human learning and
              performance of experimental manipulation tasks based on simple unstable objects
              implemented by means of robotic simulation.

Our investigations are aimed at
              better understanding the interplay between feedback mechanisms and
              preprogrammed actions in dealing with unstable objects.  The work is organized
              around three specific aims.  First, the proposed experiments will test whether
              internal models are formed during object manipulation, while maintaining the
              equilibrium of unstable objects.  Earlier studies of arm control suggest that
              the central nervous system makes use of internal models of limb dynamics in
              order to derive the neuromuscular commands needed to carry out successful
              reaching movements, but it is not known whether similar strategies are used for
              object manipulation.  Second, when handling an object we receive both visual
              information and information conveyed by the mechanical interaction between the
              hand and the object.  This information is essential to generate the appropriate
              corrective actions but it may not be used in the same way as learning
              progresses.  The proposed experiments will test the hypothesis that subjects
              become less reliant on visual monitoring of the object and more reliant on
              automatic corrections produced by muscle and reflex mechanics after attaining
              proficiency in a manipulation task. In a final set of experiments we will seek
              to determine effective training strategies for learning to handle unstable
              objects.

We expect that this work will advance our understanding of how
              healthy people handle unstable objects.  The achievement of this goal will
              provide a richer knowledge base for rehabilitation of motor functions lost to
              stroke and other neurological diseases.


