Title       : Coordination Processes and Awareness Support in Dynamic Work Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2001  
File        : a9900406

Award Number: 9900406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan Xiao yxiao@umaryland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samer Faraj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony F. Norcio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Colin F. Mackenzie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computation and communication technologies have the potential to improve
              coordination in dynamic task and team situations. To realize that potential a
              deep understanding of the coordination processes used by teams is required.
              This project investigates the coordination processes used by distributed teams
              of experts operating in a highly dynamic work domain -- a trauma patient
              resuscitation unit.  The main objective is to develop a framework for modeling
              coordination processes by team members in dynamic, multi-tasking, highly
              stressful environments.  An interdisciplinary team with wide-ranging research
              backgrounds including team performance, information technologies, medicine,
              nursing, health care informatics, management sciences, biomedical engineering
              and ethnography will conduct the project.  Qualitative and quantitative methods
              including ethnographic studies, surveys and interviews will be used to capture
              coordination processes in situ in trauma center settings.  The project will
              result in a better understanding of the role of various communication media and
              how each medium is used in dynamic work settings to achieve work coordination
              and maintain adequate awareness. A set of design principles will be developed
              that can guide the deployment of communication-computation systems in domains
              where tasks are highly dynamic and accomplished by multi-disciplinary
              teams.


