Title       : Knowledge Transfer and Reuse in Multiclassifier Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9900353

Award Number: 9900353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joydeep Ghosh ghosh@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900353
Ghosh

Simultaneous and coordinated use of multiple learning
              components is often needed for satisfactory and robust solutions to difficult
              problems involving learning, adaptation, recognition/classification and dynamic
              control.  In popular multi-learner approaches such as ensembles, Bayesian model
              averagers and mixtures of experts, each component model tries to solve
              (possibly localized versions of) the same task.  However, in practice, one is
              often faced by a series of (possibly related) tasks, or a task whose nature
              changes substantially with time due to nonstationarities, new data/sensors or
              new domain knowledge.  Moreover, these tasks are solved at different points in
              time, and at any given time, we may know about what future tasks will need to
              be solved.

This project will study how existing "support" models can be
              leveraged to help solve new, and possible related tasks.  It will focus on
              classification problems, though many of the approaches extend to a much wider
              variety of tasks.  Issues to be examined include:  (i) how to select from among
              several support models and measure their relevance vis a vis the new task; (ii)
              transfer/reuse mechanisms that only use input/output behavior of support
              models, and (iii) mechanisms that exploit internal structural information of
              support models.  Certain special issues that arise when dealing with sequence
              classifiers will also be investigated.  The main goal is to exploit knowledge
              encapsulated in support models for quicker, more accurate learning with fewer
              new training examples, along with better understanding of the new
              problem.

This project will also establish a benchmarking facility in the
              proposed areas for the benefit of the research community, based on engineering
              related datasets.  This work will facilitate the application of more versatile
              and powerful multi-component approaches to engineering smart, adaptive systems.
               It will also create an evolving knowledge base of support models that are
              developed collaboratively and are reusable for future tasks.
***

