Title       : Earthquake-Resistant Design and Remediation of Lifelines and Deep Foundations
               Subjected to Lliquefaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9900231

Award Number: 9900231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Pierre Bardet bardet@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The 1995 Hyogoken-Nanbu earthquake claimed more than 5500 lives and caused
              damage in excess of 100 billion dollars.  Gas, water and electric utility lines
              ruptured.  Bridges and over-passes on highways, railroads and subways
              collapsed.  High-rise residential and office structures were severely damaged. 
              Liquefied soils settled and spread laterally along the coast and in docks,
              piers, sea walls and quays.  Kilometers of docks and quay walls tilted and
              settled both at the coast and in the man-made islands, Port Island and Rokko
              Island.  The entire port of Kobe was almost completely destroyed.  This urban
              disaster resulted from an earthquake striking directly within a densely
              populated urban area.  A similar devastation was fortunately avoided in the San
              Fernando Valley in California as the 194 Northridge earthquake released its
              energy away from populated areas.  

This award is part of a collaborative
              effort involving a team of US and Japanese researchers.  On the US side, the
              team includes professors and students from Cornell University, Rensselaer
              Polytechnic Institute, and the University of Southern California (USC). 
              Several US government and industrial organizations have also agreed to
              cooperate in the proposed work, including, the Multidisciplinary Center for
              Earthquake Engineering Research (MCEER), Los Angeles Department of Water and
              Power (LADWP), Pacific Gas & Electric Company, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
              U.S. Geological Survey, and Woodward-Clyde Consultants.  On the Japanese side,
              the team consists of professors and students from Kyoto University, Tokyo
              Institute of Technology, University of Tokyo, Waseda University, and Yamaguchi
              University.  Several Japanese government and industrial organizations will also
              contribute to the research effort.  

The main objective of the proposed team
              research is to investigate the effects of liquefaction-induced deformation on
              foundations and lifelines systems in the 1994 Northridge and 1995
              Hyogoken-Nanbu earthquakes, and to propose engineering solutions that mitigate
              these devastating effects in future in earthquakes.  The findings of the
              research team will contribute to the implementation of performance-based design
              in geotechnical and structural engineering in the United States and
              Japan.

The specific objectives of the research at USC are (1) in-depth
              documentation of selected case histories of liquefaction-induced deformation of
              improved and non-improved grounds in the US and Japan, (2) modeling of
              liquefaction-induced ground deformation, (3) laboratory investigation of
              post-liquefied soil behavior, (4) constitutive modeling and finite element
              analysis of selected case histories and centrifuge experiments, and (5)
              Internet dissemination of research results.  The USC research is focused on the
              analytical and experimental modeling of liquefaction-induced ground
              deformation; it is an essential and original component of the collaborative
              research program, and is expected to yield results that will impact not only
              research but also engineering practice. 

