Title       : Performance and Reliability Tradeoffs of State of the Art SOI CMOS Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9900464

Award Number: 9900464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitrios E. Ioannou dioannou@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9900464
Ioannou
The proposed research integrates five major subtasks, designed
              to conduct a comprehensive investigation of design tradeoffs between
              performance and reliability of state of the art n- and p-channeI SOT MOSFET's.
              Experimental studies will be done on samples provided by Honeywell, Motorola,
              and Naval Research Laboratory, and simulations with the SILVACO package. Two
              Ph.D. students will work in this program under the supervision of the
              P1.
(a)	The recent discovery and understanding of the opposite channel based
              injection (OCBI) phenomenon, under our previous NSF grant, places us in a
              unique position to answer an important remaining question regarding the value
              of the exponent n, of the interface generation power law Dit(t) = Atn.
              Specifically, we have established with the help of OCBI that unipolar injection
              leads to n=O.25 and bipolar to n=0.5. We now propose to examine if this is due
              to the absence or presence of a coulombic barrier, or it is a result of
              different electrochemical reactions.
(b)	Bulk BC PMOSFETs are cheaper to
              fabricate (single poly) and have better performance, but suffer from DIBL
              effects and increased hot carrier degradation compared to SC PMOSFETs. We
              propose to conduct a comparative study of these tradeoffs for S0I
              PMOSFETs.
(c)	Narrow channel bulk MOSFETs suffer from higher hot carrier
              degradation than wide channel ones, but several labs (including ours) have
              observed that the opposite is true for SOI. We propose to examine why, and
              suggest suitable process improvements.
(d)	We propose to conduct an extensive
              study of the hot carrier reliability of 0.18 and 0.10 micron S0I MOSFETs,
              bearing in mind that in the case of bulk devices the worst case stress
              condition as the channel shrinks are reported to be different from the long
              channel case.
	(e)The dual-gate S0I MOSFET, where the channel region is
              independently controlled by self-aligned top and bottom gates, has been singled
              out in the NTRS report as holding much promise for future scaling down to 10
              nm. Because of the structural form of this device, OCBI is expected to be
              stronger and more complicated than in more conventional S0I structures, with
              important implications both for reliability and possible device applications.
              We therefore propose to carry out a comprehensive study of the OCBI phenomenon
              in the dual-gate SOI MOSFET.
***





