Title       : Modeling and Control of Closed Kinematic Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9900194

Award Number: 9900194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fathi H. Ghorbel ghorbel@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract: 
Closed kinematic chain mechanical systems promise advantages over
              open chains in terms of less moving inertia, faster and stiffer motion, and
              much better force-to-weight ratio. However, derivation of dynamic equations of
              motion for closed chain mechanisms suitable for controller design is still a
              challenge because of the complexity of the kinematics, dynamics, and control
              analyses. This research identifies the central difficulties in the modeling and
              control of these systems and provides an analytical framework to derive
              dynamics models appropriate for advanced model-based control laws. Two
              modeling-for-control approaches are investigated. In the first approach, a
              formulation of the dynamics equations of closed chain mechanisms in terms of
              independent generalized coordinates (reduced model) is developed. Methods to
              extend the wealth of control laws of open chains to closed chains while taking
              into consideration the local and implicit nature of the reduced model are
              considered. The second approach is to transform the Differential Algebraic
              Equations (DAE) describing closed kinematic chains into a singularly perturbed
              differential equation system with asymptotically stable fast dynamics. It
              follows that when a proper control design is made for the singularly perturbed
              system, then for a small value of an artificially introduced small parameter,
              the response of the controlled singularly perturbed system would be quite close
              to that of the controlled DAE system (closed chain mechanism). The techniques
              developed in this research potentially have applications to many other systems
              described by DAE. 
The educational objective of this research is to help
              introduce dynamic modeling and control of complex closed chain dynamical
              systems in the traditional dynamics and control courses and laboratories. In
              particular, a robotic device will be made accessible for control
              experimentation over the World Wide Web for a more effective dissemination of
              the results of this research and integration in control education. 


