Title       : Twinning in Single Crystal Steels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9900090

Award Number: 9900090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Huseyin Sehitoglu huseyin@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Orientation and stress state dependence of twinning is studied with novel
              experiments in materials with low stacking fault energy.  These materials
              include Hadfield and austenitic stainless steels with nitrogen additions and
              have enormous potential for applications where high strength, ultra-high strain
              hardening and high fracture strains are needed.  One of the unusual attributes
              of these steels is that during deformation an upward curcature in stress-strain
              curves develops.  Single crystal experiments that study this unusual strain
              hardening response will be coupled with mechanics modeling to explain the
              experimental findings.  The addition of nitrogen to these steels increases the
              deformation resistance and imparts beneficial properties.  The role of nitrogen
              will be clarified with experiments and in modeling efforts examining twin
              nucleation and twin-slip interaction.  The uniaxial stress-strain behavior of
              single crystals specimens will be determined as a function of crystal
              orientation, stress direction (tension and compression), maximum strain level
              and governing deformation mechanism.  Considerable tension-compresson asymmetry
              develops in these classes of materials because of directionality of twinning. 
              These results will be augmented with stress state experiments where hydrostatic
              stresses are systematically changed.  The sress state will decide the effective
              stacking fault energy hence the deformation behavior.  The effective stress
              required for onset of twinning.  These results will be augmeted with stress
              states experiments where dydrostatic stresses are systematically changed. 
              These stress state will decide the effective stacking fault energy hance the
              deformation behavior.  The effective stress required for onset of twinning will
              be determined as well as its variation with compressice hydrostatic stress. 
              Local strain field measurements using digital strain mapping techniques will be
              utilized to study the evolution of twin formation and propagation.  A
              specialized marker will be deposited on the specimen surface, then the motion
              of the markers will be tracked during the deformation experiments.  This
              technique allows the entire strain field on the specimen surface to be
              determined including local strain gradients.  Texture evolution measurements
              will establish the orientation changes with deformation  will help identify the
              activation of slip and twinning as a function of deformation.  A
              micro-mechancis modeling effort, incorporating the twin volume fraction and
              twin evolution, will be undertaken for predicting the stress-strain response as
              a function of orientation, stress state, and texture evolution.
