Title       : Integrated Fiber Optic Sensor for Condition Monitoring of Concrete and FRP
               Tendons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9900338

Award Number: 9900338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farhad Ansari fansari@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              INTEGRATED FIBER OPTIC SENSOR CONDITION MONITORING OF CONCRETE AND FRP TENDONS  
                                       ABSTRACT      9900338                                 
                                                                                             
                                       Fiber reinforced plastics (FRP) have been employed as
              an alternative to conventional steel reinforcement in concrete structures.  The
              primary attributes of FRP tendons are that of corrosion resistance reduced
              mass, and high tensile strength.  Despite the much higher strength to weight
              ratios exhibited by FRP tendons, there are a number of drawbacks that hinders
              their widespread usage.  In compare to the ductile elasto-plastic behavior of
              conventional steel reinforcement, the stress-strain response of FRP composites
              exhibit brittle behavior and are linear-elastic all the way to failure.  This
              issue effects serviceability, design and safety of FRP tendons in concrete
              elements.  This research program will focus attention into the development of
              an integrated fiber optic sensor system for condition monitoring of FRP bars. 
              The sensor will comprise of an optical fiber with embedded partial reflectors
              along its length.  An Optical Time Domain Reflectometer will be employed for
              interrogation of reflected optical signal from various regions of the
              structure.  The fiber optic sensor system will be developed through a
              comprehensive research program during which the following issues will be
              addressed:  (1) Practicality in terms of sensor confriguration for embeddment
              in concrete structures and simplicity of instrumentation during the condition
              monitoring stage.  (2) Capability for seimulations detection of fiber breakage,
              its location, and measurement of strain gradients along the length of the
              member in a distributed manner.  (3) Sensitivity in terms of strain amplitude
              and spatial resolution for characterization of damaged zone locations along the
              length of the FRP tendon.  (4) Ruggedness for long term use during the life
              cycle of the structure.  Performance of the proposed fiber optic system will be
              evaluated through an extensive experimental program involving quasi-static as
              well as fatigue loading of post-tensioned FRP beams.  The efficacy of optical
              fibers in detecting, locating and evaluation of progressive damage will be
              investigated.  A major portion of the project will involve evaluation of the
              system performance in terms of simultaneous detection of cracks emanating from
              different locations in beams.  Tests will be performed to determine the level
              of confidence that can be achieved in correlating the fiber optic data for
              early detection of cracks in the FRP tendons as well as the surrounding
              concrete.  The embedded optical fiber sensor will play a dual role.  It will be
              employed for condition monitoring of the structure in real-time and to warn of
              impending failures, and for establishment of a comprehensive database
              pertaining to the material and structural behavior and therefore facilitate
              development of more realistic designs of FRP structures.
