Title       : Deformation-Based Seismic Analysis and Design of Waterfront Retaining Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9900211

Award Number: 9900211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panos C. Dakoulas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Waterfront structures include gravity walls, sheet pile walls, and pile
              supported wharfs which are vulnerable to earthquake damage the response of such
              structures to strong ground shaking depends primarily on the complex
              soil-structure-foundation interaction and the undrained behavior of the
              foundation and backfill soils.  Current philosophy in the design of such system
              aims at limiting deformations of the supported structures to acceptable levels.
               Depending on their importance and function.

The objective of this research
              is to develop a deformation-based method of analysis for the seismic evaluation
              and design of waterfront structures.  The seismic behavior and damage of
              typical two-dimensional gravity walls and sheet pile walls that are vulnerable
              to excess pore water pressure buildup and liquefaction, will be investigated. 
              The performance of various ground improvement techniques using as criterion the
              predicted permanent deformation for different levels of ground shaking
              intensity and will provide guidelines for remediation optimization.  An
              effective-stress, nonlinear finite element method, coupled with boundary
              elements for accurate modeling of the energy radiation through outgoing waves
              will be used.  The foundation, backfill and near-field soils are modeled with a
              rigorous, efficient critical state model, that can predict densification, pore
              water pressure buildup, liquefaction and cyclic mobility in sands.  The
              numerical model can simulate successfully the generation, redistribution and
              dissipation of excess pore water pressures and reveal the deformational
              mechanisms leading to possible failure.  

The investigation will be
              performed in close collaboration with researchers from Shimizu Corporation,
              Japan and NTUA, Greece.  

This is an award supported under the 2nd year
              initiative, NSF 98-36 "US-Japan Urban Earthquake Disaster Mitigation
              Research."


