Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Quaternary Land Bridges in the Hawaiian Islands
               and Their Biotic Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9900933

Award Number: 9900933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9125               (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Elliott-Fisk dlelliottfisk@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Hawaiian archipelago provides an outstanding natural laboratory for
              biogeographic research.  Its extreme isolation, traceable landscape history,
              and unique biota provide a framework for scientific inquiry into the
              fundamental processes that have shaped its biosphere, thereby providing
              insights into biogeographic processes that have occurred in numerous other
              locales.  The Hawaiian islands are particularly well suited to analyses of the
              complex interplay among physical, biological, and human systems, because all
              three sets of systems have undergone considerable change from prehistoric time
              to the present.  Although many facets of current biogeographic relationships
              have been studied extensively, far less attention has been given to the ways
              that changing geologic and climatic conditions have influenced the evolution of
              natural landscapes on the islands.  This doctoral dissertation research project
              will determine how geologic and climate changes during the Quaternary period in
              the Maui Nui complex have influenced their biota.  A GIS-based model will be
              developed to trace the timing, duration, and general character of the Maiu Nui
              complex dating back to the time that the four islands of Maui, Moloka'i,
              Lana'i, and Kaho'olawe were united as one big island.  This model will be
              enhanced with the addition of paeloclimatic data, the compilation of detailed
              biogeographic data regarding flora, and the synthesis of existing biogeographic
              studies of the fauna of Maiu Nui to facilitate comparison with distributional
              patterns on other islands.  Particular attention will be given to the influence
              that previous land bridges among the present islands may have had on endemism,
              biodiversity, and the biotic similarity of species assemblages.  This project
              will provide new insights into the complex natural history of this unique part
              of the Hawaiian islands.  As such, it will enhance biogeographic theory
              regarding the interplay of changing physical and biological systems, and it
              will facilitate conservation efforts aimed at preserving complex biological
              systems with numerous rare and endangered taxa.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.
