Title       : A More Natural Programming Language for Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9900452

Award Number: 9900452
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad A. Myers bam@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert T. Corbett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Most children are not programmers but would like to create software that is
              similar to their favorite commercial applications, such as games and
              educational applications.  Today's programming environments make this too
              difficult.  The goals of this project are to study how children (fifth grade
              and older) reason about programming concepts, and then to create a new
              general-purpose programming language and environment for children that takes
              advantage of these findings.  All aspects of the new system will be thoroughly
              analyzed with usability techniques such as Cognitive Dimensions and user tests
              with children. The language will be general-purpose, in that it will not be
              limited to creating a particular kind of program.  It will be extensible,
              modular, scalable, and well-structured, so students can easily write programs
              that range from one line all the way up to many thousands of lines.  Unlike
              most current environments for children, the system will support the creation of
              complete and sophisticated programs.  The PI will exploit modern technologies
              to simplify the programming process, including direct manipulation and
              demonstrational techniques, programming environment technologies like structure
              editors, and mechanisms for extending programs by harnessing and reusing
              existing components.  There has not been a successful new programming language
              for children in many years.  Since the PI's  system will be based on empirical
              studies of how children think, it should have an excellent chance of allowing
              the majority of children (and, by extension, the general public) to create
              interesting and useful applications
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~NatProg

