Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Land Management in Mugu District, Nepal: Power,
               Cultural Practices, and Ecological Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9900788

Award Number: 9900788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9905               (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Sheppard shepp001@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9178,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although considerable attention has been devoted to environmental degradation in
              many parts of the world, scholarly examinations have shown that human
              modification of the natural environment occurs through a diverse array of
              processes, each of which must be considered within social, cultural, economic,
              political, and legal contexts of the locales where environmental change occurs.
               This is particularly true in the highlands of northwestern Nepal, where a
              range of land-management practices that have significantly altered vegetation
              patterns have evolved.  This doctoral dissertation research project will
              conduct case studies in two villages east of Lake Rara National Park in the
              Mugu District, linking analyses of social relations of power, including
              analyses of class, caste, and gender relations, with analyses of cultural
              practices and ecological conditions associated with different land-management
              practices.  A range of research approaches will be used, including interviews
              and focus groups, community map-making and transect walking, oral histories,
              analysis of government documents, aerial photo interpretation, and vegetation
              sampling.  Information gathered from these sources will be used to examine how
              social and power relations, cultural practices, and ecological conditions
              interact to influence land-management practices and resource use.  Attention
              also will be given to conflicts and consensus among different individuals and
              groups regarding the meanings of land and various land-use practices.  The
              dissertation, publications, and presentations resulting from this research
              project will contribute to understandings of the complex ways through which
              various aspects of human activity interact with each other and with natural
              phenomena to alter environmental conditions.  Because of its well-developed
              theoretical framework, these case studies will contribute to development,
              political ecology, and feminist literatures as well as to understandings of the
              human dimensions of global change.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.

