Title       : Maintained Systems Operating in a Random Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9900368

Award Number: 9900368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294326             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgia-Ann Klutke klutke@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for research on maintenance strategies for
              engineered systems that explicitly consider the environmental conditions in
              which the systems operate.  The current state of the art
              derives
inspection/repair/replacement times from lifetime distributions based
              on laboratory data.  There are several limitations to the use of lifetime data
              in maintenance planning.  For highly reliable devices, expensive devices,
and
              devices where accelerated testing is not feasible, lifetime data can be sparse.
               More importantly, operating conditions are often quite different from strictly
              controlled laboratory conditions.  In the field, devices degrade in response to
              uncontrolled (random) phenomena, such as electrical transients, heat and cold
              cycles, vibrations, and collisions. Consequently, lifetime estimates derived
              from laboratory data may have little value in establishing effective
              maintenance practices.  This work will develop and analyze theoretical and
              empirical models for system degradation driven by exogeneous random phenomena. 
              The following activities will be performed as part of this research:  (1) 
              computable expressions will be developed to describe the performance of
              maintained systems in random environments; (2)  improved maintenance strategies
              will be developed for these systems; (3)  stochastic process models of
              equipment degradation due to random environments will be developed and
              analyzed; (4) methods to estimate nominal life from lifetime data and
              degradation models will be developed.
     The goal of this research is to
              improve maintenance practice.  If successful, the results of this research will
              lead to improvements in the operation of engineered systems and reductions the
              life-cycle costs
assignable to system failure and repair.  The results of this
              effort will be useful to maintenance practitioners as well as to device and
              equipment manufacturers who must make reliability characterizations of
              their
products.  The research will also contribute to the available
              theoretical tools and methodologies for studying system deterioration as a
              result of random environmental effects.

