Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Vegetation Dynamics and Biogeomorphic Influences
               in a Highly Eroded Landscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9900967

Award Number: 9900967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen C. Parker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,9198,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although the impact of vegetation cover on erosional processes has been studied
              extensively, far less attention has been given to the effects of accelerated
              soil erosion on vegetation structure and composition.  Research in relatively
              stable, arid badlands suggests that the steep environmental gradients caused by
              fluvial erosion create correspondingly graded vegetation communities, but few
              studies have examined vegetation responses to the frequent geomorphic
              disturbance that occurs in actively eroding landscapes as well as relationships
              among geomorphic processes, topographic variables, and edaphic (soil-related)
              characteristics, and vegetation patterns in humid environments.  This doctoral
              dissertation research study will investigate those relationships through a case
              study in Providence Canyons, Georgia, a landscape that has experienced severe
              soil erosion and deep gully incision over the last 150 years because of
              careless cotton-farming practices.  Aerial photographic analysis will be used
              to characterize vegetation and geomorphic change occurring both spatially and
              temporally on a landscape scale over the past 60 years.  Complementing this
              broader-scale analysis will be focused examinations of geomorphic, topographic,
              and edaphic variables that have primary influences on vegetation patterns,
              including the nature and frequency of geomorphic disturbance that characterize
              a particular portion of the landscape; slope aspect, configuration and
              steepness; gradient; elevation above the valley floor; valley width; soil
              texture; and soil nutrient levels.  The doctoral candidate will measure
              vegetative and soil characteristics in a broad range of sites exhibiting
              differing geomorphic disturbance regimes and topographic position and will
              relate the variables using canonical correspondence analysis, classification
              analysis, and discriminant function analysis.  On an applied level, this study
              will assist landscape managers in the restoration of severely eroded
              landscapes.  More broadly, because of the unique blend of geomorphic and
              topographic variables present in these landscapes, this study will increase our
              understanding of the influence of those variables on vegetation composition,
              structure, and dynamics.  This study will strengthen existing links between
              geomorphologists and biogeographers and will enable geomorphologists to refine
              erosion models with more specific vegetation variables.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

