Title       : Nonlinear Dynamic Modeling of Identification of Flexible Polyurethane Foam for
               Seat-Occupant Dynamics and Vibration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9900248

Award Number: 9900248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247619             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Davies   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anil K. Bajaj  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
Project Abstract: The objectives of the research proposed here are to further
              the understanding of the dynamic behavior of flexible polyurethane foam, and to
              significantly enhance the models of foam components incorporated in overall
              dynamic system models. The dynamic models of occupant-seat systems, which
              include foam components, can be used to predict occupant vibration which can,
              in turn, be translated into vibration comfort.  Currently, spring-mass-dashpot
              type multi-degree-of-freedom models are used for vibration comfort studies.
              These models are linear and without memory (elastic), whereas foam is known to
              be highly nonlinear and displays memory (viscoelastic) effects. It is thus
              proposed to develop nonlinear, viscoelastic models of the components made with
              flexible polyurethane foam. They are to be based on the constitutive models of
              viscoelastic materials found in the literature and are expected to include
              linear exponential and fractional derivative relaxation models, as well as
              nonlinear extensions of these types of models. It is hypothesized that these
              detailed macroscopic mechanical models of foam components will be much more
              useful, than the linear models currently used, in the development of links
              between the microscopic structural and chemical composition of the foam and its
              mechanical properties. In addition to developing the most appropriate
              analytical model forms, the work is to focus on: the identification of
              structure models from experimental data, the development of experimental
              methods useful in revealing pertinent aspects of foam behavior, the development
              of robust parameter estimation methodologies, and the experimental validation
              of the vibratory response predictions based on seat-occupant models. While the
              simulations, identification, and experimental validations in this research are
              focused on car-seat foam, the system identification and parameter estimation
              techniques developed will be also useful in the identification of models for
              other viscoelastic materials.

