Title       : Two-Photon Confocol Microscope for Biological Imaging in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2001  
File        : a9900435

Award Number: 9900435
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Galbraith galbraith@arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans J. Bohnert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Larkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Acquisition of a multiphoton confocal microscope.  David W. Galbraith: Principal
              Investigator. 

Abstract:

Funding from the NSF Biological Instrumentation
              Program will be employed to purchase a BioRad MRC-1024 2P multi-photon confocal
              microscope. The microscope will primarily service 15 faculty users each of whom
              have active federal research grants, the majority from NSF, totalling about
              $25,000,000.  It will be made available in the form of a multi-user facility in
              the College of Agriculture at the University of Arizona. The two-photon
              microscope is the first of its kind in the state of Arizona, and therefore will
              also be made available to all interested users at the University of Arizona and
              those of other institutions within the state.
The two-photon microscope
              possesses significant advantages over conventional confocal microscopy.  In
              particular, it allows analysis of living tissues under conditions that minimize
              tissue damage, improve the depth of penetration of the light, and allow
              simultaneous excitation of multiple fluorescent labels. Highlighted projects
              that will benefit from acquisition of the microscope include:  (a) The analysis
              of the responses of plants to imposed ionic and drought stress.   This project
              aims to provide a comprehensive description of the genes and gene products that
              are involved in this process, and the transfer of these genes into plants for
              improved resistance/tolerance to these stresses. (b) The functional analysis of
              expressed genes in maize.  This project aims to catalog the totality of genes
              that are expressed during the life cycle of the maize plant.  This information
              should lead to improvement of maize as a crop plant. (c) The analysis of the
              function of the cytochrome P450 gene superfamily in plants.  This project
              centers on discovering the enzymatic functions of each of the individual P450
              genes (over 340 are expected in Arabidopsis thaliana).  These enzymes catalyze
              pathways leading to a variety of important plant secondary compounds, of value
              as pesticides and as anti-cancer agents, amongst other things. In all cases,
              the two-photon microscope will impact these projects since it enables rapid
              analysis of features of gene expression that cannot be achieved using other
              instrumentation. In particular, it enables the scientist to determine where and
              when given genes are turned on and off, and where the proteins produced from
              expression of these genes are located within cells and tissues. 



