Title       : Workshop on Mechanisms of Developmental Disruption in Amphibians; San Diego, CA,
               November 5-7, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1998   
File        : a9900495

Award Number: 9900495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Gardiner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This workshop, entitled "Workshop on Mechanisms of Developmental Disruption in
              Amphibians," will be held November 5-7, 1998 at the San Diego Zoo. This
              workshop follows two previous workshops sponsored by the National Science
              Foundation that addressed issues pertaining to amphibian declines and die-offs.
              The first, "Workshop on Amphibian Declines", held May 28 - 29, at the NSF,
              brought together biologists who have been working on amphibian declines around
              the world. One area of research identified for further consideration was the
              function of the amphibian immune system with regards to the hypothesis that
              amphibian die-offs are occurring as a result of environmental factors that are
              altering the balance between pathogens and hosts. To focus on these issues a
              second, NSF-sponsored "Workshop on Amphibian Diseases and Immunity" was held at
              the San Diego Zoo, July 26-28, 1998. Both workshops pointed out the necessity
              to address these issues with a broad scientific perspective ranging from the
              population level to the molecular level. In particular, it was repeatedly noted
              that the most vulnerable life history stages of the amphibians are during
              embryonic and larval development, and that an understanding of the effects of
              environmental agents on these stages is essential. This third workshop is
              organized to extend the results of the previous workshops into discussions of
              the developmental and molecular mechanisms underlying environmentally-induced
              congenital malformations in amphibians ("deformed frogs"). In addition, the
              proposed workshop will for the first time explicitly address the question of
              the relationship between amphibian declines and amphibian malformations. The
              goal of the third workshop is to build upon the accomplishments of the earlier
              workshops, and to expand the research discussed to include more
              mechanism-oriented approaches to the problem. The workshop will bring together
              participants from the previous workshops, including both workshop organizers,
              with researchers in the areas of limb development and regeneration,
              endocrinology, developmental immunology, parasitology, receptor-ligand
              interactions, amphibian early development and metamorphosis, and endocrine
              disruption. The workshop will be structured to produce a consensus statement
              addressing issues pertaining to amphibian malformations and the relationship
              between declines and malformations that will be published in a basic research
              journal such as Teratology or Developmental Biology.
 

