Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: The Structure and Organization of Rural Settlement: The
               Rio Amarillo Region of Copan, Honduras throughout the Classic Period
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9900908

Award Number: 9900908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Sharer rsharer@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Sharer, Mr. Marcello-Anrea Canuto will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. Building on his own and others' past work
              in the Copan region of Honduras, he will continue a survey of prehistoric Mayan
              sites. He will also conduct limited excavations and analyze the ceramics, stone
              implements and other materials collected. He wishes to understand the social
              organization of this large Mayan site. Archaeologists have focussed significant
              attention on Copan and research conducted there has played a major role in
              shaping interpretations of Mayan prehistory. The site is extremely large and
              includes a major ceremonial center as well as smaller secondary monumental
              centers and outlying regions. It existed during almost the entire span of Mayan
              prehistory and documents the cultures rise and decline. Large scale research
              conducted for many years has provided an extremely large data base and a great
              deal is known about settlement pattern. Mr. Canuto, as part of a larger
              research group, has conducted survey for several years in an outlying "rural"
              region which constituted part of the Copan system and the results of this work
              are significantly different from those of the larger previous project. For this
              reason the work is of great interest and potentially can refine generally
              accepted models.

Anthropologists wish to understand not only the rise and
              subsequent collapse of the Mayan polity but perhaps more importantly gain
              insight into how, with a simple technology such a large scale complex society
              was able to function and maintain itself in a lowland tropical environment.
              They wish to understand the mechanisms which bound large numbers of people
              together into an effectively cooperating unit. Prior work at Copan suggested
              that lineages - extensive kinship groups which traced descent down clearly
              defined genealogical lines - constituted the basic social units. It was
              believed that such corporate groups exhibited a large degree of autonomy and
              displayed relatively little internal social differentiation. These, it was
              postulated, were the basic building blocks of Mayan society. More recent work
              by Mr. Canuto and his colleagues however suggest a more complicated picture.
              They believe that significant internal differential within lineages existed and
              that a series of other types of social and economic ties cut across lineage
              boundaries. Such speculation is based on the substantial household and material
              culture differences observed between households and communities. The survey
              work in this Copan subregion however is incomplete and with NSF support, Mr.
              Canuto will both fill in spatial blanks and excavate a series of house related
              deposits. With these data it should be possible to define potential variation
              more precisely. This research will not only provide new insight into Mayan
              prehistory but also assist in training a promising young scientist.

