Title       : A Theory of Fault-Tolerant Adaptive and Minimal Routing in Mesh-Connected
               Multicomputers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9900646

Award Number: 9900646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jie Wu jie@cse.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to develop a general theory of fault-tolerant adaptive and
              minimal routing in k-ary  n-dimensional meshes. This theory can be extended to
              k-ary n-dimensional hypercubes, which are meshes with wraparounds. The theory
              is based on a new fault model and an information model. Unlike many existing
              fault models, the proposed fault model can handle boundary faulty nodes easily
              without disabling too many non-faulty nodes. As opposed to some existing
              fault-tolerant routing approaches where fault information is carried by the
              header of the routing message, the proposed approach is based on coded
              neighborhood information maintained at each processor. Each node in a
              mesh-connected multicomputer collects and distributes fault information
              concurrently but in a decentralized way. This collection and distribution
              process exhibits desirable properties of self-stabilizing, self-optimizing, and
              self-healing. Unlike many existing information models that require each node to
              have knowledge of the entire system, the coded fault information associated
              with each node represents limited-global information by exploring locality of
              disturbances in the system.   Locality of fault information also ensures the
              scalability of the proposed approach.  Insights gained in this project will
              shed new light on constructing new fault-tolerant, adaptive, minimal, and
              deadlock-free routing in mesh-connected multicomputers.


