Title       : Development of a Water-Based Machining Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9900247

Award Number: 9900247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest S. Geskin geskin@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this research project is to develop a "green" water-based
              machining technology.  Material removal will be carried out by the impingement
              of the workpiece surface by ultra high-speed water slugs.  The water
              consumption as well as amount of material debris will be minimal and
              practically no emission will be generated.  A fast moving piston will form the
              water slugs.  The piston will impact a water bullet contained in a barrel and
              will generate a package of pressure waves in water. These waves will expel a
              water slug from the barrel via a tapering nozzle.  The slug velocity will reach
              several km/sec.   At such velocity the slug will penetrate most of the
              engineering materials and will erode practically any material.  The nozzle will
              be integrated into a robotic workcell and used for the precision and emission
              free machining operations.
     Currently,  water acceleration by the strong
              pressure waves is used for demolition, mining and military applications.  This
              technology will enhance available information and will develop a mathematical
              model of the formation of the high velocity water slugs.  The result of the
              modeling will enable us to construct a laboratory set up for the experimental
              study of the process.  The water flow within and outside the nozzle as well as
              the slug's impingement on a substrate will be investigated.  As the result, the
              mathematical description of the fluid acceleration by the strong pressure waves
              will be improved and the knowledge necessary for the development of the desired
              technology will be acquired.  A conceptual design of an industrial scale
              prototype of the machining system will be developed.
    
