Title       : Feature Based Associative Memory for Design Retrieval System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9900224

Award Number: 9900224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77627              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Alec Chang changc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for research on a feature-based associative memory
              for engineering design retrieval.  Engineering designs are typically stored as
              computer-aided design (CAD) files.  A database of such files may contain many
              thousands of designs.  Searching the database for similar designs instead of
              identical designs poses a challenging problem.  This research will seek a
              design description that represents the geometric shape of a design by a set of
              machining form features such as counter-hole, pocket or slot and by a set of
              crucial technological attributes that affect machining processes such as
              dimension, tolerance, surface roughness and finish and material.  Searches may
              use a fuzzy logic techniques to retrieve similar designs.  The research will
              include development and experimentation with algorithms to find similar
              relationships among individual form features, methods to embody technological
              attributes, approaches to incorporate the ranking weights for design
              attributes, possibilities to represent spatial relationship as a retrieval
              criterion, and processes to integrate fuzzy linguistic expressions and interval
              values in query inputs.

If successful, this research will contribute to the
              conceptual design stage of industrial components.  By enabling designers to
              locate similar CAD files, they can use these to "cut and paste" new designs
              together from existing designs, greatly reducing the effort needed to create
              CAD files for new components.
