Title       : Adaptive Balanced Computing Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9900601

Award Number: 9900601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun K. Somani arun@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Akhilesh Tyagi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Applications, such as multimedia processing, digital signal, image and vision
              processing, and scientific computing, generate computation tasks that are
              structured and repetitive exhibiting varying degree of instruction-level
              parallelism (ILP). Moreover, the demands to compute certain functions and
              their
resource needs vary with applications and time. The overall goal of this
              project is to develop and use novel ideas such as reconfigurable functional
              units (FUs), cache memory, and reconfigurable bus architectures to achieve
              balanced computing, i.e. match the computing bandwidth to the memory
              bandwidth.


The research will address issues in designing architectures
              that allow reconfiguration of resources to make the following architecture
              level parameters dynamically variable: number and types of FUs, amount of
              on-chip register and cache memory, an ability to trade the on-chip memory
              resources with the number
of FUs dynamically, and the interconnectivity
              between these units. A processor core with reconfigurable logic blocks to make
              the architecture adaptive to the applications' computing and memory bandwidth
              needs will be developed. Effects of integrating reconfiguration schemes into
              the on-chip FUs and cache memories
on a processor chip will also be studied
              and evaluated.  A high-level design for the ABC (Adaptive Balanced Computing)
              architecture will be developed and analyzed. It is expected that the research
              results will significantly improve the efficiency of computation.              
                                                    

