Title       : IAS/Park City Mathematics Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9900969

Award Number: 9900969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2395000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. MacPherson rdm@ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is submitted to the Divisions of Mathematical Sciences and
              Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education, seeking partial support for the
              IAS/Park City Mathematics Institute (PCMI). Support for the Research Program,
              the Graduate Summer School, the Undergraduate Summer School, and the Mentoring
              Program for Women in Mathematics is requested for five years, beginning in
              1999.  Partial support for the High School Teachers Program is sought for two
              years.  Support for the remaining programs will be found from other
              sources.

The IAS/Park City Mathematics Institute (PCMI) is a program of the
              Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. The mission of the PCMI
              is to promote research in both mathematics and mathematics education, and to
              improve mathematics education at every level from K-12 through graduate school.
              It is built on the premise that dynamic interaction among mathematicians,
              educators, and students is essential to the optimal functioning of the
              mathematical enterprise.  It has eight years of experience in promoting this
              goal, supported in major part by the National Science Foundation.  Sponsorship
              by the Institute for Advanced Study reflects the Institute's commitment to
              extend the activities of the research community toward such broader societal
              goals.

The activities of the PCMI include a three-week Summer Session for
              all participants, a year-round program for local high school teachers site
              groups, a Mentoring Program for Women in Mathematics, and a
              Continuing
Outreach Program for Alumni Sites of high school teachers.

The
              primary focus of the PCMI is the three-week Summer Session, where participants
              gather to share information and experiences at many levels. The Summer Session
              is organized around a Research Topic that provides the academic focus for all
              programs.  In 1999 the Research Topic will be Arithmetic Algebraic
              Geometry.

The Summer Session includes six programs: the Undergraduate Summer
              School, the Graduate Summer School, the Research Program in Mathematics, the
              High School Teacher Program, the Undergraduate Faculty Program, and the
              Research Program in Mathematics Education.  The presence of all of the programs
              in one place and at one time gives the whole enterprise a high spirit that is
              often lacking when one of these groups meets by itself.  For example, the
              educational programs provide a subject for animated conversations involving
              everyone.  This leads to more informality and casual interaction, breaking
              barriers between advanced researchers, fresh PhDs, students, and high school
              teachers.  This kind of interaction has the expected payoff in terms of
              felicitous exchange of ideas and the beginnings of collaborations.  The whole
              of the Summer Session is far greater than the sum of its parts.
