Title       : The President's Information Technology Advisory Committee's Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1998    
File        : a9900003

Award Number: 9900003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 15,  1998   
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20130              (Estimated)
Investigator: P M. Melliar-Smith pmms@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The President's Information Technology Advisory Committee's Interim Report has
              recommended that the nation commit to fund considerably more research in
              several technical areas.  One of those areas is large-scale computer
              networking.  The PITAC report further suggests that NSF play the leading role
              in overseeing this research.

A group of researchers in computer networking,
              from industry and the universities, propose to gather in a one-day workshop to
              discuss the PITAC report's findings and to prepare recommendations to guide the
              research recommended by PITAC.  These recommendations and report will serve as
              initial community views on what research initiatives in large-scale networking
              are likely to be most productive.

The meeting will be held on October 7,
              1998 in Berkeley, California and will be chaired by Dr. Craig Partridge, Chief
              Scientist of BBN Technologies (a part of GTE corporation) and a Consulting
              Assistant Professor at Stanford University.  In consultation with senior
              researchers in the field, Dr. Partridge has extended invitations to roughly two
              dozen researchers, whose research interests and organizational affiliations
              span the computer networking field in the United States.

