Title       : Optimization Algorithms For a Class of Engineering Design Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9900985

Award Number: 9900985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elijah Polak polak@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is for the continuation of long standing efforts in developing
              special purpose algoritluns for the solution of important engineering
              optimization problems that are not tractable by standard mathematical
              programming or optimal control algorithms.  The problems include design
              centering, tolerancing and post manufacture tuning, robot and vehicle path
              planning in the presence of obstacles with coners, described by max-min type
              inequalities, optimal control and pursuit-evasion problems arising in
              air-traffic control, various shape optimization problems, and problems of
              seismic resistant structural design subject reliability constraints.  These
              problems are invariably characterized by nonsmoothness and infinite
              dimensionality of either variables or constraints or both, and often involve
              ordinary or partial differential equations.  The proposed research will exploit
              several tools developed, such as (i) the theory of consistent approximations,
              (ii) reformulation techniques for converting seemingly intractable problems
              into tractable forms.

The framework of consistent approximations ensures the
              convergence of local and global minimizers and stationary points of
              approximating problems to those of the original problem.  Also, it provides
              master algorithm models with discretization adjustment procedures, which can be
              used in conjunction with highly polished, mathematical programming libraries. 
              Furthermore, these algorithms can be made to converge superlinearly by calling
              superlinearly converging mathematical programming subroutines from the master
              algorithms.  By contrast, the problem reformulation techniques that we envisage
              must be developed on an ad hoc basis, as we have already done for some path
              planning and reliability constrained problems.

The chances for success of
              the proposal research will be considerably enhanced by the fact that we have
              already obtained some results on which we can build and the multidisciplinary
              setting provided by the ongoing interactions and collaborations of the
              principal investigator and others.

