Title       : Non-Associated Plastic Flow of Ductile Single Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a9900131

Award Number: 9900131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Bassani bassani@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vaclav Vitek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research focuses othe relationship between the atomic configuration
              of dislocation cores and macroscopic plastic flow.  Our principal goals are 1. 
              to develop physically based continuum constitutive relatins that account for
              complex phenomena arising form non-planar dislocaiton core structures and can
              be utilized, for example in finite element analyses and in hydrocode
              simulaitons.  We will consider a range of technologically important materials
              from different crystal classes andunder conditions that arise in both
              deformation processes and the response of componenets subjected to mechanical
              loading.  Common signatures of core effects are unexpected deformation modes
              and slip geometerics, stron and unusual dependence of flow stresses on crystal
              orientation and temperature, and most prevalently, a break-down of 'Schmid's
              law' due tothe dependence of slip on non-guide componenets of stresses.  At the
              same time, these core effects may critically affect macroscopic flow of
              polycrystals, for example, significantly influcencing the physically based
              sontitutive models that incorporate effects of non-glide stresses on
              multiple-slip deformation is the focus of the proposal.  To do that solely
              based upon experiments is difficult if not impossible, whereas atomistic
              simulations can directly reveal those characteristics of dislocations that are
              responsible for complex macroscopic behaviors.  These in turn, depend on bothe
              the crystal structure and bonding characteristics of a given material.  Strain
              localization has been shown to be quite sentitive to multiple-slip hardening
              and non-glide stress affects.  We propose to investigate  localized deformatin
              both because of its inherent importance provides a chalenging test of the new
              models.
