Title       : Developmental Mechanisms of Body Plan Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9900538

Award Number: 9900538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf A. Raff rraff@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Although there are several million species of animals, they fall into groups
              representing only 35 basic body plans (phyla).  This proposal is to study
              development of the unusual body plan of adult echinoderms, which, because of
              the radical reorganization it has undergone, offers a unique model for body
              plan evolution.  Echinoderms are related to chordates.  Thier common ancestor
              was bilateral, but the echinoderm ancestor produced a new body plan by
              generation of its major body axis from the original ancestral left side.  In
              addition, echinoderms evolved a pentameral, radial symmetry.  The new body plan
              had to have involved a reorganization of development, and this is evident in
              the formation of the adult rudiment as an outgrowth of left-side tissues of the
              echinoderm larva.  Unlike the model systems most used in studies of
              development, echinoderms transform their body plan in development, making a
              transformation from the bilateral symmetry of the larva to the pentameral
              radial symmetry of the adult.  This developmental transformation parallels
              their evolutionary history.   
As the crucial steps in echinoderm evolution as
              well as in echinoderm development are the processes that produce left-right
              asymmetry and pentamery, the project will focus on these.  Development of the
              echinoderm adult has been little studied. Heliocidaris erythrogramma, a sea
              urchin with a very large egg develops directly into a juvenile adult in only
              four days, and is highly amenable to study of adult development.  The study
              will use the following approaches: (1) The mechanisms of development of the
              asymmetries will be studied by microsurgical techniques to investigate
              autonomous and local inductive interactions in this embryo.  Tissue-specific
              gene markers will be used to analyze these processes in operated embryos.  (2)
              The roles of regulatory genes involved in asymmetry generation in vertebrates
              will be investigated, and genes involved in development of asymmetry in H.
              erythrogramma identified.  (3) The function of genes implicated in symmetry
              determination will be tested by over/ectopic expression experiments into
              appropriate cells of the H. erythrogramma embryo.  The results of this project
              will provide an insight into the mechanisms that underlie evolutionary
              modifications of developmental processes, and will yield understanding of the
              development of asymmetries in embryos.


