Title       : Numerical Simulation and Analysis of Mesoscale Convective Systems and Severe
               Storms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a9900929

Award Number: 9900929
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $830001             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Cotton cotton@atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Due to its large economic impact as well as importance for public safety, the
              study of atmospheric convective systems is a high priority topic of research. 
              Under this award the Principal Investigator will continue research on a variety
              of topics associated with convective storms.   Specific topics to be addressed
              include:

--Development of a radar-based climatology focusing on the spatial
              and temporal distribution of convection during the growth stages of mesoscale
              convective systems (MCS)  over the U.S. to characterize the most common
              patterns of development that leads to MCS formation and to understand the
              variability of processes governing different classes of MCSs. 
--  Perform
              sensitivity studies with an advanced mesoscale numerical model to examine the
              relative dominance of environmental controls versus the details of early
              convective forcing on MCS structure and evolution.
--  Using a numerical
              model,  investigate the effects of soil moisture amounts and its inhomogeneity
              on the initiation and strength of MCSs.
--  Using WSR-88D Doppler radar data,
              examine specific derecho (localized high wind) events to determine if they are
              characterized by a definable mesocyclone over a stable air mass and perform
              numerical simulations of selected cases to determine mechanisms responsible for
              severe wind formation.
--  Obtain further insight into processes responsible
              for tornado formation by simulating well -documented tornadic and null cases,
              and by performing further idealized simu-lations.
--  Investigate the
              processes of hail formation in two distinctive severe storm types using
              simplified and complex microphysical parameterizations.
--  Reexamine existing
              data collected in the urban environment by performing numerical  sensitivity
              experiments for both nocturnal organized convection and afternoon
              locally-forced convection.

Successful completion of this research will lead
              to improved understanding and ability to forecast several types of high impact
              weather including flash flooding, tornadoes, high winds and severe
              hail.











A-i

