Title       : Smart Damping Strategies for Seismic Protection of Urban Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a9900234

Award Number: 9900234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. F. Spencer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael K. Sain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1039,5921,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This investigation is aimed to develop a broad and integrated foundation for
              innovative smart structures concepts for earthquake hazard mitigation in
              heavily urbanized regions.  The research plan is divided into two complementary
              efforts: low/medium-rise buildings and bridges, and medium/high-rise buildings.
               For low/medium-rise buildings and bridges, an adaptive base-isolation system
              will be studies that are able to accommodate the severe ground motion generated
              by high-velocity, long-period, seismic events associated with near-fault
              earthquakes.  The proposed adaptive isolation system is comprised of
              low-damping isolation bearings used in conjunction with smart dampers employing
              magnetorheological (MR) fluid and can effectively adapt to unpredictable
              excitation levels and types.  The proposed architecture employing isolation
              bearings and the MR damper overcomes many expenses and technical difficulties,
              which preclude the broad-scaled realization of controllable isolation
              system.

For medium/high-rise buildings, smart dampers interconnecting
              buildings will be investigated.  An alternative approach to the popular method
              of hybrid mass driver, which has high potential for reducing structural
              responses due to large earthquake and wind excitations is to use a class of
              active control systems that places control actuators between adjacent buildings
              with different dynamic characteristics.  Yet, concerns over reliability,
              external power, capital cost and maintenance remain.  Smart dampers such as the
              MR damper have been shown to possess the adaptability of the active control
              approach while maintaining reliabilities familiar in passive dampers. 
              Development of appropriate MR dampers for this application shows great
              promise.

This project will focus on understanding and integrating the two
              complementary smart structures concepts into viable means for protecting civil
              structures against near-fault earthquakes.  The research will involve
              development of: (1) smart base isolation concepts, (2) smart interconnected
              buildings concepts, and (3) control strategies that can exploit the unique
              features of the adaptive system in mitigating urban earthquakes.  Proof of
              concept experiments for several structural system configurations will be
              carried out at the University of Notre Dame, and a 200 kip prototype damper
              will be developed.   

This project is awarded under NSF 98-36 "US-Japan
              Cooperative Research in Urban Earthquake Disaster Mitigation. 

