Title       : GOALI: New Synthetic Methods, Intercalation Compounds and Composites of Graphite
               for Electrochemical and Structural Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9900390

Award Number: 9900390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309478             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Lerner michael.lerner@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor R. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9900390
Lerner
This project entails a study of acceptor-type intercalation
              chemistry of graphite, where carbon sheets are oxidized and anions incorporated
              within expanded galleries. Both the development of new synthetic methods and
              the preparation and characterization of new materials will be explored. Known
              compounds of this type are generally limited to small anions and simple gallery
              structures (with a few exceptions having been reported recently), in marked
              contrast to the complex intercalant structures, porous galleries, and
              nanocomposite structures that have been obtained for other layered hosts. The
              useful electronic, structural, and electrochemical properties of graphite, and
              their technological significance, indicate the importance for the development
              of a similar broad intercalation chemistry. Methods are proposed to carry out
              syntheses of complex intercalation compounds, rapidly, in multi-gram quantity,
              and under ambient conditions, using hydrofluoric acid solutions containing
              strong oxidants. The products obtained will be evaluated as precursors to new
              graphitic materials, including organographites, analogous to organoclays in
              general structural features, and turbostratic graphites. Materials properties
              of these compounds, including detailed structural characteristics, will be
              investigated. A collaborative effort with Covalent Associates, Inc. under the
              GOALI program will evaluate the electrochemical activity of new graphite
              intercalation compounds developed during this project.
%%%
Graphite is a
              layered carbon structure that has a wide range of technological uses. Recently,
              the electrochemical intercalation of graphite has become the basis for energy
              storage in lithium-ion batteries, which are increasingly important and will
              likely replace all other chemistries used for small batteries. These materials
              may be advantageous compared with current graphite-based compounds either for
              energy storage or in other technological applications of graphite.




