Title       : Organometallic Reactivity of Metal-Centered Radicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9900436

Award Number: 9900436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradford B. Wayland wayland@a.chem.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program
              supports research on the mechanism of metal-promoted olefin polymerization by
              Dr. Bradford B. Wayland, Chemistry Department, University of Pennsylvania. 
              Three goals will be pursued.  First, organometallic species (M-R) will be
              formed in equilibrium with metal-centered and organic radicals to enable a
              direct method for evaluating thermodynamic parameters for organo-metal bond
              homolysis.  Second, the details of chain transfer catalysis (CTC), which
              controls polymer molecular weight and introduces end group alkene
              functionality, will be studied.  A series of persistent metalloradical
              complexes with minimum ligand steric demands and varying M-H bond enthalpies
              will be designed for application in CTC for different classes of olefin
              monomers.   Factors responsible for the effectiveness of metallo-radical
              species in fast hydrogen radical abstraction and rapid addition of M-H to
              olefins will be determined.   Finally, the role of organometallic complexes in
              initiating and controlling living radical polymerization (LRP) of olefins will
              be investigated.  LRP is an approach to producing low polydispersity
              homopolymers and block copolymers of olefins that requires radical initiation. 
              Organocobalt tetramesityl porphyrin complexes initiate and control LRP of
              acrylates and provide a prototype for establishing guideline criteria for the
              design of metal complexes that promote LRP processes.  Ligand and polymeric
              radical steric demands will be used to prevent metal-centered radicals and
              polymeric radicals from achieving the transition state for beta-hydrogen
              abstraction and the persistent radical effect of metal-centered radicals is
              expected to suppress bimolecular termination of polymeric radicals.  Several
              series of persistent metalloradicals will be tested for effectiveness in the
              synthesis of different classes of olefins.  A series of water soluble and
              polymer supported catalysts will be synthesized to address environmental issues
              and the practical considerations of product separation and catalyst
              recovery.

Polyolefins are important commercial products.  This research will
              develop a rational approach to the synthesis of various polyolefins and
              potentially result in new structurally defined block copolymers with unexplored
              material properties. Students involved in the study will learn not only
              sophisticated methods involving inorganic and organic chemistry, but will be
              introduced to major issues and challenges in energy-related research, polymer
              chemistry, catalysis and materials science.


