Title       : Dissertation Research: Effects of Civic Engagement and Cognitive Repertoires on
               Political Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9900805

Award Number: 9900805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim Voss kimvoss@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Much research on civil society and political participation assumes that
              democratic citizenship is directly and positively related to activity in civil
              society. However, little research tests this assumption or offers a mechanism
              for the relationship between civic engagement and political activity. This
              doctoral dissertation research will explore the empirical relationship between
              civic engagement and political participation and the political-cultural
              mechanisms that underlie that relationship. The first phase will use existing
              survey data (American Citizen Participation Study and General Social Survey) to
              model the relationships among civic engagement, efficacy, civic skills, and
              political participation. Particular attention will be paid to differentiating
              effects of different kinds and amounts of civic and political participation,
              and to understanding context and network effects on participation. The second
              phase will recruit participants into focus groups based on the findings from
              the first section. The focus groups will examine the relationships among civic
              and political experiences, "cognitive repertoires" of politics, and political
              participation. Transcripts will be analyzed for the ways participants structure
              thought on political involvement. A systematic, replicable methodology for
              coding and interpreting focus group and other textual data will be developed. A
              software package and standard - QCML, the Qualitative Coding Markup Language -
              will be developed to implement this methodology.
