Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Climate and Sea Level Control of Holocene
               Environments in South Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9900840

Award Number: 9900840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vance T. Holliday vthollid@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1306,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Everglades of southern Florida is home to one of the worlds largest
              freshwater marshes.  Low topographic relief and abundant precipitation support
              diverse wetland communities, including sawgrass prairie, hardwood hammocks,
              water lily marshes, and brackish mangrove swamp.  Considerable ecological
              research has focused on the modern biotic communities of this region and the
              detrimental effects human-related influences are having on the Everglades. 
              Important to this discussion but less well-represented in the literature is the
              evolution of the Everglades over time.  Variations in climate and sea level
              throughout the Holocene have played a crucial role in the evolution of this
              unique environment.  An understanding of the response of Everglades hydrology
              and biota to past changes in climate and sea level is critical for predicting
              how this ecosystem will respond to both human and natural environmental changes
              in the future.  This project will explore the Holocene paleoecology of the
              Everglades region of southern Florida and the relationship between terrestrial
              ecosystems, climate, and sea level.  The project aims at understanding the
              cause and effect nature of climate and sea-level change on regional hydrology
              and the distribution of vegetative communities.  Proxy records of climatic and
              environmental change, including sediment composition, pollen profiles, diatom
              spectra and other microfossils remains, will be employed to reconstruct the
              past climates and hydrological regimes of the region.  Emphasis is also given
              to identifying the impact of Holocene eustatic fluctuations on the coastal and
              inland wetland assemblages.  This project will provide valuable new insights
              into the natural historical evolution of the Everglades and other significant
              wetlands, particularly the relationships among climate, sea-level change, and
              biotic communities.  Increased understandings of how the area's vegetation has
              been impacted in the past by changing climatic regimes and sea-level changes is
              critical for the development of effective strategies for preserving and
              restoring Everglades ecosystems in the face of intensified human population
              pressure and natural environmental changes.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.
