Title       : Combining Economic and Ecological Indicators to Prioritize Wetlands Restoration
               Projects Within a Spatial GIS Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a9900678

Award Number: 9900678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $475000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Opaluch JimO@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter V. August  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marisa J. Mazzotta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Johnston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1099,1237,9189,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of the proposed research are to: 1.improve the fundamental
              understanding of linkages between monetary economic values, indicators and
              indexes of natural resource values, and benefit transfer methodologies; 2.
              develop indicators of wetlands values that reflect the ecological and social
              context of resource asset; 3. develop GIS-based methodologies for economic
              valuation that are akin to, and complement, watershed approaches used in
              natural science studies.; 4. coordinate with officials in the State of Rhode
              Island to develop practical methods for ranking wetland restoration projects
              using indicators of social, ecological, and economic values; and 5. develop
              standardized methodologies allowing transfer of models and results to other
              sites.

Phase I will develop the theoretical model and operational
              methodology of the study, and provide initial steps in defining indicators.
              This phase will include development of conceptual linkages between indicators,
              indexes and economic valuation methods; coordination of the approach with data
              collection efforts by Rhode Island Department of Environmental Management;
              identification of an initial set of indicators to serve as a starting point for
              the field research; and development of models to allow linking of indicators
              with benefits transfer methods. Phase II will identify key indicators of values
              as expressed by technical "experts" and by the general public. These data will
              be used to refine and quantify the indicators, to quantify linkages between
              economic values and indicators, to compare "expert" and public values, and to
              develop methods that use expert assessments as input into public value
              elicitation tools. Phase III will use methods and data developed in Phases I
              and II to develop and implement the GIS-based tool for identifying wetland
              priorities. Phase III will also compare different approaches (dollar valuation,
              utility indexes and value indicators), apply results to the Narragansett Bay
              watershed in Rhode Island, and test the transferability of the method to other
              sites.

The research will develop and implement a GIS-based tool for
              prioritizing wetlands restoration and rehabilitation projects, and will combine
              indicators of social and economic values with science-based methods being
              implemented by the state, to develop coordinated methods to balance multiple
              objectives in a systems context. The research will provide close linkages
              between previously disconnected methods for identifying and measuring economic
              values associated with natural systems, creating an interdisciplinary tool for
              prioritizing restoration projects. The approach will be designed to estimate
              and compare economic valuation, (utility-based) economic indexes, and
              indicators of economic value.

