Title       : Acquistion of an Automated Triaxial Testing System for Education and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9900145

Award Number: 9900145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah L. Gassman gassman@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Pierce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract   

9900145  

PI: S. L. Gassman and C. E. Pierce  
University of
              South Carolina, Columbia  
Title:  "Acquisition of an Automated Triaxial
              Testing System for Education and Research"   

This equipment grant provides
              funds for the acquisition of an automated triaxial testing system for the
              geotechnical laboratory in the Department of Civil and Environmental
              Engineering at the University of South Carolina. The desired system is capable
              of performing tests of controlled rate of stress or strain loading and
              different types of prescribed stress paths under both drained and undrained
              conditions.  The primary objective for obtaining this specialized laboratory
              equipment is to improve the quality and broaden the scope of geotechnical
              engineering research and educational activities at the University of South
              Carolina.  In particular, this triaxial system will be used to facilitate
              advanced research by two junior faculty members, and enhance the undergraduate
              and graduate curriculum by its direct use in several courses.  This triaxial
              system will directly impact the future direction and support of a currently
              funded research project in controlled low strength materials and several
              on-going studies in a geotechnical testing pit maintained in the department. 
              The ability to perform advanced triaxial tests will make the faculty
              competitive to obtain other research projects, such as proposed projects on
              liquefaction susceptibility of South Carolina soils and stress-strain response
              of backfill for field instrumentation.  This system will also provide
              laboratory experience for undergraduate students in Soil Mechanics and graduate
              students in a new course in Advanced Field and Laboratory Instrumentation for
              Geotechnics proposed by the junior faculty.  Triaxial testing allows students
              to learn the effects of consolidation, confining stress levels, and drainage
              conditions on shear strength, and as such will enhance their understanding of
              soil mechanics.  Research and education will be integrated by providing
              demonstrations of on-going research projects to both undergraduate and graduate
              students.  
