Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Essential Laminations and the Topology of 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9200584

Award Number: 9200584
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136600             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Gabai gabai@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The main goal of this project is to explore the                           
              interrelationships between the topology of a 3-manifold and the                
              types of laminations and foliations it can support.  The                       
              investigator will look into the nature of group actions on the 2-              
              sphere and their extensions into the 3-ball.  The main questions               
              he plans to consider are the following.  (1) If M is irreducible,              
              N is laminated, and M and N are homotopy equivalent, are they                  
              homeomorphic?  (2) If M is laminated, then are homotopic                       
              homeomorphisms isotopic?  (3) What manifolds have essential                    
              laminations?  (4) If G is a 2-sphere convergence group which                   
              extends to a properly discontinuous action on the 3-ball, is that              
              extension unique up to conjugation?                                            
                   The study of 3-dimensional manifolds is aided by the fact                 
              that our experience of living in such a space endows us with a                 
              strong intuition for what can and cannot take place.  Studying                 
              the topology of higher dimensional manifolds is necessarily                    
              dependent upon the algebraic machinery available to assist in it,              
              but in 3 dimensions we also have at our disposal a direct avenue               
              of perception.  It is therefore surprising to learn that some                  
              questions that have natural generalizations to higher dimensions               
              have been answered already for these higher cases, while the 3-                
              dimensional case that inspired them remains obdurately                         
              unassailable.  There is a classical conjecture of Poincare about               
              spheres that is the most notorious example of this phenomenon.                 
              What appears to be at work in thus violating our natural over-                 
              estimate of the advantage that geometric intuition should confer               
              in 3 dimensions?  It is at least partly a naive faith in                       
              intuition and mistrust of computation, but it is also the fact                 
              that the known methods of computation perform best with the                    
              luxury of excess dimensions in which to maneuver.  They are                    
              somehow cramped in the presence of only three dimensions.  In                  
              this setting one can see that the investigator's exploitation of               
              laminations as a tool particularly adapted to the 3-dimensional                
              environment and our intuition about it constitutes a welcome and               
              enormously promising development.
