Title       : New Numerical Methods for Quantum Field Theory and Critical Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1994       
File        : a9200719

Award Number: 9200719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan B. Goodman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan D. Sokal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Zwanziger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this project is to develop new and more                  
              efficient numerical algorithms with applications to quantum field              
              theory, the statistical mechanics of critical phenomena, and                   
              related problems in applied mathematics.  The research focuses on              
              three principal application areas: Monte Carlo simulation of                   
              lattice spain models and field theories; solution of large linear              
              systems of equations with disordered coefficients; and Monte                   
              Carlo simulation of self-avoiding random walk.  The principal                  
              algorithmic strategy is to employ "collective-mode" updates, such              
              as multi-grid, auxiliary-variable, embedding and generalizations               
              thereof.  Some of these algorithms are motivated by techniques                 
              used in the numerical solution of elliptic partial differential                
              equations, but novel adaptations are required.  The methodology                
              involves a combination of heuristic physical reasoning, rigorous               
              mathematical analysis, and systematic numerical testing.  One                  
              principal project is to continue the development of the multi-                 
              grid Monte Carlo method, with emphasis on lattice gauge theories.              
              A second project is to develop multi-grid algorithms for large                 
              linear systems with disordered coefficients; examples are the                  
              lattice fermion and Faddeev-Popov propagators in a background                  
              gauge field.  In addition, the group plans to continue its                     
              investigations of collective-mode algorithms based on auxiliary                
              variables (Swendsen-Wang and its generalizations), collective-                 
              mode algorithms based on embeddings (Wolff and its                             
              generalizations), and algorithms for the self-avoiding walk.                   
                   Efficient numerical algorithms are necessary to exploit                   
              adequately new computational technologies.  This research effort               
              will have impact both on computational mathematics and physics.                
                //
