Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates: Geology Under- graduate Field &
               Laboratory Research Projects in the Contextof a Deformed Continental Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1992      
File        : a9200392

Award Number: 9200392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marvin E. Kauffman                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur G. Goldstein agoldstein@center.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
                   Colgate University undergraduates will conduct research on the            
              geologic histories of the Taconic Fold/Thrust Belt, the Cambro-                
              Ordovician Platform, the Adirondack Massif, and the Maine coastal              
              volcanic province.  This area has served as a foundation for the               
              development of ideas relating plate teconic processes to the growth            
              of mountain belts.                                                             
                                                                                             
                   While the general geologic history and major processes are                
              known, there remain many second-order problems that require                    
              resolution.  This project will examine a number of geological                  
              research projects that are both tractable to undergraduate juniors             
              and seniors and are of significance in refining our understanding              
              of the region.  Students will also have the opportunity to work on             
              problems related to aqueous geochemistry, clay mineralogy,                     
              paleontology and geomorphology.  All proposed summer projects will             
              be supervised by faculty at Colgate University, with additional                
              fall-semester follow-up independent course work available at                   
              cooperating institutions.                                                      
                                                                                             
                   A six-week orientation field program will be run prior to the             
              beginning of summer research projects as a requirement for all                 
              students who have not completed a geological field camp or related             
              field experience.  After the field course, students will select a              
              supervisor and research project for the next eight weeks.  Most                
              projects will combine field and laboratory aspects.  All students              
              will be encouraged to continue their research following the summer             
              program and to prepare their results for possible publication.
