Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Cultural Development and Highland-Lowland
               Rainforest Interaction in the Northeastern Andes of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1994     
File        : a9200799

Award Number: 9200799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11625              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Burger richard.burger@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Warren B. Church  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Richard Burger Mr. Warren Church will               
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze                    
              archaeological materials excavated at the site of Cueva Manachaki              
              which is located in the "cloud forest" region of Eastern Peru.                 
              This area lies at a middle altitude and separates the high open                
              Andean grasslands from the low lying tropical Amazon rainforest.               
              The site itself is a small rock shelter which contains finely                  
              stratified deposits which span the per-ceramic through ceramic                 
              periods. Excavation has yielded not only large quantities of                   
              ceramic and lithic materials but also well preserved organic                   
              remains. Mr Church and his colleagues will analyze these                       
              materials to accomplish three goals: 1. to determine the cultural              
              sequence for this little known region; 2. to test the hypothesis               
              of long-term cultural development and subsequent evaluation of                 
              the alternative migration hypotheses through analysis of                       
              continuity and change in the cultural sequence; and 3. to                      
              identify and interpret evidence for highland-lowland rainforest                
              interaction.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Peru is of great archaeological interest for several reasons. It               
              saw the rise of a series of complex state level societies before               
              arrival of the Spanish. The region is also characterized by                    
              strong vertical zonation where the steep rise of the Andes                     
              creates a number of distinct ecological zones in close proximity.              
              Many models have been developed which link the development of                  
              complex societies to the need to coordinate the movement of                    
              subsistence goods across zones. While extensive excavations have               
              provided excellent data bases for some regions, others including               
              the cloud forest are little understood. Mr. Church hypothesizes                
              that local adaption took place within this zone and that it                    
              served as more than a way station between highlands and lowlands.              
              Analysis of materials from the unique site of Cueva Manachaki                  
              will allow him to evaluate this idea.                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our                  
              understanding of the processes which lead to the development of                
              complex societies and will assist in the training of a promising               
              young scientist.
