Title       : The role of nectar composition in plant-animal interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1992     
File        : a9200506

Award Number: 9200506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Lanza   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Fredonia
	      Central Avenue
	      Fredonia, NY  14063    716/673-3111

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to the Department of Biology at the                
              State University of New York at Fredonia to continue a successful              
              Research Experiences for Undergraduates program.  The SITE will                
              foster the intellectual growth and emotional development of 10                 
              undergraduate participants per year by involving them in a                     
              investigation of plant-insect interactions.  The research will                 
              focus on the role that amino acids play in attracting insects to               
              plant nectars and on the role of nectar-derived amino acids in                 
              nourishing the nectar feeders.  Participants in the project will               
              collect plant nectars, observe insect behavior, biochemically                  
              analyze the lipid and protein components of insects fed different              
              nectariferous diets, and test hypotheses that relate the nectar                
              diet to nutritional status.                                                    
                                                                                             
              In each of the three years, this project will be divided into two              
              parts, summer and winter.  The eight summer weeks will offer one               
              week of introduction to theory and methods, three weeks of directed            
              research on group projects, and four weeks of independent,                     
              participant-originated projects.  During the fall semester,                    
              participants will analyze the results of their independent                     
              projects.  They will return to Fredonia in January, when they will             
              prepare oral presentations of their projects to be presented at the            
              Eastern College Science Conference the following April.  Student               
              researchers in this project will develop through:  1) an increased             
              understanding of ecology, behavior, evolution, biochemistry, and               
              physiology, 2) hands-on experience with specific field and                     
              laboratory research techniques, 3) practice in critical reading and            
              analytical thinking, and 4) acquisition of a variety of research               
              support skills.  All of these accomplishments will enhance the                 
              emotional maturity of participants, help define their career                   
              choices as scientists, and, in some cases, raise their aspirations.
