Title       : Long and Medium-term Research: Inertial Confinement and theAuto-collimation of
               Jets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1993      
File        : a9200916

Award Number: 9200916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Frank   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1215,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  Inertial Confinement and the                     
              Auto-collimation of Jets                                                       
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a four-month postdoctoral research visit by            
              Dr. Adam Frank to the University of Leiden to work with Dr.                    
              Vincent Icke.  The researchers will focus on a class of problems               
              associated with the formation of astrophysical jets.  Based on a               
              study of bipolar outflow in Planetary Nebulae, Drs. Frank and Icke             
              believe that a single mechanism associated with a single geometry              
              is responsible for the ubiquitous, well collimated flows.  They will           
              use sophisticated numerical hydrodynamic code to simulate the                  
              interaction of aspherical stellar outflows and the production of jets.         
              The goal of this project is to demonstrate the efficacy of this                
              process over a wide range of length and time scales beginning with             
              stars and ending with galaxies.  They will then go further and                 
              provide "theoretical observations" allowing detailed comparisons of            
              the models with what is seen in the telescope.                                 
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a stipend for four months plus a dependent allowance.
