Title       : Studies in Complexity Theory: A Circuit Based Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9200878

Award Number: 9200878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69951              (Estimated)
Investigator: H Venkateswaran venkat@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate properties of complexity                        
              classes, both sequential and parallel, with a view to                          
              understand the structure of computations in these classes and                  
              the relationships among these classes.  The circuit model will                 
              be used to do these studies.  The Boolean circuit model is an                  
              appealing model for studying the structure of computations in                  
              complexity classes because it makes it simpler to use                          
              combinatorial and algebraic arguments.  The close connections                  
              between machine models such as Turing machines and Boolean                     
              circuits facilitates the application of techniques and results                 
              from circuit complexity theory to address questions from                       
              complexity theory.  The study of complexity classes defined by                 
              restricted models of computation such as monotone Boolean                      
              circuits, and the study of counting classes using the circuit                  
              framework are other developments that make the circuit model                   
              quite valuable.                                                                
                                                                                             
              This research will study several issues in complexity theory                   
              with circuits as the unifying framework.  Specifically, the                    
              following are some topics that will be addressed by this work:                 
              semi-unbounded fan-in circuits as a model of computation,                      
              relationships between NP and other classes such as LOGCFL that                 
              are definable using the semi-unbounded fan-in circuit model,                   
              relationships among counting classes and their implications,                   
              properties of monotone complexity classes and relationships                    
              among them, and the dual interpreted pebble game model.  Many                  
              related issues will also be addressed in the course of this                    
              work.  It is expected that this research work will extend our                  
              understanding of the many fundamental problems of                              
              computational complexity theory leading to new insights into                   
              the difficulties involved in resolving them.
