Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Function Theory on Symmetric Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1994       
File        : a9200463

Award Number: 9200463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Koranyi adam@alpha.lehman.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY H H Lehman College
	      250 Bedford Park Blvd West
	      Bronx, NY  10468    718/960-8107

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This award will support mathematical research focusing on                 
              three problem areas.  The first continues work on quasiconformal               
              maps defined on manifolds.  These maps play an essential role in               
              understanding transformations of Euclidean space whose local                   
              distortions lie within fixed limits.  The extension to manifolds               
              such as the Heisenberg group is new, providing a potentially                   
              valuable tool in the harmonic analysis of semi-simple or                       
              nilpotent Lie groups.  In addition, the manifolds under                        
              consideration form boundaries of strongly pseudoconvex domains in              
              several complex variables.  It then becomes natural to ask (as                 
              was in the real variable case) for conditions on when these                    
              quasiconformal maps can be extended.  Many of the real-variable                
              methods do not carry over.  Nevertheless, some of the main                     
              results do.  Work will concentrate on isolating conditions which               
              will give the extension result.                                                
                   A second line of research involving symmetric spaces                      
              concerns domains formed by symmetric cones and tube domains. At                
              issue is whether or not on can obtain all symmetric tubes by a                 
              Jordan algebra construction.  If this can be done, then it is                  
              likely that current results available for convex cones can be                  
              carried over to the non-convex.  This will have particular                     
              implications for representation theory.                                        
                   The third area of investigation will consider harmonic                    
              functions on Riemann surfaces and on discrete structures.                      
              Efforts will be made to carry over some of the classical one-                  
              variable function theory to complete Riemann spaces.  Of special               
              interest is the use of a generalized area integral which can be                
              defined on these spaces.  Using this integral work will be done                
              in determining those function spaces for which the area integral               
              gives the same Hardy class as the traditional maximal function.
