Title       : The Topology and Arithmetic of Real Algebraic Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1991  
File        : a9200975

Award Number: 9200975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wojciech Kucharz kucharz@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The principal objective of this work is to study connections              
              between the topology and arithmetic of real algebraic varieties.               
              The contributions of the investigator and his collaborator have                
              uncovered such connections in the theory of real algebraic                     
              morphisms and complex structures on real algebraic varieties.  He              
              intends to continue his research in this direction.  Another                   
              topic for further investigation is approximation of smooth                     
              manifolds by real algebraic varieties.                                         
                   Algebraic varieties are geometric objects which can be                    
              described by polynomial identities satisfied by the coordinates                
              of their points.  "Real" means that the coordinate numbers are                 
              limited to ordinary real numbers, avoiding the square root of                  
              minus one.  While these are physically natural objects,                        
              paradoxically, the theory for treating them is in a far less                   
              satisfactory state than the one  permitting imaginary numbers,                 
              those involving the square root of minus one.  The investigator's              
              efforts have been directed to remedying this situation and have                
              had some gratifying successes.
