Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Problems Concerning Oscillations and
               Singular Perturbations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1996      
File        : a9200131

Award Number: 9200131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. Kopell nk@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1266,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator develops mathematical methods for analyzing              
              oscillatory networks of neurons.  Such networks are common in the              
              central nervous system, but so far the relationship between                    
              structure and function in them is largely unexplored.  Some of                 
              the specific projects are tightly connected to the analysis of                 
              particular neurophysiological networks, such as the vertebrate                 
              central pattern generator for undulatory locomotion.  This work                
              is undertaken in collaboration with a group of                                 
              neurophysiologists. Others are designed to develop new methods to              
              analyze such networks.  In particular, neurons and networks of                 
              them operate on many different time scales, and new mathematical               
              techniques are needed to understand the range of behaviors that                
              can result as a consequence.  The mathematics is used to help                  
              determine which features in the neurons or their connectivity is               
              responsible for the emergent behavior seen in physiological                    
              preparations or in computer simulations of them.  Mathematical                 
              techniques that have been useful for earlier stages of this work               
              include reduction procedures that produce simpler equations                    
              having similar behavior. New techniques to be developed include                
              geometric methods for the analysis of equations with many time                 
              scales.  Some of the project topics concern the development of                 
              such techniques independent of biological questions.                           
                   Central pattern generators are neural networks -- clusters                
              of neurons connected together -- that are thought to govern                    
              rhythmic motor activity such as walking, running, swimming, and                
              breathing.  These generators are examples of oscillatory networks              
              of neurons.  The project aims to develop a better understanding                
              of the relations between the structure of oscillatory networks                 
              and the behaviors of the networks.  Such understanding is                      
              fundamental for a variety of neurophysiological questions.
