Title       : Selective Precipitation of Protiens with Ligand-Modified Phospholipids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9200823

Award Number: 9200823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Kilpatrick peter-k@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruben G. Carbonell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9181,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal is concerned with recovery of proteins from                      
              complex biological media (microbial cell broths, tissue                        
              homogenates, mammalian cell culture broths, etc.) by affinity                  
              precipitation using ligand-modified phospholipids (LMP).                       
              Ligand modified phospholipids are phospholipids to which is                    
              covalently attached a ligand which selectively complexes to a                  
              site on a protein molecule.  Ligand modified phospholipids are                 
              solubilized in water by hydrophobic association with nonionic                  
              surfactants.  The solubilized LMP/surfactant complex then                      
              binds with the active site on the protein to form a protein-                   
              phospholipid-surfactant complex.  Such complexes aggregate by                  
              virtue of hydrophobic interactions among hydrocarbon chains on                 
              different complexes.  Also another LMB/surfactant complex can                  
              bind to the protein of a LMB/surfactant/protein complex if                     
              there is more than one binding site on the protein.                            
              Associations of these types lead to large complexes which                      
              become insoluble and precipitate out of solution.                              
                                                                                             
              In a previous grant (CTS-8904192), the PIs demonstrated that                   
              this precipitation does work by using DMPE-biotin as the                       
              ligand modified phospholipid and avidin (with four binding                     
              sites to biotin) as the protein.  To solubilized the LMP, the                  
              polyethoxy surfactant C12E8 was added in concentrations above                  
              the CMC.  The phospholipid solubilized itself into the                         
              micelles as was inferred by changes in micellar size as                        
              measured by quasi-elastic light scattering.  When the ligand                   
              modified phospholipid was attached to the micelles,                            
              precipitation was not observed; however, when the solution was                 
              diluted to presumably form sub-micelle aggregates in a                         
              metastable, transparent solution, precipitation of the avidin                  
              was observed.  A theory for the rate of aggregate formation                    
              was developing using Smoluchowski kinetics.  Measurements of                   
              the turbidity due to scattering were shown to be in good                       
              agreement with the kinetic expressions.  The new research                      
              suggests examining the precipitation by this method of two                     
              polyclonal (goat IgG) antibodies with two binding sites, anti-                 
              biotin antibody (ABA) and anti-digoxin antibody (ADA), and a                   
              single binding site enzyme phosphofructokinase (PFK).  The                     
              synthesis routes for the LMPs are detailed.  In the new                        
              effort, the effects of impurity proteins on the affinity                       
              precipitation will be examined, and isolation schemes to                       
              remove the protein from the precipitating aggregate will be                    
              devised and tested.
