Title       : Weak Electronic Couplings in Biradicals and Radical Pairs: Through-Bond,
               Through-Space, and Through-Solvent
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1994       
File        : a9200917

Award Number: 9200917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm D. E. Forbes mforbes@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1773,9161,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An investigation of electron spin resonance couplings of                       
              biradical species in a variety of different environments will                  
              be conducted.  Time-resolved electron paramagnetic resonance                   
              will be used to study the effects of substituents, geometrical                 
              constraints, distance, solvent, and temperature between the                    
              flexible organic biradicals.  Media to be included in the                      
              investigation include organic solvents, super critical fluids,                 
              vesicles, micelles, liquid crystals, polymers, and zeolites.                   
              The magnitude of the size of the coupling constants will                       
              provide critical information with respect to through solvent                   
              versus through bond interactions in weakly coupled systems.  In                
              the case of the polymer systems, strategic placement of the                    
              biradical sites in the polymer chain will allow rotational                     
              barriers to be probed both at the end and at the center of the                 
              polymer.  In addition, polymers containing critical                            
              concentrations of ketones will be synthesized and investigated                 
              to define the parameters important in development of the next                  
              generation of photodegradable macromolecular materials.                        
              %%%                                                                            
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the                      
              investigation of biradical interactions in chemical systems by                 
              Professor Malcolm Forbes at the University of North Carolina at                
              Chapel Hill.  It is critical to understand the method by which                 
              different parts of molecular systems communicate with each                     
              other electronically in order to be in a position to design                    
              molecules that are capable of performing specific functions in                 
              the context of a molecular device.  In addition, the synthesis                 
              of new materials with potential use as photodegradable plastics                
              will be guided by the results of the biradical studies.  Also                  
              photochemically reactive polymers will be designed to increase                 
              the adhesion between traditionally non-interactive polymeric                   
              materials.
