Title       : Electron Transfer and Electronic Coupling Through Hydrogen Bonds in Simple
               Ruthenium Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9200446

Award Number: 9200446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff C. Curtis CurtisJ@usfca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University San Francisco
	      2130 Fulton Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941171080    415/666-6886

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project, funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organo-                
              metallic Chemistry Program, will involve studies of con-                       
              formational gating, and electronic coupling between redox                      
              centers through hydrogen bonds, in electron transfer reactions.                
              The effects of second coordination sphere interactions between                 
              ruthenium(II) ammine complexes and complexation agents on                      
              electron transfer reactions with Ru(III) oxidants will be used                 
              as the model for conformational effects that may be involve in                 
              electron transfers in biopolymers.  In the second case,                        
              electron transfer between Ru(II) and Co(III) through hydrogen                  
              bonds will be examined.  Stopped flow spectroscopic and                        
              rotating disk voltammetric measurements will be used in the                    
              study of these reactions.  Detection of hydrogen bonded                        
              Ru(II)/Ru(III) mixed valence dimers will be attempted using                    
              electronic, NMR and FTIR spectroscopies.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Electron transfer is one of the most important processes in                    
              biological systems but many questions remain concerning the                    
              mechanisms of these electron transfers.  In addition to in                     
              vitro studies of the actual biological molecules, which are                    
              frequently very difficult to interpret, studies of model                       
              systems that are designed to simulate one aspect of the                        
              biological process can be especially helpful in determining                    
              what structural and electronic features of the biological                      
              system have significant effects on reaction rates.  This                       
              project, to be pursued by undergraduate scholars, will examine                 
              two of the factors that are believed to affect the rates of                    
              electron transfer in certain biological molecules.  The first                  
              is the ability of hydrogen bonds to serve as conduits for                      
              electron transfer between donor and acceptor, in this case                     
              between two transition metal centers.  There is accumulating                   
              evidence that suggests that electron transfer may be coincident                
              with, or preceeded by, a change in the structure of a protein                  
              that surrounds the electron donor or acceptor.  A model has                    
              also been designed to probe this concept, again based on                       
              reactions between two transition metal complex ions.  Studies                  
              such as these may ultimately result in better treatment of                     
              certain physiological disorders and new methods solar energy                   
              conversion based on models of biological systems.
