Title       : REU Sites for Studies of Marine Antarctic Ecosystem Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1992    
File        : a9200119

Award Number: 9200119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80833              (Estimated)
Investigator: Langdon B. Quetin langdon@icess.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin M. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond C. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara B. Prezelin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Palmer Station Antarctic Marine LTER (Long-Term Ecological                 
              Research) project provides an excellent opportunity for                        
              undergraduate participation in research.  All research within the              
              antarctic marine LTER relates to a central hypothesis:  that                   
              interannual variation in the extent of pack ice affects all                    
              levels in the food web, from phytoplankton to apex predators.                  
              The LTER and the Research Experiences for Undergraduates programs              
              have several common objectives which are achieved by                           
              undergraduates participating in research activities.  These                    
              objectives include:  enhancing undergraduate education,                        
              attracting students to marine science, and training the next                   
              generation of scientists.  Undergraduates with an interest in                  
              marine sciences will have the opportunity to experience many                   
              aspects of an interdisciplinary project which involves current                 
              and evolving techniques.  They will participate both in the field              
              seasons in Antarctica, and in the laboratory work in universities              
              in the United States.  Areas of research available to REU                      
              students who participate in the Palmer antarctic marine LTER                   
              include:  remote sensing; hydrographic and optical                             
              characteristics of the water column; phytoplankton physiology and              
              production; distribution and recruitment of zooplankton and                    
              nekton; and analysis of zooplankton and nekton collected by                    
              seabirds.  During this experience we expect students to move from              
              a broad overview and dependent status to narrower focus and                    
              independent projects with their REU advisors.
