Title       : FASEB Summer Conference on Phospholipases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9200582

Award Number: 9200582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Dennis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                The purpose of this grant is to provide partial support of a                 
              meeting on phospholipases sponsored by the Federation of American              
              Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB).  This is the second                
              meeting on this topic sponsored by FASEB and it will be held at the            
              Vermont Academy in Saxons River, Vermont, July 12-17, 1992.   There            
              is no other conference dedicated to these ubiquitous and important             
              esterases.  All aspects of their chemistry will be covered in                  
              invited talks, discussion sessions, and poster presentations.                  
              These include structure and mechanism of the enzymes, intracellular            
              phospholipase A2, phospholipase C, signal transduction and cellular            
              activation, function of extracellular and secretory phospholipase              
              A2, calcium-independent phospholipase A2, phospholipase                        
              implications, membrane interactions, and relevant phospholipases.              
              The meeting will bring together a world class group of                         
              investigators.  Speakers have been chosen for their state of the               
              art research and ability to communicate.  Special efforts and                  
              support will be made to attract young investigators, including                 
              graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.  The next FASEB                    
              phospholipase conference will probably be held two years from this             
              one.                                                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Phospholipases are hydrolytic enzymes which cleave specific                    
              phospholipid moieties (fatty acids or polar head groups) at                    
              specific positions on the glycerol backbone.  The resulting                    
              cleavage products have specific functions in the cell (e.g., as                
              second messengers for signal transduction).  Thus, the control of              
              phospholipase activities are important for normal cellular                     
              functions.  Accordingly, an understanding of the specificity of                
              both the enzymatic reaction and the regulation of the enzyme                   
              activity, are critical to an understanding of cellular regulation.             
              This is an extremely important and intensely active field of                   
              research, and it is crucial that scientists involved in this work              
              get together on a regular basis to exchange ideas and introduce                
              junior scientists into the research field.  This meeting serves                
              those purposes.
