Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research in Nonlinear Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1992     
File        : a9200672

Award Number: 9200672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8150               (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Kaup   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1266,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor David J. Kaup of                                 
              Clarkson University to collaborate in nonlinear optics                         
              research with Dr. Heinz Steudel of the Central                                 
              Institute of Optics of the Academy of Science of                               
              Berlin, Germany.  The objectives of their joint                                
              research are to develop new solutions and applications                         
              of integrable systems to nonlinear optics, including                           
              such phenomena as Stimulated Raman Scattering, Two-                            
              Photon Propagation, Superfluorescence, Three-Wave                              
              Interactions and Harmonic Generation.  This modest                             
              support for Dr. Kaup's visits to Berlin and other                              
              forms of communication will add impetus to their                               
              collaboration which has been extremely productive                              
              recently.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              With current technology, it is possible to generate                            
              coherent pulses whose widths are on the order of, or                           
              less than, typical relaxation times.  In these cases,                          
              entirely new coherent phenomena can occur which offer                          
              the possibility of new technological applications.                             
              While considerable effort has been devoted to the                              
              development of relevant mathematical techniques and                            
              solutions, very little work has been done to explain                           
              the experimental results.  The collaborating U.S. and                          
              German scientists in this project have been involved                           
              for many years in the development of the mathematical                          
              descriptions of such coherent phenomena.  They now                             
              propose to develop practical applications from the                             
              existing theoretical base.
