Title       : Ecosystems Studies at the H.J. Andrews Experimental Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1992     
File        : a9200809

Award Number: 9200809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Beatty beattyj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur McKee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew R. Moldenke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Biology Department at Oregon State            
              to continue a successful 10-week program that will provide 10                  
              undergraduates in biological sciences with research experiences in             
              ecosystem studies at the Andrews Experimental Forest.  This                    
              experimental forest is the site for several interdisciplinary                  
              projects, including the NSF sponsored Long-Term Ecological Research            
              Program.  Students will learn and develop skills as they interact              
              and work closely with scientists from several discipline on                    
              individual projects within larger established research programs.               
                                                                                             
              To foster student development and monitor what careers they pursue             
              after they complete the program, a 4-phase program is planned:  an             
              overview phase which explains integrated ecosystem studies, an                 
              apprenticeship phase to develop student skills, a personal research            
              phase, and an evaluation and follow-up phase.  According to their              
              interests, students will join a collaborating scientist for the                
              second and third phases.  The principal investigator of this award             
              will coordinate the program, organize the overview phase, field                
              trips, and seminars, integrating the students and collaborating                
              scientists, facilitate students' progress toward independent                   
              scientific research, and monitor the evaluation and follow-up phase            
              so that students can be tracked.                                               
                                                                                             
              Students will be housed at the field station with other                        
              researchers, an arrangement that encourages after hours discussions            
              and helps break barriers between disciplines.  The project will                
              place promising students at a scenic research site with an                     
              interdisciplinary team of scientists to produce good science and               
              develop an enthusiasm for biological research.
