Title       : CRB: Stimulation of Woodland Restoration: Inital Patch Size Effects on Spread of
               Vegetation and on Soil Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1994      
File        : a9200082

Award Number: 9200082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven N. Handel handel@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan G. Ehrenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9104,9285,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Derelict land commonly found in metropolitan areas often fails to              
              support normal succession to woodland vegetation, for reasons that             
              are not known.  Restoration of diverse communities of native woody             
              plants on such sites is important because of the need to increase              
              habitat for wildlife and plant biodiversity, create corridors and              
              decrease distance between areas of natural habitat, support                    
              migratory birds, and provide opportunities for environmental                   
              education and recreation in densely populated urban areas.  We                 
              propose to test methods that may stimulate woody plant colonization            
              of closed landfills, an abundant type of derelict land, by planting            
              small patches of woody plants that can rapidly colonized the site.             
              We will experimentally determine the patch size site, and will test            
              a series of hypotheses concerning the causes for the inhibition of             
              natural succession.                                                            
              The study will be conducted on a recently closed landfill at Fresh             
              Kills, NY.  Patches of 7, 21, and 72 individuals of 7 species will             
              be created in a randomized block design.  Seed rain, recruitment               
              and survival of seedlings, and herbivory will be monitored in the              
              patches and on transects extending outward from each patch; these              
              studies will test hypotheses that dispersal and herbivory limit                
              natural woody plant establishment.  Soil qualities, including                  
              organic matter, pools of N and P, N mineralization rae, root growth            
              and mycorrhizal infection, will also be monitored within the                   
              patches and transects, and will test hypotheses concerning below-              
              ground changes over time will permit testing of hypotheses                     
              concerning linkages among these processes.  By evaluating                      
              hypotheses regarding both above- and below-ground processes, we                
              will be able to compare their relative importance during                       
              succession.  Subsequently, this project will result in design                  
              recommendations for restoration methods used on derelict land                  
              throughout the region.
