Title       : Thin Films Growth and Deposition Studies under Energetic Conditions: Ion Beams
               and Electron Cyclotron Resonance Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1994       
File        : a9200723

Award Number: 9200723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Irene GENE_IRENE@UNC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 9161,9295,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research deals with the fundamental aspects of initial film               
              formation mechanisms from a bare semiconductor surface to a                    
              complete thin film under energetic process conditions involving ion            
              beams and plasmas.  The key feature of the project is the use of               
              in-situ spectroscopic ellipsometry operated during the film                    
              formation process which enables the measurement of nucleation                  
              pathways, substrate damage and film properties.  The effects of                
              many process parameters can be determined with an economy of                   
              experiments and the correlation of process variations on film                  
              formation kinetics and resulting film properties can be made in a              
              direct way.  A novel immersion ellipsometric technique will be used            
              to access dielectric-film interface optical properties.  Relevant              
              and well known electronic materials are chosen for the study: Si,              
              Ge, InP and GaAs substrates with grown and deposited oxides and                
              nitrides.  In this way, general and meaningful fundamental                     
              materials science relationships will be uncovered and models for               
              film formation developed.                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              This research embodies in-situ materials diagnostics during process            
              study of film formation on semiconductor substrates under energetic            
              process conditions.  The objective is to elucidate the film                    
              formation mechanisms from the nucleation stage forward and to                  
              correlate film formation with electronics properties.  In this way             
              an understanding of important processes for technologically                    
              relevant materials will be obtained.
