Title       : US-Poland Research on High-Latitude Ionospheric Scintillation (Aeronomy)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9200765

Award Number: 9200765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22350              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. C. Yeh kcyeh@uiwpls.ece.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5953      POLAND
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1521,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this U.S.-Poland research project between Dr.                 
              K.C. Yeh of the University of Illinois Champaign-Urbana and Dr.                
              Andrzej W. Wernik of the Radiophysics Laboratory, Space                        
              Research Center, Polish Academy of Science is to study satellite               
              radio beacon scintillation.  These studies will provide information            
              about irregular structure of the ionosphere.  Recent interest in               
              coupling process between the solar wind, magnetosphere and                     
              ionosphere has lead to an increased activity in the high-latitude              
              ionosphere studies.  Past cooperative projects on scintillation                
              measurements have been at the Polish Polar Station at Spitsbergen.             
              Using these data, the researchers will:  (1)  Study more extensively           
              the morphology of scintillation in the auroral, polar cap and polar            
              cusps regions accessible from the Station; (2) Model the                       
              highlatitude scintillation avoiding assumptions apparently not                 
              satisfied at high latitudes, namely that fluctuations of the electron          
              density are random with a spectrum which has the same form along               
              and across magnetic field, and compare with observations; (3)                  
              Apply the approach used in the nonlinear system studies to                     
              scintillation and in-situ electron density data.  This research will           
              obtain fuller description of the high-latitude scintillation                   
              morphology, to improve the scintillation theory, to gain more                  
              information about the ionospheric irregular structure at high                  
              latitudes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project in electrical and computer engineering fulfills the               
              program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling                
              leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine             
              complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual             
              interest and competence.
