Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis and Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1994      
File        : a9200908

Award Number: 9200908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos E. Kenig cek@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research leading to the               
              development of various aspects of harmonic analysis with a view                
              toward applications to problems in linear and nonlinear partial                
              differntial equations.  The main emphasis will be on the study of              
              elliptic boundary value problems on domains with rough                         
              boundaries.  More precisely, the boundaries are not required to                
              have a continuously turning tangent.  They may have corners but                
              not cusps.  These are effectively the minimal conditions one                   
              might impose in physical representations where imprecise                       
              measurements always lead to a loss of smoothness.  Results on                  
              homogeneous equations in any dimension are considered well                     
              developed.  Not so are the inhomogeneous problems.  In fact, in                
              two dimensions there is a Dirichlet problem for which the                      
              fundamental estimate comparing the gradient with the boundary                  
              values does not hold.  Work will now be done on the corresponding              
              inhomogeneous Neumann problem to see if the estimates can be                   
              obtained for functions in appropriate Sobolev spaces.  A second                
              line of research, more geometric, concerns the question of                     
              estimating a Riemannian metric in terms of the spectrum of it s                
              associated Laplacian.  In particular, work will be done in                     
              estimating the metric of a three-manifold in terms of its                      
              spectral data with no restriction on the manifold's conformal                  
              class.  This will be done by constructing a function whose                     
              quadratic norm dominates the Riemannian measure.  The                          
              construction requires the solution of a specific differential                  
              inequality on the manifold.                                                    
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them.
