Title       : Dissertation Research: Dietary Reconstruction: Trace OrganicAnalysis of Tiwanaku
               Ceramics. Implications in Form, Function, and Social Status
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1992   
File        : a9200766

Award Number: 9200766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11710              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Marchbanks  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Henry Bunn, Mr. Michael Marchbanks a                
              graduate student at the University of Wisconsin, will collect                  
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will assemble ceramics                  
              from the site of Tiwanaku and immediate surrounding environs in                
              Bolivia. All were collected during careful archaeological                      
              excavation and thus derive from known cultural contexts. He will               
              then conduct lipid analysis in an attempt to determine the foods               
              and other organic materials which were either stored, cooked or                
              consumed in these vessels. To do this he will also acquire modern              
              samples and ethnographic information from local inhabitants and                
              markets to provide a controlled baseline. With such data it                    
              should be possible to answer a number of important questions                   
              about the subsistence practices and social organization of                     
              Tiwanaku's inhabitants.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Tiwanaku is a major monumental architectural site, occupying an                
              area of approximately 8 square kilometers. Inhabited from                      
              approximately 1000 BC to AD 1200 it saw the rise of the earliest               
              kingdom in the Andes. Research conducted by a University of                    
              Chicago team headed by Dr. Alan Kolata has reconstructed much of               
              the history of the site and this provides the broader context                  
              within which Mr. Marchbanks work will take place. His analysis                 
              should accomplish several goals. First it will increase knowledge              
              of subsistence practices because it is likely that some types of               
              food were traded into the region over long distances. Secondly,                
              it will help to elucidate the role which trade played in the rise              
              of this early Empire. The work will also provide insight into the              
              internal organization at Tiwanaku because, on the basis of the                 
              distribution of particular types of food it should be possible to              
              determine the social status of individuals who inhabited                       
              different parts of the site.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also help to                  
              pioneer the application of analytic chemical techniques which,                 
              hopefully, will be of use in many archaeological situations.                   
              Finally it will help to train an extremely promising young                     
              scientist.
