Title       : Role of Phytoplankton in the Cycling of Carbon and Sulfur at the Marginal Ice
               Zone of the Barrents Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1994  
File        : a9200847

Award Number: 9200847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Matrai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 5211      POLAR BIO & MEDIC ARCTIC RES
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Arctic phytoplankton may act as a sink for carbon dioxide (CO2)                
              and a major producer of dimethylsulfide (DMS).  Maximum effects                
              are expected in the marginal ice zone where phytoplankton blooms               
              extend from May to September as the ice recedes northwards.                    
              These productive waters can cover more than half the area of                   
              arctic shelf seas, such as the Barents Sea, in any one growth                  
              period.  One of the main components of the phytoplankton at the                
              marginal ice zone is Phaeocystis pouchetii which, in its colonial              
              form, is a high producer of DMS.  This species is known to                     
              excrete a high proportion of newly fixed carbon as high molecular              
              weight polymers in order to form the colony.  Later, it sinks in               
              mass in the latter stages of the bloom when nitrate becomes                    
              limiting.  Diatoms, such as Thalassiosira gravida, may dominate                
              the bloom at the ice edge late in the summer and may also precede              
              the P. pouchetii bloom in early spring (i.e. Chaetoceros                       
              socialis).  The different patterns of dissolved organic carbon                 
              formation and cell sedimentation between P. pouchetii and diatoms              
              need to be included in productivity models for an understanding                
              of the production and sink of CO2 and DMS in arctic shelf areas.               
              The objectives of this field and laboratory study, in                          
              collaboration with Norwegian scientists, are to:  (1) to                       
              determine the quantitative differences between P. pouchetii and                
              diatoms blooms in the ice edge with respect to primary                         
              production, proportion of carbon fixed that is extracellular, DMS              
              production, and sedimentation of particulate carbon and sulfur to              
              depth: (2) to determine which are the main environmental                       
              variables that favor each type of bloom using a 10-year time                   
              series from the Barents Sea; and (3) to estimate a 10-year time                
              series of DMS production and CO2 uptake by combining the existing              
              time series with carbon and sulfur budgets of the ice edge                     
              blooms.  This research will provide a first approximation to the               
              seasonal and interannual variability of the phytoplankton                      
              contribution to the carbon and sulfur cycle during the ice edge                
              bloom in arctic shelf areas.
