Title       : Shipboard Measurements of DMS and SO2 in ASTEX
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9200620

Award Number: 9200620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255422             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Bandy bandyar@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Byron W. Blomquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  A set of seven proposals and two supplement requests was                  
              submitted for participation in an international marine atmospheric             
              chemistry experiment.  The Atlantic Stratocumulus Transition in the            
              eastern North Atlantic during June 1992, is a multinational effort             
              designed to improve our capability for studying cloud-chemistry                
              interactions and the air/sea fluxes that affect them.  The specific            
              goals of the MAGE atmospheric chemistry experiment in ASTEX                    
              include:  1) develop and test a Lagrangian strategy for studying               
              chemical and meteorological evolution in a tagged airmass, using               
              ships, balloons, and aircraft; 2) develop and test new techniques              
              for estimating trace-gas and aerosol fluxes across the air/sea                 
              interface by comparison with traditional approaches; 3) evaluate               
              the impact of marine and continental aerosols and the formation and            
              dissipation of stratocumulus clouds; 4) compare the impacts of                 
              natural and anthropogenic sulfur, halogens, and hydrocarbons on                
              marine aerosol chemistry; and 5) use a multinational, multi-agency             
              field experiment as a means for addressing tropospheric chemistry              
              issues.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                   In this MAGE proposal, the PIs propose to conduct measurements            
              of dimethyl sulfide (DMS) in ocean water and sulfur dioxide and DMS            
              in air from shipboard in the study area of ASTEX.  The primary                 
              objective is to determine the DMS content in the ocean along the               
              track of the parcel sampled in a Lagrangian experiment.  The PIs               
              propose to compute the DMS flux along the parcel trajectory using              
              a thin film model.  Then, the DMS flux data would be used to reduce            
              the number of variables in the Lagrangian budget analysis or to                
              test the reliability of DMS flux data obtained directly from the               
              budget analysis.  Secondary objectives include the determination of            
              DMS and sulfur dioxide in air before and after the air parcel                  
              passes over the ship.  These data would provide information on the             
              horizontal variation of DMS and sulfur dioxide upwind and downwind             
              of the air parcel.  These measurements would compliment those                  
              obtained from an aircraft platform because the aircraft will not               
              sample exactly the same air parcel during the Lagrangian                       
              experiment.  The PIs also propose to obtain sufficient data to                 
              characterize the diurnal variation of DMS and sulfur dioxide to aid            
              in testing chemical models of the marine boundary layer.
