Title       : Thermal Front Propagation of Fast Igniting Catalytic Converters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9200210

Award Number: 9200210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hsueh-Chia Chang chang.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eduardo E. Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The problems of ignition and propagation of a thermal front in                 
              a catalytic converter will be studied theoretically and                        
              experimentally in order to gain a better understanding of the                  
              factors controlling these phenomena.  A preliminary                            
              theoretical analysis utilizing non-linear dynamics and                         
              bifurcation theory will be extended to analysis of more                        
              complex models.  Experimentally, macroscopic thermal wave                      
              propagation will be investigated via infrared thermography                     
              studies on unsupported model substrates, studies on supported                  
              model catalysts, and studies on a section of a catalytic                       
              converter.  In addition, the issue of communication between                    
              two reactive spots (communications between individual catalyst                 
              particles) will be similarly experimentally investigated.                      
              Finally, a new radial catalytic converter design which is                      
              predicted on the basis of preliminary analysis to have                         
              particularly desirable characteristics as regards fast                         
              ignition and thermal front propagation will be studied                         
              further.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Evolving air pollution regulations for automobiles have the                    
              effect of requiring that catalytic converters come up to full                  
              effective operation with a minimal time delay subsequent to                    
              engine startup, making the development of catalytic converters                 
              with minimal ignition delay and rapid thermal front                            
              propagation highly important.  Accordingly, a major goal of                    
              this program is development of an understanding of the                         
              critical phenomena (fundamental mechanisms) which will lead to                 
              design of more efficient fast-igniting catalytic converters                    
              without the onerous requirement of external heating sources                    
              (an alternative approach to "fixing" the cold startup                          
              emissions problem.
