Title       : RUI: Activation-Evocability Theory of Noncontingent Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9200994

Award Number: 9200994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27340              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesse W. Whitlow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research uses a new approach, termed "activation-elicitation              
              theory," to study how the information present in an event is                   
              combined with the emotional processes it evokes to shape the                   
              organism's response.  The research focuses on two simple learning              
              paradigms, classical conditioning and habituation, that are                    
              common to many species and situations.  An essential idea of the               
              analysis is that we can make significant progress toward                       
              understanding the nature of human reactions to complex situations              
              by elucidating how prior learning and current emotional state                  
              influence behavior in simplified paradigms like these.                         
                                                                                             
              The immediate goal of the research is to measure the relative                  
              contributions of prior learning and emotional responsiveness to                
              performance, using one of the "model systems" of modern                        
              psychobiology, the eyeblink reflex system of rabbits.                          
              Activation-elicitation theory prescribes methods for making such               
              measurements, which should lead to revised estimates of emotive                
              processes in these examples of simple learning.  For example,                  
              certain procedures thought to promote new learning may actually                
              be effective because they produce emotional changes as well.                   
              Clarifying this issue has both theoretical and practical                       
              significance.  Researchers often use classical conditioning to                 
              study the formation of simple associations, assuming that higher               
              levels of conditioned responding corresponds to stronger                       
              associations or more information.  A practical example of such                 
              reasoning is to consider a drug or surgical treatment that                     
              increases conditioned responding to be a potential aid to                      
              learning and memory.  The present approach sharply questions the               
              validity of such an interpretation; increased responding may only              
              indicate an effect of the treatment on emotional responsiveness.               
                                                                                             
              The long-range goal of this research is to improve our knowledge               
              of simple adaptive processes.  Such knowledge is essential for                 
              progress in understanding the biological basis of learning and                 
              memory.
