Title       : Parallel Monte Carlo Calculations of Condensed Quantum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1994      
File        : a9200469

Award Number: 9200469
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390688             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey V. Chester douglas@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malvin H. Kalos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a renewal grant for ongoing simulation studies of quantum              
              many-body systems.  Improved techniques and computing power will               
              enable progress to be made on several more difficult and complex               
              problems.  Detailed studies will be made on the structure and                  
              phases of helium films, the structure and excitation energy of a               
              quantized vortex, and the fluid and solid phases of helium-four                
              very close to the melting-freezing transition.  A new Fermion                  
              algorithm will be applied to study the fluid phase of helium-three             
              and prior calculations on the momentum distribution and condensate             
              fraction of helium-four will be improved using new sampling                    
              techniques and improved wave functions.  A new study will be                   
              initiated on the ground and excited states of a helium-three                   
              impurity in liquid helium.  An attempt will be made to construct a             
              general approach to quantum mechanical soft potential problems                 
              based on hard-core modeling and a suitable perturbation approach to            
              the remainder of the two-body potential.  The formalism will be                
              developed for the path integral method of simulating quantum                   
              systems at finite temperatures.                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              The ongoing research project will focus on the computational                   
              simulation of important problems concerning helium in its liquid               
              and solid states.  This is a difficult and very fundamental problem            
              since quantum mechanical effects are not small for these systems.              
              In order to deal with these computationally intensive problems, new            
              computer techniques will be developed.
