Title       : Developmental Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1992     
File        : a9200770

Award Number: 9200770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Marsteller pmars@learnlink.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Lucchesi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to Department of Biology at Emory                    
              University to establish a Research Experiences for Undergraduates              
              SITE in the broad area of Developmental Processes.  Recruitment                
              efforts will focus on students at primarily undergraduate                      
              institutions and on women and minority students.  Ten students from            
              other institutions will be invited to participate based on academic            
              records, evidence of research potential and interest, and                      
              recommendations from faculty at their home institution.                        
                                                                                             
              The program has the following objectives: (1) to provide formal and            
              informal introductions to the processes of science; (2) To provide             
              an intensive research experience in one subdiscipline; (3) To                  
              provide perspective by examining alternative approaches to                     
              processes of development at different hierarchical levels; and, (4)            
              To maximize participant interaction with other undergraduate and               
              graduate researchers, their specific research mentor, and his/her              
              research group.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Students will select a research mentor and project from the                    
              following areas: genes and development, cellular differentiation,              
              development of behavior, and developmental processes in ecology and            
              evolution.  Students will work under the direct guidance of one of             
              the 22 participating research mentors.  All participants will                  
              attend workshops on scientific methodology, research design, data              
              analysis and interpretation, and scientific communication skills.              
              Students will design and conduct an independent project in                     
              consultation with their mentor.  They will participate in weekly               
              progress discussions with other student researchers and the project            
              directors.  Each focal area will also have weekly lab meetings to              
              discuss project progress.  Students will interact with their                   
              research mentor, his/her research group, including graduate                    
              students and technicians, and will attend departmental seminars.               
              Each student will prepare an oral presentation and a written report            
              at the conclusion of his/her project.
