Title       : Honey Bee Neurobiology and Behavior Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9200326

Award Number: 9200326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30590              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Fahrbach susanfah@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene E. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Entomology at the               
              University of Illinois at Urbana to establish a summer research                
              program that focuses on the behavior and neuroanatomy of honey                 
              bees.  Students will have the unique opportunity to combine                    
              compelling fieldwork with modern laboratory techniques.  Student               
              training will be a three-fold process.  First, lectures will be                
              given on the structure and function of the insect nervous system;              
              the hormonal regulation of insect metamorphosis and neural                     
              development; the hormonal regulation of insect behavior; and                   
              experimental design.  Second, students will receive practical                  
              training in the safe handling of colonies of honey bees and in                 
              observation of honey bee behavior, and ample opportunity  to                   
              practice these new skills.  Third, students will also receive                  
              laboratory instruction in histological techniques for the light                
              microscopic study of the insect nervous system.  Each student will             
              then carry out a research project in which an aspect of bee brain              
              morphology, cell number, neurochemistry, neurotransmitter                      
              expression, gene expression, or hormonal responsiveness etc. is                
              studied in bees of known age and behavioral status.  The goal of               
              this project is to introduce students who already have an interest             
              in neuroscience and behavioral biology to the value of social                  
              insects as models for the study of the neurobiology of complex                 
              behavior.  This project represents and extension of an ongoing                 
              collaboration between two laboratories in the Department of                    
              Entomology and the Neuroscience Program at the University of                   
              Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.  It will be based in the Bee Research            
              Facility and two other well-equipped laboratories in the Department            
              of Entomology.
