Title       : U.S.-Chile Collaboration Plant/Animal Mutualisms in Fragmented Forests; Effects
               on Forest Function and Implications for Habitat Restoration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1992      
File        : a9200111

Award Number: 9200111
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20125              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary F. Willson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : FS Pac NW Forest Range
	      
	      Portland, OR  97208    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1128,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Chile award will support research                                    
              collaboration between Mary Willson of the Pacific                              
              Northwest Research Station, Juneau, Alaska and J. J.                           
              Armesto and M. K. Arroyo-Hurley of the Universidad                             
              de Chile in Santiago, Chile.  The collaborators                                
              intend to quantify the effects of forest                                       
              fragmentation on mutualistic animals and on the                                
              reproduction of their plant mutualists, and to                                 
              examine the effect of perches on rates of                                      
              recruitment of fleshy-fruited plants on disturbed                              
              sites.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              Mutualistic interactions between plants and animals                            
              comprise a set of major ecological processes in many                           
              terrestrial communities, although they are much less                           
              studied than competition, predation, parasitism, and                           
              herbivory.  Because their effects are positive, the                            
              continued operation of these mutualisms is critical                            
              to maintenance of ecosystems and community function.                           
              The proposed work will involve a field census of                               
              birds, student training, and setting up a                                      
              colonization experiment.  These studies will prove                             
              useful in carrying our similar studies in the north-                           
              temperate rain forests from the Pacific part of                                
              North America, where communities and interactions                              
              may be organized differently.
