Title       : Undergraduate Research in Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1992        
File        : a9200150

Award Number: 9200150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50194              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harrington Wells harrington-wells@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Bromer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Goldsmith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Biological Sciences             
              at the University of Tulsa to help train undergraduate students in             
              the philosophy, mechanics, and execution of scientific research.               
              This project will enhance an already strong program in                         
              undergraduate research participation, and will extend this program             
              into the summer.  Another goal is to enhance opportunities for                 
              participation in scientific research for members of                            
              underrepresented groups.  The Undergraduate Summer Research Program            
              will consist of a research workshop, independent research projects,            
              weekly group meetings, invited speakers, and a research colloquium.            
              The research workshop will introduce the students to the philosophy            
              and mechanics of the various fields in biology represented by the              
              participating faculty.  One result of the workshop will be the                 
              development by each student of an individual research project.                 
              These projects will focus on nectivore foraging ecology, plant                 
              reproductive ecology, vertebrate reproductive physiology, or                   
              reproductive behavioral ecology.  The students will complete their             
              projects over the course of the summer.  The weekly group meetings             
              will provide a forum for review of literature, progress reports on             
              research projects, and for solving problems that arise during the              
              course of the projects.  The invited speakers will expose the                  
              students to a wider variety of viewpoints in biology than is                   
              available through the participating faculty.  Finally, students                
              will communicate the results of their projects and experience                  
              critical peer review through the research colloquium.
