Title       : Survey, Inventory and Ecology of Amazonian Herpetofauna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9200779

Award Number: 9200779
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurie J. Vitt vitt@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janalee P. Caldwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1198,9145,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This research will increase our knowledge of biodiversity in              
              the Amazonian rainforest ecosystem of Brazil.  The rate of                     
              deforestation in that area has continued to accelerate in past                 
              decades in response to continuing human interference.  Many                    
              scientists have predicted great losses in biodiversity by the                  
              early decades of the next century as well as significant changes               
              in weather patterns in response to burning and clearing forested               
              areas.  Yet we have relatively little knowledge of the organisms               
              that inhabit this great ecosystem.  Many areas remain unexplored,              
              and there is a great paucity of information on the systematics,                
              phylogenetic relationships, and ecology of Amazonian plants and                
              animals.                                                                       
                   This proposal will focus on two groups of animals, reptiles               
              and amphibians, that play a vital role in the highly complex                   
              interactions that occur among plants and animals.  Amphibians,                 
              although not always conspicuous, can be among the most abundant                
              organisms in a given region, providing a significant food source               
              for many reptiles, birds, and mammals.  By determining the                     
              numbers of species and the ecological relationships among these                
              two groups in a given area, predictions can be made concerning                 
              the effects of large-scale conversions of forested areas on the                
              remaining biota.  The reptile and amphibian faunas of nine sites,              
              adjacent to nine major river tributaries of the Amazon River and               
              roughly covering a circle north and south of the Amazon Riber,                 
              will be intensively studied.  The resulting data and specimens                 
              will provide answers to questions related to the biogeography,                 
              ecology, and systematics of these organisms.  In addition,                     
              tissues and voucher specimens will be deposited in Brazilian and               
              U.S. museums and will provide valuable material for future                     
              studies on systematics and on changes in distribution and                      
              abundance of these groups, Field guides, which currently do not                
              exist for these groups of organisms in Brazil, and popular and                 
              scientific literature will result from this study.
