Title       : The Nature and Reactivity of Soot
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9200923

Award Number: 9200923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica A. Mazurek                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwight M. Smith dwismith@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Research on the structure and reactivity of soot (black                   
              carbon) continues.  Although topics related to the role of the                 
              solid phase and studies of carbonaceous atmospheric particulate are            
              receiving attention, the emphasis of the work continues to be on               
              heterogeneous photochemical reactions involving soot and reaction              
              schemes in more complex systems.                                               
                   The photochemical behavior of reaction systems involving soot             
              being studied under conditions of simulated solar radiation                    
              include:                                                                       
                   (i) soot/sulfur dioxide/oxygen/water vapor                                
                       The role of the surface, through selected surface reaction            
                       and incorporation of trace metal constituents, is included            
                       in this study.                                                        
                   (ii) soot/oxides of nitrogen                                              
                   (iii) soot/ozone                                                          
                   The kinetics and mechanisms of the latter two reaction                    
              systems, previously determined in this laboratory, provide a solid             
              basis for this group of studies.  Several surface-sensitive                    
              vibrational and ultraviolet spectroscopies are employed as                     
              analytical tools in this work.                                                 
                   Reactions of soot are being studied in more complex systems               
              than previously.  Specific focus currently is on the effect of                 
              certain reactions on the subsequent catalytic activity and                     
              reactivity of soot, and the determination of kinetics and                      
              mechanisms of soot reactions in multireactant systems.                         
              Investigations of both the photochemical reactions and                         
              multireactant system are being carried out at low concentration                
              levels in a specially-designed, optical path, reaction cell                    
              interfaced simultaneously with an a fourier transform - infrared               
              spectrometer and Cahn electrobalance.
