Title       : Conference: Travel Support for New MRS Symposium on Photo- Induced Space-Charge
               Effects in Semiconductors to be held inSan Francisco, CA, April 27 - May 1,
               1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9200143

Award Number: 9200143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3612               (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Nolte nolte@physics.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A new symposium is being arranged to                                           
              take place April 27 - May 1, 1992 at the                                       
              Spring Meeting of the Materials Research                                       
              Society to be held in San Francisco.  The                                      
              title of the symposium is:  Photo-Induced                                      
              Space Charge Effects in Semiconductors:                                        
              Photoconductivity, Spectroscopy and                                            
              Electro-Optics.  Travel and registration                                       
              funds for students and post-doctoral                                           
              attendees for this symposium is requested.                                     
              Of the submitted abstracts, at least two                                       
              from students and post-docs will be                                            
              elevated to the status of invited talks.                                       
              Travel and registrations for these two                                         
              speakers are requested.  In addition,                                          
              funds for partial support for 4 additional                                     
              students or post-docs are requested in                                         
              order to ensure that good speakers will                                        
              be able to attend who would not                                                
              otherwise have the resources.  The                                             
              technical content of the symposium                                             
              centers around the photorefractive effect                                      
              and application to semiconductor                                               
              structures.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The photorefractive effect is a space-                                         
              charge phenomena.  It operates through                                         
              the generation of photocarriers in a high-                                     
              resistivity sample, followed by                                                
              photoconductive transport and trapping of                                      
              the charge at defects.  The                                                    
              photogenerated space-charge fields alter                                       
              the optical properties of the sample                                           
              through the electro-optic effect.  The                                         
              photorefractive effect is one of the most                                      
              attractive optical nonlinearity for                                            
              applications of all-optical control and                                        
              image processing because it requires very                                      
              low light intensities.  This low-light                                         
              requirement is a direct consequence of                                         
              the storage of space-charge on defects,                                        
              allowing low light intensities to be                                           
              integrated over time.  Applications                                            
              include phase conjugation, optical                                             
              amplification and spatial light modulators.                                    
                                                                                             
              Recent advances in the photorefractive                                         
              effect are using the electro-optic                                             
              properties of quantum-confined structures                                      
              ?Nolte, 1990!.  The role of the photo-                                         
              induced space-charge in these                                                  
              photorefractive quantum wells is closely                                       
              analogous to the feedback that occurs in                                       
              self electro-optic devices.
