Title       : Evolutionary Biology at the American Museum: Undergraduate Research Experience
               in an Interactive Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1994     
File        : a9200351

Award Number: 9200351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137687             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melanie L J. Stiassny mljs@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1101      SPECIAL PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides continued NSF support the successful Research              
              Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program in Evolutionary                   
              Biology at the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH).  Drawing             
              on the research and teaching expertise of the Museum's scientific              
              staff, the program revolves around projects carefully designed to              
              introduce undergraduates to the excitement, challenge and relevance            
              of research careers in Evolutionary Biology.  The program is a                 
              comprehensive, interactive learning experience that has already                
              proven highly successful in directing students into science career             
              tracks.  In addition to hands-on experience of research and                    
              publication the program includes a series of roundtable discussions            
              where students discuss their research, "show and tell" their latest            
              findings, and thrash-out ideas in an informal, friendly setting.               
              A Special Lecture Series introduces the students to eminent                    
              scientists whose lectures address current debates in evolutionary              
              biology, systematics, the biodiversity crisis and the role of                  
              museum research in these areas.  Students will visit the Peabody               
              Museum at Yale University, and gain insight into the role of                   
              collections in teaching programs.  At the end of the program                   
              students participate in a Student Seminar where they give formal               
              slide illustrated presentations and answer questions from the                  
              floor.  The AMNH has established a comprehensive follow-up program             
              which enables them to maintain contact with REU alumni, provide                
              support and track their careers.
