Title       : National Museum of Natural History Research Training Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9200203

Award Number: 9200203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Wing   (Principal Investigator current)
              W. John Kress  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W.Ronald Heyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      750 9th Street N.W.
	      Washington, DC  205600903    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Paleobiology at the             
              National Museum of Natural History to help support 28 undergraduate            
              students who will participate in both a formal curriculum and                  
              closely supervised independent research in areas such as                       
              systematics, botany, zoology, and paleobiology.  Research in and               
              teaching of organismal biology, systematic, and ecology has                    
              declined at most universities over the last decade, even though                
              these fields are critical for evaluating and addressing loss of                
              biodiversity and global change.  Large research museums still carry            
              out basic research in these fields, but have had little to do with             
              undergraduate education.  The Research Training Program at the                 
              Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History (NMNH)            
              is designed to address this problem by stimulating the interest of             
              undergraduates in natural history research through a balanced                  
              curriculum of lectures, labs, and independent research.  The 10-               
              week long summer program emphasizes an independent research project            
              closely supervised by a member of the scientific staff, but also               
              offers a set of lectures, discussions, field trips, and laboratory             
              and collections demonstrations.  The group activities give                     
              background material, and also raise issues of theoretical and                  
              methodological importance in natural history research.  The                    
              greatest strengths of the Research Training Program at NMNH are the            
              large number of research staff (over 120 doctoral level scientists             
              and 250 technicians), the breadth of research projects (e.g.                   
              morphological and molecular systematic of many groups of plants and            
              animals, morphometrics, paleobiology, behavior, ecology), the size             
              of the collections (more than 119 million specimens of plants,                 
              animals, fossils, etc.), and the libraries (over 1 million volumes,            
              and hundreds of natural history journals).  The combination of                 
              these resources with a Research Training Program that provides both            
              a formal curriculum and closely supervised independent research,               
              creates an unparalleled environment for getting undergraduates                 
              started on careers as researchers in the natural sciences.
