Title       : 5th Annual Penn State Symposium in Plant Physiology; May l7-19, l990, University
               Park, PA.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1990     
File        : a9004528

Award Number: 9004528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : March 31,  1991      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack C. Shannon jack shannon@AGCS.PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hector E. Flores  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard N. Arteca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This symposium provides an up-to-date assessment of our knowledge              
              of the biosynthesis, metabolism and molecular biology of                       
              polyamines and ethylene.  Presentations by outstanding                         
              researchers in the field will provide a critical analysis of the               
              involvement of polyamines and ethylene in plant growth,                        
              development, and responses to stress.  The antagonistic roles of               
              these molecules in senescence, plant stress and development will               
              be examined, as well as the possible regulatory mechanisms for                 
              the ethylene and polyamine pathways.                                           
                                                                                             
              Polyamines and ethylene are the two important topics that will be              
              discussed during the 5th Annual Penn State Symposium in Plant                  
              Physiology.  Polyamines are compounds that have been implicated                
              as markers for male fertility and in flower development.                       
              Evidence also suggests that polyamines may retard senescence.                  
              Ethylene has been shown to play an important regulatory role in                
              many physiological processes including sex expression, flower                  
              initiation and the promotion of senescence.  The purpose of this               
              symposium is to address a variety of topics on polyamine and                   
              researchers working on these two distinct yet overlapping                      
              subjects and provide a catalyst for innovative approaches in the               
              future.  The symposium will provide students and post doctoral                 
              fellows an unusual opportunity to meet and interact in a small                 
              group setting with the leaders in this research area.  The                     
              published proceedings will provide an up-to-date review of                     
              research in these rapidly advancing fields which will be of                    
              general value to students and scientists in colleges and                       
              universities, government, and industry.
