Title       : Developmental Genetics of the Pituitary Gland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1990     
File        : a9004449

Award Number: 9004449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Camper   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ric Lloyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Saunders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              There are two mouse dwarfing mutations that provide good models                
              for studying the basis for induction of tissue specific                        
              transcription during embryogenesis. Both mutants lack the three                
              pituitary cell types which produce prolactin, growth hormone, and              
              thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH). The similarity of the mutant                
              phenotypes suggests that the three missing cell types may derive               
              from a common precursor cell and that at least two genes are                   
              involved in this differentiation pathway. Classical genetic and                
              molecular biology will clarify how the affected genes normally                 
              interact and whether they have overlapping functions.                          
              Specifically, double heterozygotes and double mutants will be                  
              produced and the phenotypes characterized in terms of                          
              neurological, development, immune dysfunction and ablation of                  
              additional pituitary cell types. An intersubspecific backcross                 
              will be used to screen candidate genes for linkage to the Ames                 
              dwarf mutation (df) on chromosome 11 and for fine mapping of the               
              df gene. Closely linked molecular probes will be used to generate              
              a long range map of the df region using pulsed field gel                       
              electrophoresis. The df mutant was generated by X-irradiation,                 
              therefore the long range map may reveal evidence for a deletion                
              or rearrangement, which would facilitate locating and subsequent               
              cloning of the df gene. Linked molecular probes will be used to                
              screen a yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) library of the mouse.               
              Pituitary cDNA and cross species homology will be used to                      
              identify the df gene within the YACs. Identification of the                    
              mutant gene by reverse genetics will clarify the basis for the                 
              failure of progenitor cells to differentiate into hormone                      
              producing cells and expand our understanding of the basic                      
              cellular commitment process.                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              The anterior pituitary is composed of a number of cell types,                  
              each specialized in the synthesis and secretion of different                   
              hormones. This study will determine if the products of genes                   
              essential for the development of the specific cell types act                   
              independently in each cell or whether their expression affects                 
              the development of neighbor cells.
