Title       : Taphonomic Perspectives of Carbonate Sedimentation, Graham's Harbor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9004872

Award Number: 9004872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Felicia Fauntleroy                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Hays Cummins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Boardman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   An eighteen month study of taphonomic and sedimentologic                  
              processes in a modern marine carbonate environment will be                     
              conducted.  PIs will assess the biologic and physical and                      
              sedimentologic characteristics of six diverse environments in                  
              Graham's Harbor, Bahamas.  The objectives of the study are (1) to              
              contrast and compare rates of taphonomic loss from a variety of                
              carbonate environments within Graham's Harbor with those measured              
              rates along the Texas coast--are loss rates in clastic                         
              environments different than those in carbonate environments?                   
              Loss rates in carbonate environments may be less than in clastic               
              environments.  If loss rates are less, then the death assemblage               
              and by analyogy, the fossil record, might contain more of the                  
              original thought. (2) to recognize transported assemblages on a                
              very fine environmental scale--we will quantify transport between              
              and within habitat in Graham's Harbor.  The techniques developed               
              and perfected in this study should be transferable to the                      
              analysis of fossil outcrops.  (3) size frequency analysis of the               
              living community and death assemblage--do carbonate death                      
              assemblages contain a more accurate representation of the                      
              population dynamics of the living community than in clastic                    
              environments?  (4) Taphonomic signatures of the biota from six                 
              distinct environments in Graham's Harbor will be determined and                
              compared with the sedimentary record.  How closely do                          
              sedimentologic parameters reflect taphonomic properties?
