Title       : Genetic Analysis Of Synaptonemal Complex And The Spindle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1992       
File        : a9004671

Award Number: 9004671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Gyula Szauter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Meiosis is a complex cellular process that occurs during the sexual            
              reproduction of all eukaryotic organisms including man.  The                   
              process of meiosis involves the assembly of complex cellular                   
              structures, including the synaptonemal complex, and the spindle.               
              We are studying two genes required for normal meiosis in                       
              Drosophila: (1) c(3)G, which is required for the assembly of the               
              synaptonemal complex, and (2) cand, which encodes a kinesin-like               
              mechanochemical protein that is required for the assembly of the               
              spindle.  We have refined the cytogenetic localization of c(3)G in             
              order to facilitate the isolation of the gene by molecular cloning.            
                                                                                             
              We now propose to isolate the c(3)G locus by chromosome walking,               
              and use the cloned gene to determine the nature and subcellular                
              localization of the gene product by DNA sequencing and antibody                
              staining.  We also propose to identify additional genes required               
              for synaptonemal complex and spindle assembly by screening for                 
              mutations that display second-site noncomplementation of c(3)G or              
              cand.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              Gametes are formed in sexually reproducing organisms by an                     
              intricate sequence of two cell divisions known as meiosis.  During             
              meiosis special structures are formed in the dividing reproductive             
              cells which ensure that a precise and complete set of chromosomes              
              is distributed into each gamete.  The cellular structures and                  
              mechanisms of meiosis are essential for normal reproduction, since             
              gametes carrying too many or too few chromosomes give rise to                  
              grossly abnormal or inviable offspring.  The detailed mechanisms               
              of meiosis are as yet poorly understood.  This is a proposal to                
              study genes of the fruit fly Drosophila whose products play an                 
              essential role in meiosis.***                                                  
               //
