Title       : RUI: Characterization of Cultured Guard Cell Protoplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1994     
File        : a9004331

Award Number: 9004331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219237             (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Tallman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pepperdine University
	      24255 Pacific Coast Hwy
	      Malibu, CA  902634819    310/506-4000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Stomata are biological valves in the aerial organs of plants that              
              regulate simultaneously photosynthesis and transpiration.  The                 
              opening and closing of stomata are affected by the shrinking or                
              swelling of "guard cells" which form their edges.  The                         
              chloroplasts of the guard cells that surround the stomatal pore                
              do not senesce (yellow) at the same time as those in mesophyll                 
              tissue of the same leaf.  The long range goal of the project is                
              to culture stomatal guard cells in ways that preserve their                    
              unique physiological properties, including the functionality of                
              their chloroplasts.  Such cultures could be used to study the                  
              induction and regulation of chloroplast senescence.  This                      
              laboratory has established protoplasts of stomatal guard cells of              
              Nicotiana glauca in culture.  However, optimal conditions for                  
              cell survival have not yet been identified.  A variety of culture              
              conditions will be evaluated to identify those that are optimal                
              for cell survival.  To determine whether any of the unique                     
              properties of guard cells are maintained in culture, some of the               
              physiological and biochemical properties of freshly isolated                   
              guard cell protoplasts will be compared to those of protoplasts                
              of cultured cells.  The same experiments will be performed with                
              guard cell protoplasts from senescing (chlorotic) leaves:  1) to               
              evaluate their viability relative to those of                                  
              guard cells of non-senescing leaves, and 2) to determine whether               
              there are any differences in the properties of guard cells of the              
              two types of leaves that might explain why the stomata of                      
              senescing leaves fail to open in response to light.                            
                                                                                             
              This research is directed at developing techniques for culturing               
              stomatal guard cells from leaves under conditions that not only                
              permit their survival but also maintain their differentiated                   
              properties.   The availability of such cultured cells would                    
              greatly facilitate further research on the physiological function              
              of these cells which regulate the passage of water and gases                   
              across the surfaces of leaves.  Since the chlorophyll-containing               
              organelles, chloroplasts, of guard cells behave differently from               
              the chloroplasts of other cells under some physiological                       
              conditions, these cells would provide an excellent model system                
              in which to study the regulation of the functional state of                    
              chloroplasts.  Since this research will be conducted at an                     
              undergraduate institution it will also provide an excellent                    
              opportunity for undergraduate students to gain first hand                      
              experience in research in plant cell biology.
