Title       : Seismic Characteristics of Sediments in the New Madrid Seismic Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1990 
File        : a9004086

Award Number: 9004086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58344              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tzyy-Shiou Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas S. Fry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this research program is to                                   
              develop a comprehensive data base on the                                       
              modulus and damping characteristics of                                         
              surficial soils in the Mississippi embayment                                   
              region - which is recognized as a high                                         
              seismic hazard area associated with the                                        
              historic New Madrid earthquakes of 1811-12.                                    
                                                                                             
              The New Madrid seismic zone (NMSZ), located                                    
              at the northern edge of the embayment, is                                      
              well known for its seismically active buried                                   
              faults.  The earthquakes that occur in the                                     
              NMSZ are characterized by a long recurrence                                    
              period and low seismic wave attenuation (the                                   
              effect of an earthquake is felt at large                                       
              distances from the epicenter).                                                 
                                                                                             
              The damaging effects of earthquakes are                                        
              intimately associated with the dynamic                                         
              properties of the surficial soils, most                                        
              notably the stiffness and damping properties.                                  
              These properties are a major component to                                      
              regional seismic risk assessment studies.                                      
              The damage is most often a result of                                           
              amplification of the ground surface shaking                                    
              as a result of the coincidence between a                                       
              natural mode of the soil profile and the                                       
              dominant frequency of incident seismic waves;                                  
              or of the liquefaction of water-saturated                                      
              granular deposits near the ground surface.                                     
                                                                                             
              The dynamic soil properties for the data base                                  
              come from several sources: the laboratory                                      
              test program; data and soil samples provided                                   
              by local sources; and field work to collect                                    
              special soil samples.  The data have many                                      
              applications in earthquake hazard mitigation,                                  
              including the design of earthquake resistant                                   
              structures, the retrofit of existing                                           
              structures, and revision of the current                                        
              building codes for the urban development                                       
              projects in the Mid-south.
