Title       : Characterization of a Germ Line Expressed Gene of DrosophilaMelanogaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1990    
File        : a9004775

Award Number: 9004775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Schulz sa08371@odin.mdacc.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas MD Anderson Ctr
	      1515 Holcombe, Box 202
	      Houston, TX  77030    /   -

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              gonadal (gdl) is a gene that is differentially expressed in the                
              male and female germ lines of Drosophila. This proposal describes              
              experiments that address gdl function in the germ line, sex-                   
              specific expression of the gdl gene products, and complex                      
              regulation of the gene during gametogenesis. The specific goals                
              of the research are summarized as follows. First, complementing                
              genetic techniques will be used to isolate gdl mutant alleles.                 
              The gdl mutants will then be characterized as to specific                      
              phenotype, with the overall objective being to determine the role              
              gdl plays in the male and/or female germ line. Second, Dr. Schulz              
              will generate antibodies directed against gdl proteins so as to                
              facilitate the characterization of the gene products. The                      
              objective is to determine whether the proteins have common or                  
              different functions during spermatogenesis and oogenesis. Third,               
              he will study gdl expression in mutations affecting germ cell                  
              differentiation. These studies may identify genes that regulate                
              gdl and should provide additional information on gene expression               
              in the early germ line. Additionally, gdl may serve as a                       
              sensitive sex specific differentiation marker during                           
              gametogenesis. Overall, the extensive analysis of the gdl gene                 
              should enhance the current understanding of germ cell                          
              differentiation in Drosophila.
