Title       : PRF/M: Parasites and Herbivores as Agents of Natural Selection in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1990    
File        : a9004287

Award Number: 9004287
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64463              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yan B. Linhart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                   Disease-producing and parasitic species are important agents              
              of natural selection in the evolution of their hosts.                          
              Disease-producing species are often bacteria or fungi; parasites               
              are often insects or other invertebrates.  Each of these classes               
              of organisms has a different physiology, and therefore can                     
              present a different challenge to a host.  Ford and Haldane                     
              postulated that this diversity of challenges produces a diversity              
              of selective pressures which help explain the high genetic                     
              diversity observed in human populations.  The PI plans to test                 
              the generality of this hypothesis by using a woody perennial                   
              plant, the wild thyme (Thymus vulgaris L.) and three species that              
              parasitize it or feed upon it.  These include the mollusk                      
              Agriolimax reticulatus Muller, the lepidopteran Pyrausta                       
              sanguinalis L., and the mildew fungus Oidium sp.  Thyme plants                 
              can be characterized by their terpene composition, and single                  
              plants contain a single terpene.  The biochemical pathways of                  
              terpene production are known, and the genetic control of terpene               
              production involves single Mendelian loci.  Thyme populations are              
              highly polymorphic for these terpene chemotypes.  The PI proposes              
              to (1) study the differential sensitivity of these terpene                     
              variants to parasites and (2) document the diversity of selective              
              pressures generated.
