Title       : Meiotic recombination and chromosome pairing in Coprinus cinereus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1993      
File        : a9004176

Award Number: 9004176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. Pukkila pukkila@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,
Abstract    :
              We will determine the relative timing of genetic recombination                 
              and chromosome pairing in normal strains of the fungus Coprinus                
              cinereus.  We will ask if the presence of flanking                             
              insertion/deletion heterozygosities alters the timing or amount                
              of exchange in the test interval.  We will examine recombination               
              in the test interval using strains that fail to complete                       
              chromosome pairing due to the presence of the rad3-1 mutation.                 
              We will also monitor the timing of genetic exchange between                    
              homologous sequences that are located at non-homologous positions              
              in the genome.  The specificity of meiotic chromosome pairing is               
              not known.  It has been suggested that some aspects of the                     
              recombination mechanism might provide this specificity, but                    
              evidence to test these models is lacking.  Such models would                   
              predict that exchange should precede or occur simultaneously with              
              pairing, but not follow pairing.  Such models also predict the                 
              occurrence of mutant strains that are recombination-proficient                 
              but pairing deficient.  These two predictions will be tested in                
              the experiments proposed here.  The results will provide an                    
              important framework for understanding the molecular basis of                   
              homologue recognition in meiotic prophase.                                     
                                                                                             
              All living organisms have mechanisms to ensure that their genetic              
              information, packaged in their chromosomes is passed from one                  
              generations to the next in a faithful and orderly way.  This is a              
              proposal to resolve some important long-standing questions about               
              the nature of these mechanisms.
