Title       : The Role of Calcium and the Cytoskeleton in Pollen Tube Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1992     
File        : a9004191

Award Number: 9004191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stylianos P. Scordilis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Calcium ions and cytoskeleton contribute importantly to the                    
              process of pollen tube growth. A calcium gradient located at the               
              tip of the pollen tube may control the fusion of incoming                      
              vesicles, while the microfilament cytoskeleton appears to move                 
              the vesicles to the tip. The proposed project will further                     
              explore the role these factors play in tip growth, and in                      
              addition examine the impact of calcium ion on the cytoskeleton                 
              and vice versa. Dr. Hepler will measure the gradient in free                   
              calcium ion using ratiometric fluorescent dyes that have been                  
              microinjected in single pollen tubes. He will determine the                    
              extracellular inward calcium current using a ion specific                      
              vibrating electrode. He will explore the detailed ultrastructure               
              of the cytoskeleton in pollen tubes that have been prepared by                 
              rapid freeze fixation-freeze substitution. Finally, he will                    
              identify the cytoskeletal components at the electron microscope                
              level using gold tagged antibodies. The above analytical methods               
              when applied to cells cultured under experimental conditions that              
              block elongation through perturbation of either the calcium ion                
              gradient or cytoskeletal function may provide important new                    
              information about the control of growth and polarity in                        
              developing pollen tubes.                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Understanding how the pollen tube of plants grows could have                   
              important impact on plant breeding in agriculture and                          
              horticulture.
