Title       : Dependence of Fission Track Annealing Kinetics on Crystallographic Orientation
               and Crystal Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1990       
File        : a9004218

Award Number: 9004218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald S. Miller don miller@cps.rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary K. Roden-Tice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Casey E. Ravenhurst  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond A. Donelick  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The PIs have developed and tested a method whereby the mean                    
              etchable fission track (FT) lengths parallel and perpendicular to              
              the crystallographic c-axis in apatite may be precisely                        
              determined.  The lengths so determined differ for a single                     
              population of FTs (parallel tracks > perpendicular) but, because               
              of their equivalent thermal histories, they are defined as                     
              "equivalent lengths".  The PIs plane to use this new method to                 
              determine whether the physical process of FT annealing in apatite              
              varies with crystallographic orientation or whether we are                     
              observing experimental artifacts due to anisotropic etching.                   
              Similarly, they will determine whether the FT annealing process                
              varies with crystal chemistry (e.g. Cl-rich track lengths> F-                  
              rich) or whether this is also an etching phenomenon.  The method               
              proposed, in order to address these questions and to better                    
              calibrate this important thermochronometer, is a series of                     
              isochronal laboratory annealing experiments (ranging from O.3-                 
              1OOOO hours and 23-400oC).  Specifically, they will investigate:               
              1) the correlation of observed FT length anisotropy with etching               
              anisotropy in apatite, 2) the variation of mean etchable FT                    
              length with time, temperature and crystallographic orientation                 
              for a range of apatite compositions ;(F-, Cl-, OH-, and Mn-rich)               
              at low temperature (23oC) and elevated temperatures, 3) how                    
              activation energy for FT annealing varies a) with mean FT length               
              at fixed orientation, b) between equivalent lengths, and c) with               
              host crystal chemistry, 4) the relationship of the above results               
              with currently published results (Galbraith and Laslett, 1988)                 
              relating the dependence of FT density (tracks/unit area) to the                
              mean etchable FT length.                                                       
              These new data will then be used to derive a mathematical                      
              expression relating the "equivalent length" to the time-                       
              temperature (t-T) history of the apatite.  This new expression                 
              should result in a significant  improvement in estimates of t-T                
              paths experienced by geologic samples.
