Title       : Pyridine Nucleotide-Linked Reduction of Nitroxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1993   
File        : a9004557

Award Number: 9004557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Bernofsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              B. M. Ratnyake Bandara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              When neutrophils are activated by contact with bacteria, foreign               
              particles, and various chemicals such as phorbol esters, they                  
              generate a large quantity of superoxide by means of the NADPH                  
              oxidase and its associated electron transport chain.  Most of                  
              this superoxide is converted to hydrogen peroxide, and most of                 
              the peroxide is converted to hypochlorous acid (HOC1) by the                   
              action of myeloperoxidase.  In the presence of the spin-trapping               
              agent 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (DMPO), activated                       
              neutrophils yield the nitroxide adducts of both superoxide                     
              (DMPO-OOH) and hydroxyl radical (DMPO-OH).  The origin of DMPO-                
              OOH is controversial, and many workers believe that it arises                  
              from breakdown of DMPO-OOH. In addition, the principal                         
              investigator recently showed that HOC1 catalyzes the                           
              incorporation of ?17O!H2O into ?17O!DMPO-OH, thus suggesting an                
              alternative origin of DMPO-OH in neutrophils.  In these model                  
              studies, the DMPO-OH was further oxidized by HIC1 to 55-dimethyl               
              1-2 pyrrolidone-N-oxyl (DMPOX). The latter product has not been                
              seen with activated neutrophils. However, the principal                        
              investigator has found that DMPOX is readily converted by NADPH                
              into an EPR-silent species, presumably the hydroxylamine.  The                 
              proposed research will test the hypothesis that activated                      
              neutrophils form DMPO-OH and DMPOX from HOC1 but subsequently                  
              reduce the DMPOX with NADPH generated by the respiratory burst.                
              Synthetic DMPOX will be incubated with activated neutrophils and               
              its reduction monitored by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR).              
              The role of NADPH as a source of reducing equivalents will be                  
              examined with site-specific inhibitors, chemical agents that                   
              oxide NADPH, and a recycling system for regenerating NADPH.  The               
              reaction of DMPOX with NADPH will be quantitated and the reaction              
              product identified.  In addition, activated neutrophils will be                
              incubated with DMPO in the presence of 17O-labeled O2 and H2O to               
              determine the origin of the DMPO-OH produced.  Enzymic reactions               
              that reduce nitroxides and oxidize the corresponding                           
              hydroxylamines may be responsible, in part, for the conflicting                
              observations of radicals formed by neutrophils using                           
              spin-trapping techniques .  The proposed research will help                    
              clarify the basis of this inconsistency.
