Title       : Single and Two-Phase Thermosyphon Heat Transfer from Arrays of Discrete Heat
               Sources Submerged in a Dielectric Liquid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1994    
File        : a9004213

Award Number: 9004213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175479             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank P. Incropera   (Principal Investigator current)
              Satish Ramadhyani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Interest in convection heat transfer from arrays of discrete                   
              heat sources has been stimulated by rapid advancements in VLSI                 
              chip technologies and the attendant need for effective heat                    
              dissipation.  Recently, it has become clear that an important                  
              cooling option involves direct immersion of electronic                         
              components in a dielectric liquid, and considerable effort is                  
              being directed towards use of this option to dissipate large                   
              heat fluxes (> 100 W/cm2).  Such efforts typically involve                     
              single-phase forced convection and forced convection boiling,                  
              with measures for effecting heat transfer enhancement.                         
              However, it is believed that, in the quest for achieving                       
              larger levels dissipation with forced convection, insufficient                 
              attention is being given to moderate heat flux applications                    
              for which cooling with no imposed flow of the dielectric                       
              liquid is desirable, if not mandatory.  Such cooling schemes,                  
              involving either single-or two-phase thermosyphons, offer                      
              benign, passive conditions for which pumping requirements are                  
              eliminated, thereby reducing mechanical problems related to                    
              the hydrodynamic loads and vibrations induced by high speed                    
              flows.  High-powered desktop computers and workstations of the                 
              future would constitute an important application of this                       
              technology, since complex coolant distribution units cannot be                 
              used in such situations.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The proposed study seeks to assess means by which non boiling                  
              and boiling heat transfer from arrays of discrete sources may                  
              be enhanced for free convection in a cavity.  For heat sources                 
              with and without extended surfaces, experiments and numerical                  
              simulations will be used to establish a basic understanding of                 
                                                                                             
              related flow and thermal conditions and to determine operating                 
                                                                                             
              conditions which maximize heat transfer per unit package                       
              volume.  Heat transfer enhancement schemes to be considered                    
              include, but are not restricted to, low-profile studs, pin-fin                 
              arrays, longitudinal fin arrays, and porous fin arrays.                        
              Three-dimensional models, including the conjugate problem of                   
              substrate conduction, will be used for comparison with                         
              experimental results.  The work is expected to enhance                         
              understanding of basic flow and heat transfer associated with                  
              discrete sources in a dielectric liquid with particular                        
              attention to heat transfer enhancement schemes which maximize                  
              heat flux at low coolant volumetric flow rate and low coolant                  
              system volume.
