Title       : Subviral RNAs of TCV: Symptom Induction and the Generation of Discontinous RNAs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1992  
File        : a9004665

Award Number: 9004665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne E. Simon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifford D. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Turnip crinkle virus (TCV) will be used as a model to study symptom            
              manifestation, defective interfering (DI) RNA formation and RNA                
              recombination.  The TCV system is uniquely suited for these                    
              studies; it is the only plant or animal virus associated with                  
              avirulent and virulent sat-RNAs which can recombine their genomes              
              and DI RNAs which can be generated de novo from in vitro                       
              synthesized TCV transcripts.  Furthermore, two isolates of TCV have            
              distinct biological properties: subviral RNAs only produce symptoms            
              when associated with the TCV-M isolate and DI RNAs have only been              
              generated from the TCV-B isolate.  Chimeric TCV genomic RNAs will              
              be constructed to ascertain which region of TCV RNA is involved in             
              differential symptom production and DI formation.  The mechanism               
              by which DI RNAs and sat-RNA recombinants are formed will also be              
              investigated.  The putative internal replicase recognition sequence            
              in sat-RNA C, found at the right hand junction of all recombinant              
              sat-RNAs, will be deleted, altered and/or moved from its current               
              location to determine the importance of the sequence in                        
              recombination.  A copy choice model versus a breakage and ligation             
              model for the formation of descendance RNAs will also be tested.               
              Sat-RNA transcripts with defined mutations, allowing differential              
              replication of plus or minus strands, will be added to both                    
              protoplasts and plant extracts.  RNA recombination will be detected            
              by polymerase chain reaction techniques.***//
