Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Geometry and Topology of Instantons and Related
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1990      
File        : a9004076

Award Number: 9004076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Glazebrook                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles P. Boyer cboyer@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The principal investigator will expand upon his recent                    
              discovery of new homotopy-theoretic structures on complex                      
              surfaces.  This interdisciplinary project involves the use of                  
              algebraic topology to understand the structure of the solution                 
              space of certain systems of nonlinear partial differential                     
              equations which appear naturally in differential geometry and                  
              mathematical physics.  Additionally, he will investigate several               
              problems involving iterated loop space structures.                             
                   Two shapes are homotopic if closed loops on them have                     
              identical collapsing properties.  For example, a circle and the                
              shape of a solid coffee mug (with one handle) are homotopy                     
              equivalent.  But if the mug were to have two handles or no                     
              handles, it would not be homotopy equivalent to a circle.  This                
              concept has been explored by mathematicians for over a hundred                 
              years, but its use in problems related to mathematical physics                 
              has been a recent phenomena.  The principal investigator will                  
              contribute to this growing interdisciplinary activity.
