Title       : Mutagenic Activity of Drosophila Retrotransposons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1992     
File        : a9004708

Award Number: 9004708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillie L. Searles lsearles@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Spontaneous mutation in Drosophila melanogaster are frequently                 
              caused by insertions of retrotransposons.  Mutant phenotypes result            
              from insertions into both coding and noncoding regions, and the                
              mutagenic effects caused by insertions into coding and noncoding               
              regions are not well understood.  Some phenotypes resulting from               
              retrotransposoninsertions can be reversed by extrangenic suppressor            
              and intragenic reversion mutations.  The long term objective of                
              this study is to understand how these mobile elements disrupt the              
              expression of nearby genes and to elucidate the role of suppressors            
              in modulating the mutagenic activity of retrotransposons.  A                   
              suppressible mutation caused by insertion of the 412 element into              
              the vermilion (v) gene of Drosophila is being investigated.  In                
              this case, the 412 element inserted into the 5' untranslated region            
              of the first exon, and transposable element sequences are almost               
              entirely eliminated from the mature RNA by splicing at sites near              
              the ends of 412.  Mutations at suppressor of sable (su(s)) cause               
              increased accumulation of nearly wild-type sized v transcripts.                
              One objective of this proposal is to investigate the mechanism of              
              suppression.  The proposed experiments will define whether su(s)               
              mutations affect transcription, RNA stability or splicing.  Other              
              experiments will indicate whether specific 412 sequences interfere             
              with v RNA accumulation and are required for the response to su(s)             
              mutations or whether interference is due to the position of the 412            
              insertion.  A second objective is to investigate the mechanism of              
              intragenic reversion.  In one v revertant, a second retrotransposon            
              inserted into one end of the 412 element, altering the splicing                
              pattern.  The proposed experiments will ascertain whether the                  
              secondary insertion significantly improves the rate of splicing to             
              remove transposon sequences.  If so, the effect of changes in                  
              splice sites on the response to su(s) mutations will be determined.            
                                                                                             
              These goals will be accomplished by examining levels of precursor              
              and mature v RNA produced by in vitro generated variants of the                
              mutant and revertant alleles after transformation into the                     
              Drosophila germ line.***
