Title       : Regulation of Tetrapyrrole Synthesis in Rhodobacter capsulatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1990       
File        : a9004792

Award Number: 9004792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Biel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Photosynthetic bacteria use a single branched pathway to                       
              synthesize all four tetrapyrrole endproducts:  heme,                           
              bacteriochlorophyll, vitamin B-12, and siroheme.  What makes                   
              this branched pathway so interesting is that the four                          
              products play such diverse roles in cellular metabolism and                    
              are required in vastly different amounts.  The ultimate aim                    
              of this research is to understand how the photosynthetic                       
              bacterium Rhodobacter capsulatus coordinates the synthesis of                  
              the four tetrapyrrole products.  Recent evidence suggests                      
              that the PufQ protein binds to some tetrapyrrole intermediate                  
              and is involved in its conversion to bacteriochlorophyll.                      
              Synthesis of bacteriochlorophyll is therefore regulated by                     
              the amount of PufQ protein present in the cell.  The role of                   
              carrier proteins such as PufQ in the regulation of the common                  
              tetrapyrrole pathway that leads to heme and                                    
              bacteriochlorophyll is being determined.  When coproporphyrin                  
              is excreted from R. capsulatus it is complexed with a 32kDa                    
              protein which is too large to be PufQ.  This protein is being                  
              partially sequenced, the gene cloned using oligonucleotide                     
              probes, and a mutant constructed that lacks the protein.  The                  
              phenotype of this mutant allows for a determination of                         
              whether this protein is required for heme synthesis,                           
              bacteriochlorophyll synthesis, or both.  Other hem mutants                     
              are being isolated so that it can be determined which                          
              tetrapyrrole intermediate is the first to bind a carrier                       
              protein.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              It can be argued that the biosynthetic pathway leading to the                  
              production of tetrapyrroles such as chlorophyll and heme is                    
              one of the most important pathways in nature.  Currently,                      
              very little is known about how this complex pathway is                         
              regulated.  The photosynthetic bacterium Rhodobacter                           
              capsulatus provides an ideal model system, in that it                          
              synthesizes all four tetrapyrrole endproducts and is amenable                  
              to study both genetically and biochemically.  This research                    
              aims at an understanding of how an adequate yet balanced                       
              supply of these compounds is ensured. //
