Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analytic and Geometric Function Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1992   
File        : a9004149

Award Number: 9004149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314133             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Alan Taylor taylor@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel M. Burns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                   The primary areas of investigation in this project are                    
              studies of potential theory in several complex variables and                   
              complex differential geometry related to manifolds in the space                
              of several complex variables.                                                  
                   Work in potential theory concerns the analysis of                         
              plurisubharmonic functions arising as solutions of a partial                   
              differential equation given by the complex Monge-Ampere operator.              
              The plurisubharmonic functions are the basic building blocks for               
              potential theory. They arise as solutions of Monge-Ampere                      
              equations. However, there are many unanswered questions regarding              
              the nature of the Monge-Ampere operator which impede development               
              of a plurisubharmonic theory. They include determining whether or              
              not the plurisubharmonic functions form the natural domains of                 
              Monge-Ampere operator and establishing the boundedness of                      
              solutions of the inhomogeneous Monge-Ampere equation when the                  
              forcing term is a Borel measure.                                               
                   Work will also be done studying the analytic and geometric                
              properties of complex manifolds and their boundaries,                          
              specifically Cauchy-Riemann manifolds. Certain renormalized                    
              characteristic classes, finite on strictly pseudoconvex domains,               
              have been identified. They have proved effective in showing that               
              the Chern form for Kahler-Einstein surfaces is a nonnegative                   
              (2,2) form. From this follows the remarkable fact that the                     
              integral of this Chern form can be broken into a part only                     
              dependent on the boundary topology. Work is now proceeding to                  
              determine the set of all renormalized characteristic classes,                  
              that is, global integrals of Chern-Weyl polynomials of curvature               
              tensors of Kahler-Einstein metrics which are finite.
