Title       : Maize and Prehistoric Diets: Isotopic Variation in Eastern North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1991      
File        : a9004063

Award Number: 9004063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127152             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret J. Schoeninger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Because the composition of bone collagen is affected by diet,                  
              paleoanthropologists have used analyses of both trace elements                 
              and isotopic ratios in skeletal remains in an attempt to                       
              reconstruct patterns of subsistence.  In particular, this                      
              approach has been employed to study the adoption of maize                      
              agriculture among North American Indians.  Changes in                          
              hypothesized diets have then been correlated with changes in                   
              social organization.  Because maize has a slightly different                   
              ratio of carbon isotopes from most native North American                       
              vegetation, paleoanthropologists have used variation in carbon                 
              12/13 ratios as an indicator of the amount of maize in the diet.               
              While, from an empirical perspective, the results appear                       
              reasonable, many details of the system are not fully understood.               
              Dr. Margaret Schoeninger's work is directed to filling in the                  
              blanks.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Dr. Schoeninger will carry out a number of related activities.                 
              She will study modern samples of prehistoric strains and                       
              determine isotope ratios.  She will then subject such samples to               
              burning and other diagenetic factors to see if they affect the                 
              ratio.  She will also analyze a series of materials recovered                  
              from archaeological sites which also contain maize remains.  Bone              
              collagen stable isotope ratios will be determined.  Maize kernels              
              will then be analyzed for overall isotopic composition, as well                
              as the isotopic composition of individual biochemical components               
              and individual amino acids.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  First, it will                
              help to develop techniques which may be used to investigate a                  
              number of archaeological situations.  Secondly, it will increase               
              our understanding of U.S. prehistory.  Finally, because the                    
              project includes students, it will assist in the training of                   
              young scientists.
