Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stability, Regularity and Long Time Behavior of
               Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1990      
File        : a9004078

Award Number: 9004078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36522              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manoussos Grillakis mng@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The work undertaken in this project concerns partial                      
              differential equations of hyperbolic type.  These equations are                
              frequently used to model wave phenomena occurring the physical                 
              universe.  Examples can be found in the theories of elasticity,                
              elementary particle physics and general relativity.  The general               
              paradigm for studying a class of hyperbolic equations is to show               
              first the existence of what are known as weak solutions, to                    
              establish properties of these solutions and then examine the                   
              large time behavior of the solutions.  In the last context, one                
              looks for stationary or static solutions through a conversion of               
              the (now time-independent) equation to elliptic form.                          
                   This research will focus on nonlinear waves described by                  
              equations whose primary nonlinear term (as distinct from the                   
              fundamental wave equation) is a power of the modulus of the                    
              solution.  At issue is whether solutions can be shown to exist                 
              for all time or will singularities develop?  It turns out that a               
              nonlinearity equal to the fifth power of the solution is the                   
              critical exponent for existing theory.  For all values less than               
              five, regularity obtains.  Recent work provides proof of the                   
              regularity even at the critical value.  Current work will now be               
              confined to equations involving higher powers of the                           
              nonlinearity.  Past methods will definitely not work here.                     
                   Other investigations will be carried out on the wave                      
              equation in curved space-time to determine whether the energy of               
              the solution decays locally in space and on Hamiltonian systems                
              that are invariant under the action of a Lie group.  Analysis of               
              these systems will be directed toward a better understanding of                
              the stability of periodic solutions.
