Title       : Host Genes Affecting Plasmid Replication and Its Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1992       
File        : a9004169

Award Number: 9004169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihai Serban Iordanescu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Public Health Res Inst
	      
	      New York, NY  10016    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The present proposal is centered on the study of two classes vof               
              Staphylococcus aureus host mutants which affect the replication                
              of plasmid pT181.  The studies conducted so far on the                         
              characterization of these two classes of mutants have shown that               
              both illustrate new types of host-plasmid interactions.  The                   
              first class of mutations, exemplified by pcrA3, maintain plasmid               
              pT181 at a reduced copy number, without dramatically affecting                 
              its hereditary stability.  The pcrA mutations does not act by                  
              interfering with the plasmid control mechanism, and its effect                 
              can not be explained simply by a host factor limiting for plasmid              
              replication.  It was shown that in the pcrA host there is an                   
              accumulation of the plasmid pT181 Rep-origin replication                       
              initiation complex.  These results suggest that the pcrA gene                  
              product enables the plasmid replication initiation complex to                  
              make efficient use of the host enzymatic machinery for                         
              replication.  Several classes of plasmid mutations that affect                 
              the response to the pcrA3 mutation have been isolated and                      
              characterized.  A more detailed study of the pcrA3 mutations is                
              proposed which will include in vivo and in vitro replication                   
              experiments as well as genetical studies. Work is in progress for              
              the cloning of the pcrA gene.  This will permit us to evaluate                 
              its role in the cell and will contribute to the understanding of               
              the way in which it affects plasmid pT181 replication.  The                    
              mutation placC1, representative of the second class which leads                
              to the maintenance of plasmid pT181 at much increased copy                     
              number, was found to specifically affect the control mechanism of              
              this plasmid, by depressing the synthesis of the                               
              countertranscripts ( ctRNA), which act as negative effectors.                  
              The placC gene has been cloned and its sequencing is in progress.              
              The cloned wild type allele was found to complement the placC1                 
              allele present on the chromosome preventing the amplification of               
              plasmid pT181.  The isolation of the plaC gene makes possible the              
              study of its role in host metabolism and of the way in which its               
              expression is regulated.  The results to be obtained will help                 
              to determine what is the biological significance of the                        
              dependence of the pT181 ctRNA promoter upon the function of the                
              plaC gene.
