Title       : Debris-Flow Fans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1990  
File        : a9004843

Award Number: 9004843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159166             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Dunne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1571,
Abstract    :
              Debris flows pose a hazard to lives and structures in mountain                 
              communities throughout the world.  Motivated by the need to                    
              enhance prediction and mitigation, research projects,                          
              particularly in the U.S. and Japan, have produced wealth of                    
              information on initiation and dynamics of debris flows.  By                    
              comparison, little research has been devoted to understanding                  
              debris flows in the environment where their hazard potential is                
              most serious: i.e., on debris-flow fans.  Debris-flow fans form a              
              significant portion of the landscape and aside from concerns                   
              about hazards, the dearth of rigorous studies of the processes                 
              forming debris-flow fans represents a basic lack of scientific                 
              knowledge about a major landform of Earth's surface.  The                      
              proposed research will address the mechanics of formation of                   
              debris-flow fans.  The study complements on-going debris-flow                  
              monitoring programs in this country and in East Asia in that we                
              will develop a methodology for interpreting the vast amounts of                
              information on debris flows and fan formation stored in the                    
              debris-flow deposits themselves.  Our approach considers the                   
              processes of, and controls on, debris-flow initiation,                         
              conveyance, and interaction with the channels of the fan surface,              
              starting with the lithologic and climatic conditions in the                    
              source area and their influence on flow mobility, volume, and                  
              frequency of occurrence.  The approach is a general one,                       
              applicable in a range of environments, and not limited to the                  
              specific conditions in the chosen field study site: Owens Valley,              
              CA.  The model will be built around an rheological description of              
              debris-flow dynamics and will be based on field and laboratory                 
              data.
