Title       : 1990 Workshop on Site-specific Recombination and Transpostion: September 12-16,
               1990, Woods Hole, Massachusetts.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9004022

Award Number: 9004022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Kleckner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Nash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9145,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this workshop is to assemble for discussions a                  
              select but representative group of scientists who are actively                 
              working at the forefront of research on the biochemical                        
              mechanisms used in site-specific recombination and transposition.              
              This interrelated group reactions lie at the heart of a number                 
              of very important biological processes: integration of                         
              retroviruses generation of antibody diversity, transmission of                 
              antibiotic resistance genes, rearrangement of bacterial                        
              chromosomes and mobility of eukaryotic introns.  The oral                      
              presentations at this Workshop will emphasize the mechanistic                  
              aspects of these recombination reactions.  There is currently                  
              rapid progress in this area, and a specialized meeting for                     
              leaders in this field should be both timely and productive.  The               
              roster of speakers includes several scientists who have pushed                 
              the analysis of recombination for the first time into the realm                
              of enzyme kinetics, as well as many scientists who have applied                
              other types of biochemical, genetic and topological analysis.                  
              Topics will include retroviral integration, reactions of the                   
              integrase and resolvase families, Holliday junctions,                          
              immunoglobulin rearrangements, prokaryotic transposable elements,              
              and Drosophila P elements.  We are also encouraging poster                     
              presentations from scientists working in systems which are not                 
              yet amenable to mechanistic analysis.  This should serve both to               
              broaden the biological base of the meeting and to encourage those              
              working in relatively undeveloped systems to undertake a more                  
              mechanistic approach.  The meeting will be limited to 100-135                  
              participants.  This number is sufficient to include all of the                 
              principal investigators who are working productively in this area              
              as well as a reasonable sampling of post-doctoral fellows and an               
              occasional outstanding graduate student.  However, this number is              
              small enough that efficient interchange amongst all the                        
              participants is still possible.
