Title       : Structure-Function Relationship of Restriction Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1993     
File        : a9004611

Award Number: 9004611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan C. Dunbar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State U Sch of Med
	      
	      Detroit, MI  48202    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9220,
Abstract    :
              The project encompasses the investigation of the molecular basis               
              of sequence specific recognition by DNA binding proteins and, in               
              particular, the mechanism by which type II endonucleases achieve               
              their high degree of binding and catalytic specificity.  SmaI,                 
              XmaI and XcyI each recognize the hexanucleotide CCCGGG.  SmaI                  
              cleaves between the internal CpG, while XmaI and XcyI are perfect              
              isoschizomers and cleave between the external cytosines.                       
              Cytosine methylation within the recognition site inhibits the                  
              activity of the enzymes.  It is the aim of this proposal to                    
              focus on the DNA binding properties of the endonucleases and to                
              compare the mechanism by which each of the proteins interacts                  
              with the same DNA sequence.  The project involves structural                   
              characterization of the endonucleases and analysis of the                      
              protein-DNA interaction in terms of the overall topology of the                
              protein-DNA complexes, specific base and phosphate contacts and                
              the potential for protein-induced bending and unwinding of the                 
              DNA.  The effect of cytosine methylation on the binding                        
              properties of the endonucleases will also be investigated.  The                
              comparative study of the endonucleases will reveal whether there               
              are any similarities in their mechanism of molecular recognition               
              or whether each is characterized by a distinct mode of                         
              interaction with DNA.  Furthermore, the enzymes also provide a                 
              good model system for analyzing the potential roles of cytosine                
              methylation in protein-DNA interactions.
