Title       : RUI: Glycosidase Release and the Block to Polyspermy in Ascidian Eggs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1995   
File        : a9004735

Award Number: 9004735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles C. Lambert   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christina A. Goode  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1111,9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr.Lambert and Dr.Goode will study a block to polyspermy in the                
              Ascidian egg.  According to their model, the sperm bind to                     
              glycosides on the vitelline coat of the egg.  An increase in the               
              number of sperm binding to the vitelline coat is followed by a                 
              rapid decline.  This decline in binding helps insure that only a               
              single sperm enters the egg.  Sperm binding is inhibited by the                
              Na+-dependent release of a glycosidase that modifies the                       
              vitelline coat sperm receptors.  They hypothesize that the                     
              glycosidase is initially linked to the egg membrane and is                     
              rapidly discharged at fertilization.  The fact that detergents                 
              and Phospholipase C can free the enzyme from the unfertilized egg              
              suggest that the enzyme is linked to a membrane phospholipid.                  
              Their model includes linkage of the glycosidase to a                           
              phosphatidylcholine and the Na+-dependent activation of a                      
              phospholipase that causes enzyme release.  The glycosidase and                 
              phospholipase will be isolated and extensively characterized.                  
              Antibodies will be prepared to both proteins for ultrastructural               
              enzyme localization.  The mechanism of release will be probed                  
              through the use of phospholipase agonists and antagonists and                  
              also through the direct measurement of phospholipase activity in               
              unfertilized and fertilized eggs.  The role of G proteins and                  
              ions in Ascidian egg activation will also be probed.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Although millions of sperm are produced for each egg, if more                  
              than a single sperm enters the egg,cleavage is grossly abnormal                
              and death is inevitable. As a consequence, blocking the entry of               
              additional sperm is of critical importance to fertility.                       
              Dr.Lambert and Dr. Goode will further the understanding of this                
              phenomenon by studying the molecular details of sperm entry and                
              blocking in the Ascidian system.
