Title       : Molecular Analysis of a G Protein in Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1993     
File        : a9004567

Award Number: 9004567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Ma   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              G proteins are signal transducers found in a variety of eukaryotic             
              organisms, from humans to fruit flies, and from slime molds to                 
              yeasts; they are heterotrimers (of alpha, beta, and gamma subunits)            
              that play crucial roles in many types of receptor-mediated                     
              signalling processes.  In plants, cells respond to a variety of                
              hormonal and environmental stimuli; many of these are known or                 
              thought to involve receptors.  However, the function of G proteins             
              in plant signal transduction processes has not been demonstrated.              
              This laboratory has recently isolated a gene (GPA1) coding for a               
              G protein alpha subunit (G alpha 1) from the small flowering plant,            
              Arabidopsis thaliana.  This is the first G protein gene identified             
              in any plant.  The long term goal of this laboratory is to study               
              signal transduction processes in plants which require G protein                
              functions, and to compare and contrast G protein functions between             
              animals, plants and simple eukaryotes.  The immediate objective                
              proposed is to characterize the GPA1 gene and its product G alpha              
              1 in detail.  The time and tissue specific patterns of GPA1                    
              expression, the intracellular localization of the G alpha 1                    
              protein, and the function of G alpha 1 in the plant will be                    
              examined.  A wide range of approaches will be taken; they include              
              transcriptional and translational gene fusions, transgenic plants,             
              analysis using antibodies, and mutational analysis.                            
                                                                                             
              G proteins are known to be very important in animals and simple                
              eukaryotes.  They are necessary for a variety of cellular                      
              signalling processes such as hormonal stimulation, photoreception              
              by cells of the retina, chemotaxis of slime molds during                       
              aggregation, and the yeast mating response.  There is evidence that            
              some plant signal transduction processes also require G proteins,              
              although, thus far, very little is known about this in plants.                 
              This laboratory has recently shown that G proteins are present in              
              plants by cloning a gene for a G protein subunit.  Understanding               
              the functions of G proteins in plants will be an important                     
              contribution to our knowledge of cellular signal transduction                  
              processes in plants.
