Title       : Teleost Oogenesis and Oocyte Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1993      
File        : a9004310

Award Number: 9004310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1990    
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly E. Selman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin A. Wallace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1111      DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANISMS PROG
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The two major aspects of germ cell development examined in this                
              proposal are: a) oogenesis per se (the transformation of oogonia               
              into oocytes) and early oocyte development and b) the initiation               
              of vitellogenesis. Both the pipefish, Syngnathus scovelli, and                 
              the seahorse, Hippocampus erectus, will be used because of the                 
              unique arrangement of developing follicles in their ovaries,                   
              where a sequential pattern of oocyte development is observed.                  
              This pattern begins on one side of the ovary and a gradient of                 
              follicles of increasing developmental age extends to the opposite              
              side. Little is known about the regulation of early events of                  
              oocyte formation in embryonic ovaries of most vertebrates and the              
              absence of very early stage oocytes in adult ovaries in many                   
              species. The presence of germinal tissue (oogonia and meiotic                  
              oocytes) in a restricted but easily accessible region of                       
              syngnathan ovaries makes these teleost ideal for studying early                
              germ cell events and their hormonal regulation in an adult                     
              vertebrate. The extent of oogonial proliferation and the time                  
              for progression of oocytes through meiosis will be determined in               
              vivo. Dr. Selman will then attempt to duplicate both processes in              
              vitro by examining the influence of various hormones and co-                   
              cultured tissues on oogonial division and the progression of                   
              oocytes from leptotene up to diplotene stages. The process of                  
              follicle formation will also be examined. Dr. Selman intends to                
              characterize the transition from previtellogenesis to                          
              vitellogenesis in syngnathans and will address the cellular                    
              mechanism(s) responsible for the initiation of vitellogenesis.                 
              For this she will examine follicular vascularization,                          
              vitellogenin accessibility, the ontogeny of functional                         
              vitellogenin rectors and the intraoocytic fate of internalized                 
              vitellogenin. Studies will be performed both in vivo and in vitro              
              to determine whether a cessation of normal lysosomal synthesis                 
              and/or activity or a modification of the endocytic pathway                     
              distinguishes previtellogenic form vitellogenic oocytes.
