Title       : Structure and Function of a Novel Biotin Enzyme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1990     
File        : a9004409

Award Number: 9004409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Basil J. Nikolau dimmas@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eve S. Wurtele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research focuses on understanding the significance and                    
              role of biotin enzymes in plant metabolism.  To achieve this                   
              goal the unique somatic embryogenesis system of carrot has                     
              been utilized to study these proteins.  During the                             
              development of somatic embryos of carrot the steady state                      
              levels of one of the six biotin-containing polypeptides                        
              increases dramatically.  This biotin protein has been                          
              purified and polyclonal antibodies against it have been                        
              prepared.  Using these antibodies a cDNA clone coding for                      
              this biotin protein has been isolated.  This novel biotin                      
              protein is being investigated through the utilization of                       
              these antibodies and the cDNA clone as specific probes to                      
              investigate this novel biotin protein.  These investigations                   
              concentrate on elucidating the function and regulation of                      
              this biotin enzyme.  Initial experiments with the antibodies                   
              have identified this biotin protein as representing an acetyl                  
              CoA carboxylase.  The function of this form of acetyl-CoA                      
              carboxylase in plant metabolism is being elucidated by 1)                      
              identifying the subcellular and tissue distribution of this                    
              protein in the carrot plant and 2) elucidating the molecular                   
              genetic mechanisms that regulate the accumulation of this                      
              protein in response to developmental and environmental                         
              signals.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Biotin is an essential component of a set of enzymes that                      
              have important metabolic functions.  The structure, function                   
              and regulation of a number of biotin enzymes is extensively                    
              studied in a diverse set of organisms.  However, very little                   
              is known about the biotin enzymes of plants.  This research                    
              investigates the function and regulation of plant biotin-                      
              containing enzymes in order to provide a better understanding                  
              of their role in plant metabolism.***//
