Title       : Structural Homology of Plant Enzymes Degrading S-SubstitutedCysteines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1990       
File        : a9004960

Award Number: 9004960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mendel Mazelis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A number of S-substituted cysteines are major constituents of the              
              non-protein amino acid pool in species of genera which are                     
              widely-separated taxonomically.  Enzymes are present which act as              
              C-S lyases and by a beta-elimination reaction yield, in many                   
              cases, the characteristic odors and flavors of those plants used               
              as food.  In addition the garlic and onion enzymes are of                      
              particular interest because the products produced also appear to               
              have marked effects in a number of medical applications.  There                
              is one C-S lyase which is present in all autotrophic plants.                   
              This is cystathionine-beta-lyase (EC 4.4.1.8) which is required                
              in the biosynthetic pathway of methionine.  The other C-S lyases               
              studied to date do not utilize cystathionine as a substrate or do              
              so very poorly.  This proposal clarifies the evolutionary                      
              relationships among various C-S lyases that have been purified to              
              homogeneity by determining the structural homologies which exist               
              in the protein molecules.  Typical examples of each type of lyase              
              have been obtained in a homogeneous state and by the use of                    
              peptide mapping and immunological cross-reactions, the homologous              
              regions, if any, are being determined.  The active site peptide                
              should be distinguished from the others because of the pyridoxal-              
              5'-phosphate bound as the secondary amine after reduction.                     
                                                                                             
              Studying the conservation of protein structure among proteins                  
              with similar functions in different organisms has been one                     
              approach to elucidate evolutionary origins and relationships.                  
              This project examines the degree of relatedness of a group of                  
              enzymes limited to a few widely-divergent plant families whose                 
              substrates are S-substituted cysteines, which are common                       
              secondary metabolites in these families.  Determining the                      
              evolutionary relationship between these enzymes is important both              
              agriculturally and medically.  There is considerable commercial                
              interest in these enzymes in several species such as garlic,                   
              onion and broccoli because of their relationship to the                        
              characteristic flavors and odors associated with these                         
              vegetables.  Furthermore, the products resulting from these                    
              enzymes have potential medical applications and have aroused                   
              pharmaceutical interest.
