Title       : Performance Assessment as a Tool for Enhancing Learning in Middle and Secondary
               School Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9154433

Award Number: 9154433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1332312            (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Frederiksen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann L. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Y. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph C. Campione  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educational Testing Serv
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08541    /   -

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 7355,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project's major objective is to develop a principled                      
              basis for constructing and scoring conceptually rich                           
              performance tasks in order to serve the goals of enhancing                     
              both the teaching and learning of science, while at the same                   
              time meeting psychometric standards needed to provide                          
              accountability information to the public.  Classroom-based                     
              experimental trials will explore a set of alternative                          
              assessment models for middle and secondary school science.                     
              These trials will be carried out in schools, and will                          
              incorporate a variety of assessment activities.  The                           
              activities will range from asking students to engage in                        
              "what would happen if ..." thought experiments, to extended                    
              research projects, often carried out in collaboration with                     
              other students.  In addition to the creation of a variety of                   
              assessment activities, alternative rubrics for scoring the                     
              activities will be developed and tried.  The Oakland and New                   
              York school sites represent different contexts for the                         
              experimental trials.  We will study not only the                               
              effectiveness of the different performance assessments and                     
              scoring rubrics for enhancing the students' learning, abut                     
              also their effectiveness in improving the teachers'                            
              teaching.
