Title       : Design as an Introduction to Computer Science in High School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1993  
File        : a9154008

Award Number: 9154008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494844             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith E. Sims-Knight jsimsknight@umassd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass, Dartmouth
	      285 Old Westport Road
	      North Dartmouth, MA  02747    508/999-8953

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Computer programming has gained great popularity in elementary and             
              secondary education because it has been as a powerful tool by which            
              children can develop general problem solving skills and learn                  
              fundamental concepts in mathematics, physics, and logistics, as                
              well acquiring foundational understanding of computer science.                 
              Unfortunately, research assessing these claims has found that                  
              students fail to attain sufficient programming competence to serve             
              as a basis for the development of general problem solving skills.              
              In addition, both research and the practical experiences of expert             
              software designers have suggested that the analysis of the problem             
              domain and the design of an overall plan of the software are more              
              central to the development of software than is learning to code.               
              Students in programming courses that emphasize design learn more               
              than students in other courses, but they still show little progress            
              toward general problem solving.  Recently developed technology has             
              simplified the relation between the analysis and design phase,                 
              making it feasible to teach students software design without first             
              teaching them how to code.  This project proposes to teach design              
              without coding and to evaluate critically the efficacy of such an              
              approach.  If successful, this project will serve as a model that              
              can be developed both for introductory computer science courses and            
              for computer literacy courses.
