Title       : Program to Improve Knowledge and Pedagogical Skills of Pre-Service Elementary
               Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1994   
File        : a9154041

Award Number: 9154041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Enneking                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $788992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ram S. Lamba   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramon A. De La Cuetara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Int Amer U PR San Juan
	      Central Office Systems
	      San Juan, PR  009363255    /   -

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  Inter American University of Puerto Rico will carry                       
              out a project to improve the science knowledge and                             
              pedagogical skills of preservice elementary teachers.  The                     
              project provides eight weeks of summer workshops each year,                    
              four in the biological/health sciences and four in the                         
              physical and earth sciences.  The workshops are limited to                     
              recent graduates of the IAU teacher preparation program who                    
              have secured teaching positions for the fall, and will take                    
              place during the summer between graduation and the first                       
              year of teaching.  Up to sixty teachers per year over a                        
              period of three years will participate in these workshops,                     
              for a total of approximately 180 teachers served.  Class                       
              visitations and follow-up support will take place during                       
              the teachers' first year in the classroom.  The workshops                      
              address a critical, often-neglected area of teacher                            
              preparation, that of induction of the new teacher into the                     
              teaching profession.  Since these workshops are                                
              strategically scheduled to be taken during the summer                          
              before the teacher enters the classroom, these experiences                     
              will be freshest in the minds of the teachers as they begin                    
              teaching.  The project will have a strong influence in                         
              shaping these new teachers' attitudes, habits, and practice                    
              in elementary science teaching which should continue                           
              throughout their careers.  The University has pledged to                       
              institutionalize successful project activities and will use                    
              the workshops as a basis for upgrading the science                             
              preparation of all elementary teachers.  The University's                      
              cost-sharing is 16% of the amount contributed by NSF.
