Title       : Nuclear/High Energy Physics Center of Excellence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9154080

Award Number: 9154080
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4807000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren W. Buck BUCK@JLAB.ORG  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Hampton University
	      
	      Hampton, VA  23668    804/727-5000

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9131,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This Minority Research Center of Excellence (MRCE) project at                  
              Hampton University represents the establishment of an                          
              internationally competitive nuclear physics program.  This is                  
              the first program of this quality in nuclear and high energy                   
              physics to be located at a historically Black university.                      
              More specifically, this project will:  (a) expand and enhance                  
              the physics faculty at Hampton; (b) strengthen collaborative                   
              activities with accelerator facilities that are located at                     
              other universities and national laboratories; and (c)                          
              provide support to develop a Ph.D. program in nuclear physics                  
              at Hampton University.  Hampton University will serve as a                     
              Center for promoting interest in nuclear and high energy                       
              physics by underrepresented minorities.  This achievement                      
              provides a focal point for the University to work with other                   
              historically Black colleges and universities to strengthen                     
              nuclear and high energy physics by underrepresented                            
              minorities.  This achievement provides a focal point for the                   
              University to work with other historically Black colleges                      
              and universities to strengthen nuclear and high energy                         
              physics throughout the nation.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The MRCE at Hampton will continue collaborations with the                      
              Continuous Electron Beam Accelerator Facility (CEBAF) at                       
              Hampton Roads and with the College of William and Mary.  The                   
              CEBAF facility will provide a better understanding of the                      
              basic nature of matter.  CEBAF's advances will continue the                    
              tradition of nuclear physics to benefit other fields such as                   
              molecular biology, materials science, geological prospecting,                  
              semiconductor fabrication, radiation medicine, and energy                      
              technology.  Hampton University plans to fulfill a dream in                    
              being an integral part of CEBAF's overall development and to                   
              make that dream a reality for minorities who choose careers                    
              in science and engineering.  The nuclear and high energy                       
              physics faculty members at Hampton are will respected in the                   
              scientific community because of their publications in                          
              refereed journals and their participation in national and                      
              international professional conferences.
