Title       : View: Video For Exploring The World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1996   
File        : a9154070

Award Number: 9154070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1407537            (Estimated)
Investigator: Andee Rubin andee_rubin@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The study will investigate the power of video in                          
              helping middle school students learn the mathematical bases                    
              of change over time.  By connecting digitized video images                     
              with powerful analytical software, environments will be                        
              created in which students can construct robust                                 
              understandings of the relationships among functions, changes                   
              in their values, and accumulations of changes.                                 
                                                                                             
                   The plan is to use video as DATA, a view that renders                     
              video an active part of the analysis process, not merely a                     
              motivational ploy.  Thus, video becomes a new, flexible                        
              data-collection device that students can use to explore                        
              previously-inaccessible aspects of the world around them and                   
              to relate mathematics to science.                                              
                                                                                             
                   The project will produce and experiment with several                      
              prototype systems for using video to provide visible,                          
              salient connections between mathematics and science and to                     
              support the learning of basic concepts of change over time.                    
              These systems, coupled with descriptions of the roles they                     
              played in students' learning, will constitute one outcome of                   
              the project.  In the second phase of the project, we will                      
              design and implement a single system, based on the results                     
              of our experiences with prototypes.  The effects of this                       
              system will be evaluated by working with experts in focusing                   
              on several key mathematical concepts, constructing problems                    
              that embody the concepts, and comparing middle school                          
              students to college students with respect to these                             
              challenges. Through these activities we will understand the                    
              effect of various characteristics of the video technology on                   
              students' learning.
