Title       : Summer Workshop on Introductory VLSI Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1992  
File        : a9154163

Award Number: 9154163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76775              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl Weiss   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie L. MacDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Cunningham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass Microelectronics Ctr
	      75 North Drive
	      Westborough, MA  015813335    508/870-0312

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9268,
Abstract    :
              The Massachusetts Microelectronics Center (M2C) is conducting                  
              a two week (ten day) project-oriented workshop on the                          
              fundamentals of VLSI design and CAD tool usage.  This workshop                 
              is directed towards Electrical Engineering faculty with little                 
              experience in VLSI design, Electrical Engineering faculty with                 
              expertise in VLSI but little familiarity with the design tools                 
              available in an academic environment, and Computer Science                     
              faculty with minimal acquaintance with electronic engineering.                 
              The goal of the Workshop is to equip the faculty with the                      
              resources necessary to conduct an undergraduate course in VLSI                 
              design that would culminate in the fabrication and subsequent                  
              test of student-designed chips.  Topics include an introduction                
              to UNIX, device behavior, design methodology including design                  
              reviews, design styles, and process fundamentals.  Lectures on                 
              design methodology and process technology are supplemented by                  
              design and simulation laboratory exercises on CAD workstations.                
              Emphasis is on public-domain CAD tools in a UNIX environment.                  
              The course culminates in the fabrication of student projects at                
              M2C's integrated circuit fabrication facility.  Fabricated                     
              chips will be mailed to participants shortly after the end of                  
              the Workshop.  In addition, previously fabricated chips                        
              designed to the same project specifications, some working and                  
              some with planned design flaws, are to be tested during the                    
              workshop.
