Title       : An Interdisciplinary Urban Multicultural Teacher PreparationProgram in the
               Sciences: The Brooklyn Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1994  
File        : a9154046

Award Number: 9154046
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rose Marie Smith                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $645358             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Jablon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Madeleine Grumet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nehru E. Cherukupalli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Brooklyn College of the City University of New York                       
              will carry out a project to upgrade the science preparation                    
              of elementary teachers.  All students at the College,                          
              including elementary education majors, are required to                         
              complete a core science requirement consisting of four 2-                      
              credit science courses surveying the fields of biology,                        
              chemistry, physics, and geology.  The project will build                       
              upon this core to develop five additional courses in                           
              science content and pedagogy.  The courses will consist of                     
              an Interdisciplinary Natural Science Course and two pairs                      
              of education methods and science laboratory courses.  The                      
              Interdisciplinary Course will provide the preservice                           
              teacher with a more in-depth learning experience in "pure                      
              science" which cuts across the science disciplines                             
              involving a variety of topics of interest to the teacher.                      
              As an example, an Interdisciplinary Course might                               
              investigate the chemical composition of rocks and minerals,                    
              the geological structure of the earth, and applications                        
              from physics involving energy and wave propagation during                      
              earthquakes.  The education methods/science laboratory pair                    
              courses will link laboratory study of selected                                 
              interdisciplinary science topics, such as Urban                                
              Environmental Chemistry or Biological Energy, with an                          
              examination of the various scientific processes of inquiry                     
              and of the students' learning processes and attitudes.  The                    
              project also provide workshops and follow-up programs for                      
              teachers who will serve as mentors for students in the                         
              program, and the program will be infused with an urban                         
              multicultural perspective and bolstered by a support system                    
              for women and minority students.  Brooklyn College's cost-                     
              sharing will be 33% of NSF's contribution.
