Title       : Linking Mathematics Education Policy Reports to State Initiatives for Systemic
               Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1996      
File        : a9154539

Award Number: 9154539
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $458050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane M. Armstrong jarmstrong@ecs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Kansky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educ Commission of States
	      
	      Denver, CO  80295    /   -

NSF Program : 7260      DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Poor U.S. student performance on national and international               
              assessments has prompted the development of a national goal for                
              "U.S. students to be first in the world in mathematics and science             
              achievement by the year 2000."  Many believe we can meet this goal             
              only if the entire education system in every state is restructured             
              to promote higher levels of achievement for all students.                      
              Mathematics has taken a national leadership role in developing                 
              consensus on a clear vision of what curriculum, student assessment             
              and teacher preparation must look like from kindergarten through               
              college to be successful in improving mathematical literacy among              
              our youth.  The thoughtful work of the mathematics education                   
              community provides significant information on policy and practice              
              issues related to mathematics education.  Likewise, state-sponsored            
              restructuring initiatives (such as the Re: Learning effort) over               
              the past three to four years have provided successful strategies               
              for systemic change.  However, we have not yet been successful in              
              linking these two efforts - mathematics education reform and state             
              efforts in systemic change.                                                    
                   While the mathematics education community was developing                  
              consensus on new directions for mathematics education, policy                  
              makers were developing consensus on the role of policy in                      
              supporting systemic change.  There is now agreement that success in            
              changing the education system will be determined by how well state             
              policies support and encourage exemplary classroom teaching and                
              learning.  The mathematics reports provide this vision for teaching            
              and learning in mathematics.  The task, now, is to translate this              
              vision into supportive state policies which help schools and                   
              districts commit to the systemic changes needed for improved                   
              student learning.
