Title       : Summer 1992 Workshop for High School Mathematics/Computer Science Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1992       
File        : a9154819

Award Number: 9154819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry Kepner                            
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Minsker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Potsdam College will conduct on its campus the "Summer 1992                    
              Workshop for High School Mathematics/Computer Science                          
              Teachers" as a three-week intensive workshop for                               
              approximately twenty high school teachers of mathematics and                   
              computer science living within a 200-mile radius of Potsdam,                   
              NY.  The workshop is to be team-taught by three members of                     
              the computer and information sciences department, including                    
              its chair and two members with secondary school teaching                       
              experience.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Individual and group efforts to solve problems posed by the                    
              staff team will emphasize the interplay of computational and                   
              analytical techniques in solving a variety of problems                         
              arising in the high school curriculum.  Participants will                      
              enhance their computer programming and problem solving skills                  
              during classroom discussions and presentations of problems                     
              and pedagogy as well as in computer laboratory experiences                     
              taking place in a PC lab dedicated solely to the workshop.                     
              The teachers will finish the workshop with a collection of                     
              specific problems they have solved, knowing the exact levels                   
              of skill, techniques, and background needed to solve each as                   
              well as placement in the high school curriculum.                               
                                                                                             
              Follow-up includes each participant being invited to share                     
              experiences of implementation in a one-day workshop each                       
              semester of that same academic year in conjunction with an                     
              already established series the Computer Science Department at                  
              Potsdam holds for local area high school teachers.                             
                                                                                             
              This project will stimulate and guide teachers of high school                  
              mathematics and computer science in shifting their teaching                    
              practices toward problem-solving approaches and constructive                   
              methods(including use of computer technology) sensitive to                     
              the development of their individual students.                                  
                                                                                             
              Potsdam College of SUNY cost sharing accounts for 5.8% of the                  
              NSF budget contribution.
