Title       : Enhancement of Two-Year Industrial and Engineering Technology Faculty in Current
               Industrial Quality Assurance Practices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  1991   
File        : a9154295

Award Number: 9154295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53006              (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. De Sain   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry L. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary D. Scalise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9268,
Abstract    :
              This project will provide information using interactive formats                
              about current industrial quality assurance practices to two-                   
              year industrial and engineering technology faculty.It will                     
              enable them to update existing course content or initiate                      
              instruction in quality assurance. This activity will enhance                   
              the instruction of quality assurance at the two-year level and                 
              will also teach students about the importance of quality in an                 
              economic environment.  Western Carolina University and the                     
              American Society for Quality Control jointly  will conduct a                   
              year long set of activities under project auspices .The initial                
              activity is a week long applications workshop involving quality                
              assurance fundamentals including total quality, team problem                   
              solving, process study, control charts and process control                     
              versus product control.  This will be complemented with field                  
              trips and guest speakers.  During the following year,                          
              participants will visit several industries representing a broad                
              range of manufactured products to discuss, review and gather                   
              data about quality assurance processes.The concluding two day                  
              session will emphasize participants' experiences and how these                 
              experiences will impact the local curriculum and students in                   
              specific engineering technology programs .
