Title       : Teacher Inservice Program in Technological Literacy and Engineering Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9154839

Award Number: 9154839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry Kepner                            
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $464784             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas T. Liao Thomas.Liao@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              State University of New York at Stony Brook will conduct a                     
              three-year project to enhance 40 science teachers, 40                          
              technology/engineering teachers, 20 mathematics teachers                       
              and 20 teacher-leaders (in the same ratio) to become more                      
              technologically literate and able to implement contextual                      
              learning experiences in their high school mathematics,                         
              science and engineering courses.                                               
              The study of technological systems and related engineering                     
              concepts will provide an approach to make science and                          
              mathematics more meaningful and attractive in high school                      
              education.  A tested and published "Principles of                              
              Engineering" syllabus for a one-year course using six                          
              relevant monographs of engineering case studies will be                        
              used as the main curriculum materials, supplemented by                         
              three video-based motivational and career exploration                          
              instructional packages.  A teacher implementation and                          
              resource guide will be developed concurrently with the                         
              project.  Teacher participants and leadership teams from                       
              sixteen states will be an integral part in generating,                         
              critiquing, testing and refining the guide edited and                          
              produced by the project staff of mathematicians,                               
              scientists, technologists, mathematics and science                             
              education specialists from SUNY Stony Brook; mathematics,                      
              science, and technology teachers from schools in New York.                     
                                                                                             
              Fifty classroom teachers from New York in the first year ,                     
              25 from New York and 25 total from five other states in the                    
              second year will in a three-week summer workshop experience                    
              classroom presentations and participate in hands-on                            
              laboratory experiences that broaden their backgrounds in                       
              technology/engineering, applied physics, biology, and                          
              chemistry, as well as mathematical topics of algebra,                          
              trigonometry, geometry, and discrete mathematics.  Both the                    
              university and school staff members will facilitate these                      
              learning activities. Pedagogical features include the                          
              teachers (a) learning how to use cooperative learning                          
              strategies in the "Principles of Engineering" course and                       
              (b) developing a constructivist approach to helping                            
              students learn mathematics, science, and technology. Five                      
              two-person leadership teams (one classroom teacher, one                        
              college/university/regional educator consultant) will join                     
              the classroom teachers for the third week of the summer                        
              workshop in each of the first two years, those ten teams                       
              joining ten new such teams from ten new states for a one-                      
              week workshop in the third summer to finish the guide and                      
              evaluation input. The regional groups of participant                           
              teachers and leadership teams will meet at the                                 
              college/university of the consultant on the leadership team                    
              to conduct follow-up activities during the school year.  An                    
              evaluation will monitor all program aspects including the                      
              effective use of project curriculum materials and                              
              pedagogical techniques in the classroom.                                       
                                                                                             
              SUNY at Stony Brook cost sharing accounts for 5.4% of the                      
              NSF budget contribution.
