Title       : Problem-Posing Instruction for Teachers: Its Ipact on Student Success in Problem
               Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9154395

Award Number: 9154395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34253              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy A. Gonzales nancyg@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this investigation is to conduct preliminary                    
              research activities with a view to designing a research                        
              proposal related to the impact of problem-posing instruction                   
              (for teachers) on the teaching and learning process of                         
              problem solving (for high school students).  A major goal of                   
              this study is to explore the feasibility of examining                          
              cognitive and affective changes in student problem-solving                     
              behavior resulting from teacher in-service training in                         
              mathematical problem posing.                                                   
                                                                                             
              An in-depth pilot study will be conducted with a small group                   
              of six teachers from three different ethnic communities in                     
              New Mexico.  One teacher in each school will receive                           
              instructional treatment in learning to incorporate a                           
              problem-posing dimension into activities designed for                          
              classroom problem solving.  The other teacher in each school                   
              will receive no instructional treatment.  During the                           
              academic year, all six teachers will be expected to conduct                    
              instruction on problem solving.  Data on student problem-                      
              solving behavior will be collected from the classes taught                     
              by the six teachers.  The investigator will search for                         
              cognitive and affective changes in student problem-solving                     
              behavior resulting from the instructional treatment.                           
                                                                                             
              The study will employ a combination of data collection and                     
              analysis techniques using: student records maintained by the                   
              six teachers, specially developed problem-solving                              
              instruments, and interview instruments.
