Title       : Prehistoric Life Exhibits at the Denver Museum of Natural History....
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1993     
File        : a9154860

Award Number: 9154860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $967309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian K. McLaren   (Principal Investigator current)
              Merry H. Dooley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan L. Espenlaub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Stucky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Denver Museum of Nat & Sci
	      2001 Colorado Boulevard
	      Denver, CO  80201    303/370-8261

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9180,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  In fall of 1995, the Denver Museum of Natural History                     
              (DMNH) will open the Prehistoric Life Exhibits in 17,000                       
              square feet of new exhibition space.  The exhibits will be                     
              part of an on-going renaissance in paleontology at DMNH that                   
              includes research, educational programming, teacher                            
              training, and collections management.                                          
                   Visitors will walk through a series of nine life-size,                    
              open, prehistoric habitat dioramas -- "enviroramas"--                          
              representing principally regional sites that feature                           
              critical events in 3.5 billion-year history of life on                         
              Earth.  An extension of the Museum's tradition of diorama                      
              excellence, the enviroramas will immerse visitors in a                         
              multisensory journey, underscoring the message that vast                       
              amounts of both time and change have occurred since life                       
              began on Earth.  Focus area exhibits adjacent to each                          
              envirorama will invite visitors to examine fossil evidence                     
              and scientific processes.  Layered presentations will enable                   
              visitors to discover, explore, and study according to their                    
              level of interest.  Excellent specimens, interpretive                          
              exhibitry and hands-on components will allow visitors to                       
              gain awareness of past patterns of environmental change and                    
              to develop literacy about and appreciation for how science                     
              and technology contribute to interpreting the fossil record.                   
              A comprehensive evaluation program will ensure that focus                      
              area exhibits are effective and provide visitors with "new                     
              eyes" for viewing the enviroramas.                                             
                   During exhibit construction, visitors will be able to                     
              watch from the viewing area of a state-of-the-art fossil                       
              preparation laboratory, completed in l990, as preparators                      
              rearticulate the skeletons of Diplodocus, Stegosaurus and                      
              other fossils.  As part of their Prehistoric Life Exhibits                     
              experience, visitors will be able to witness on-going                          
              science activities in the laboratory.  The National Science                    
              Foundation is requested to contribute $1 million over three                    
              years toward the $5.3 million Prehistoric Life Exhibits                        
              project.  The exhibition and associated programming will be                    
              a major cultural and educational resource for the Rocky                        
              Mountain region , potentially reaching a diverse audience of                   
              well over a million Museum visitors and program participants                   
              annually.
