Title       : Testing and Screening of the New Chip
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0098218

Award Number: 0098218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $627550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. McCluskey ejm@crc.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nirmal R. Saxena  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is about testing digital integrated circuits during their
              manufacture -- production testing.  Production testing attempts to identify
              manufactured parts that do not perform according to their 
specification
              (defective parts) as well as parts that will fail early in their operating life
              (weak parts).  Sometimes parts are also sorted by their maximum operating speed
              (binning).  For some selected parts, the 
exact causes of their deviation from
              expected functionality must be identified (diagnosed) in order to improve the
              manufacturing process.  Improved IC production test techniques are necessary
              because current 
techniques are too expensive and are projected to become
              increasingly unsatisfactory for future IC designs.  The manufacturing cost per
              transistor is decreasing for newer technologies while the cost per
              
transisitor for production testing is remaining approximately constant.  In
              other words, the fraction of the total cost of manufacturing process due to
              testing is increasing.  There is interest in reversing this trend.

Specific
              research goals are to develop test techniques to replace current burn-in, delay
              test and the single-stuck fault coverage metric.   Other goals will to be
              compare test results for different generations of 
technology to find out to
              what extent results from one technology carry forward to a next generation, and
              to compare the effectiveness of functional tests with structured tests (for
              example, sequential circuit 
test patterns versus scan patterns). 
              Experimental data obtained from ATE will be analyzed.  This data will be used
              to suggest new techniques and to determine their effectiveness.  We will use
              two types of experimental 
data:  some is industrial data that we obtain as
              part of a joint study with a company; the other is data that we collect
              ourselves.


