Title       : Interior-Point Methods for Nonlinear Optimization and Complementarity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0098040

Award Number: 0098040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Vanderbei rvdb@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098040
Princeton University
Vanderbei, Robert J.

Optimization is
              the process of determining values of certain controllable parameters so as to
              achieve the best, i.e. smallest or largest, value of an objective function
              within a specified domain of feasible parameter settings.  The demand for
              high-performance optimization algorithms and software is increasing rapidly as
              the power of the current technology to solve difficult real-world problems is
              becoming more widely recognized.
Much of the success of modern optimization
              techiques stems from the recent development of so-called interior-point
              methods.  These methods were first developed for linear optimization problems
              but are now actively being extended to nonlinear optimization problems.

This
              research involves the development of new interior-point algorithms and software
              for large-scale nonlinear constrained optimization.  Specific goals include:
              (1) fundamental enhancements to the current state-of-the-art, such as the
              replacement of the merit-function for step-length control with a
filter-based
              method and the development of better techniques to detect unbounded and
              infeasible problems; (2) extension of the basic algorithm to new problem
              classes, such as second-order cone programming and semidefinite programming,
              that don't quite fit the basic paradigm of nonlinear constrained optimization;
              (3) further extension beyond the realm of optimization to nonlinear
              complementarity problems, which arise in many engineering problems; and finally
              (4) development of a large repository of optimization models, which serves both
              to illustrate the power of modern optimization technology and also to provide a
              test bed for future algorithm development.


