Title       : Magnetism, Electronic Structure, and Dynamics in Atomic Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0098781

Award Number: 0098781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Bloomfield lab3e@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental research project uses small clusters of atoms to examine the
              development of several bulk characteristics and phenomena-magnetism, structural
              defects, and phase transitions-out of molecular properties. Its main thrusts
              are in magnetic ordering in ferro- and ferri-magnetic particles and in
              ultrafast ion and electron dynamics in salt systems.  The magnetic component
              seeks to address numerous theoretical uncertainties in the spin ordering of
              low-dimensional systems.  Predictions of enhanced ferromagnetic ordering and
              even elevated Curie temperatures have been predicted in one- and
              two-dimensional systems, and small particles, with their large fraction of
              surface atoms, are proving to be an excellent laboratory in which to study such
              effects.  Spin-canting and a competition between ferro- and antiferromagnetic
              orderings have also been examined theoretically and will be studied in this
              work.  The dynamics portion examines the interactions of alkali-halide clusters
              with light, looking at the roles of various energies-thermal, electronic,
              vibrational, and rotational-in the finite-system equivalents of heating,
              cooling, melting, and evaporating.  Graduate students participating in this
              research will receive training that will prepare them for industrial, academic,
              or government careers in the rapidly developing fields of optical science and
              engineering and nanotechnology, particularly the emerging fields of magnetic
              and non-volatile charge-based memory and optical computing.

This research
              uses small collections of atoms to examine connections between the science of
              individual atoms and molecules and the science of bulk matter.  In particular,
              it studies how bulk magnetic properties emerge from those of the individual
              atoms that comprise bulk matter and how temperature, melting, and evaporation
              are related to various dynamic phenomena in small molecules.  Both experimental
              programs involve beams of tiny particles in vacuum, so that those particles are
              studied in the pristine state of perfect isolation.  They are therefore
              well-suited to address many fundamental questions, including how the magnetic
              atoms in a material order themselves to retain or cancel their magnetism in
              larger system, how light energy heats small systems, and how large a particle
              has to be in order to exhibit such bulk properties and phenomena as
              temperature, crystal structure, and changes of material phase.  This research
              has close connections with modern magnetic and electronic memory systems and
              with optical storage and communications.  Students in this research program
              undergo rigorous training in condensed matter, atomic, molecular, and optical
              physics and are well prepared for careers in industrial or academic science.

