Title       : Cooling Flows and Thermal Conduction in Galaxy-Cluster Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0098086

Award Number: 0098086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin D. Chandran benjamin-chandran@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
AST 0098086
Chandran

Galaxy clusters are among the largest organized
              structures in the observed universe and play an important role in our
              understanding of the evolution of the universe as a whole. Intriguingly, these
              clusters possess vast quantities of plasma (hot ionized gas) in the enormous
              spaces between their galaxies. Typically, there is much more mass in a
              cluster's plasma than in all the stars in all the galaxies within a cluster.
              Because this plasma is such an important constituent of a cluster, its
              evolution poses an important and challenging problem for astronomers.

With
              the advent of x-ray satellites, astronomers discovered that intracluster
              plasmas cool by emitting huge amounts of high energy x-rays. As the plasma
              within a cluster cools, the pressure within the plasma decreases, which enables
              gravity to compress the plasma and force it inwards towards the cluster's
              center. The rate at which plasma flows inwards is currently the subject of
              considerable controversy within the astrophysical community. Some astronomers
              believe that the radiative cooling of intracluster plasma is offset by heating.
              For example, as the plasma near a cluster's center cools, heat can be conducted
              inwards from the hotter plasma surrounding a cluster's core. Such heating
              sustains the pressure of the plasma in the core, reducing the rate of inflow. 
              Other astronomers believe that heating of cluster plasma is minimal, so that
              large quantities of intracluster plasma are accreted towards a cluster's
              center.  This project will help resolve this controversy by determining the
              efficiency of thermal conduction in galaxy clusters. The subtlety is that
              intracluster plasmas are turbulent and magnetized. The particles which carry
              heat from hot regions to cold regions are constrained to move primarily along
              the magnetic field, so that if the magnetic field has a tangled topology, the
              transport of heat is slowed.  This project will use numerical simulations of
              turbulent plasmas to determine the rate of heat conduction amidst such tangled
              magnetic fields. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***


