Title       : Dynamics of Quantum Magnets and Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0098226

Award Number: 0098226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subir Sachdev subir.sachdev@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical research on fundamental questions raised by
              experiments on the magnetic and charge transport properties of complex oxide
              compounds.  The aim of this work is to elucidate the competition between the
              many possible ground states of correlated electron systems in low dimensions,
              the quantum phase transitions between them, and the complex crossovers in their
              dynamic and transport properties at finite temperature.  One focus of this work
              will be the response of correlated quantum systems to non-magnetic impurities
              like Zn or Li.  Nuclear magnetic resonance, neutron scattering, and tunneling
              microscopy experiments have shown that such impurities can be sensitive probes
              of the quantum state of the electrons. The PI plans to explore whether these
              probes can distinguish among the different models proposed for high temperature
              superconductors.  The PI's recent theories correlate the results of different
              experimental probes and suggest new experiments and open new theoretical issues
              that will be investigated.  The spectrum of collective spin-singlet and
              spin-triplet excitations in d-wave superconductors, the manner in which these
              excitations couple to the fermionic S=1/2 quasiparticle excitations, and their
              possible interplay with "stripe" correlations will also be studied. The PI also
              plans to pursue related projects on spin-glass order in strongly disordered
              transition metal and rare earth compounds, and tunneling between lateral
              quantum Hall edge states.
%%%
This award supports theoretical research on
              fundamental questions raised by experiments on the magnetic and charge
              transport properties of high temperature superconductors and related transition
              metal oxide compounds. The proposal involves using impurities like Zn or Li as
              probes of the quantum state of the electrons in these systems.  The response of
              the correlated electron system as revealed by a variety of experiments is
              expected to elucidate the fundamental nature of magnetic and superconducting
              states in these materials. These states are both a puzzle and a motivation for
              theoretical and experimental work that challenges our fundamental concepts of
              superconducting, magnetic, and metallic states. A unifying theme of the
              proposed research involves exploring the role of quantum phase transitions in
              determining macroscopic properties and the nature of electronic excitations in
              high temperature superconductors and related transition metal oxides at finite
              temperature. Quantum phase transitions occur at zero temperature in response to
              small changes in an external parameter. The proposed work also supports
              graduate education in state-of-the art methods in condensed matter
              theory.
***


