Title       : Motives and Algebraic Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0098111

Award Number: 0098111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96687              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Merkurjev merkurev@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The PI of this project will continue to work on problems in algebraic group
              theory using three algebraic cohomology theories having topological origin:
              motivic cohomology, algebraic K-theory and algebraic cobordism.  The PI
              proposes to work on three relatively independent topics. The first topic is
              devoted to the rationality problem of algebraic groups and deals with motivic
              cohomology.  The PI expects to find a Postnikov tower for the motive of a
              simply connected group involving motives of projective homogeneous varieties. 
              The second topic is related to algebraic cobordism.  The PI sees the
              opportunity to use this theory in order to approach the general Rost's degree
              formula.  The latter has many applications in the theory of homogeneous spaces
              of algebraic groups.  The third topic, the essential dimension, although
              seemingly different from the others, nevertheless, involves the phenomenon of
              compression of algebraic varieties and hence is closely related to the second
              topic.  The PI proposes to use degree formulas for the computation of essential
              dimensions of algebraic groups.

The area of this project lies between
              algebraic geometry, the branch of mathematics devoted to geometric objects
              called algebraic varieties and described by polynomial equations, and algebraic
              topology where one studies continuously varying families of structures called
              topological spaces.  Translating the methods of topology from topological
              spaces to algebraic varieties gives new tools to solve problems in algebraic
              geometry.  Much of this project is about using techniques that are of a
              topological nature to obtain a better understanding of certain problems in
              algebraic geometry.

