Title       : Scattering and Reactions of Intermediate Energy Projectiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0098642

Award Number: 0098642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1310929            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Glashausser glashaus@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Gilman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Ransome  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant will support the experimental work of the 
Intermediate Energy
              Nuclear Physics Group at Rutgers  University.
The Rutgers group carries out
              experiments  primarily
at the continuous electron beam accelerator, CEBAF,
              located at the 
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility 
in Newport 
              News, Virginia.  Their experiments are aimed at
improving our understanding of
              the structure of nucleons.  Although
we know the basic building blocks of
              nucleons are quarks and gluons,
how they interact to give the nucleon its
              observed properties is
still not well known.  Our experiments use spin, a
              fundamental property
of sub-atomic particles,  as a sensitive probe of
              the
nucleon.  One type of experiment measures the polarization of
ejected
              protons when polarized (spin-aligned) electrons are scattered
from nucleons. 
              This determines the distributions of charge and
magnetization in the proton,
              and how those distributions are changed
when the proton is bound in a nucleus.
              Another type of experiments
uses polarized photons absorbed on deuterium.  The
              polarization of
the outgoing protons is sensitive to the mechanism of the
              absorption,
and hence to the way the quarks and gluons interact in the
              deuteron. 
The third major type of experiments use electrons scattered from
              a
polarized helium target to study the quark spin structure of the
              neutron.


