Title       : Studies of Geometric Arrangements and their Algorithmic Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0098246

Award Number: 0098246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Pollack pollack@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janos Pach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Micha Sharir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computational geometry covers a wide range of applications, such as motion
              planning and computer graphics, 
and its contribution to their solution
              involves the use of sophisticated techniques drawn from many branches of
              mathematics and computer science. The investigators extensively study many
              basic and applied problems in the area, including motion planning, Voronoi
              diagrams, combinatorial and algebraic analysis of arrangements of curves and
              algebraic surfaces, graph drawing, randomized algorithms, and geometric
              optimization.

A major portion of this research involves the study of
              arrangements of curves and surfaces. The significant progress made by the PI's
              on these problems during the past 15 years has opened up many new challenging
              research directions, including:
Combinatorial and algorithmic problems related
              to substructures (lower envelopes, single cells, zones, levels, vertical
              decompositions) in arrangements of surfaces in higher dimensions.  Related
              algorithms in real algebraic geometry for computing connected components,
              stratifications, the dimension and other
topological parameters of real
              semi-algebraic sets.  Graph drawing and other algorithmic, combinatorial, and
              topological problems involving planar arrangements of segments or curves. 
              Applications of these results to numerous areas, including motion planning in
              robotics, rendering and modeling problems in computer graphics, generalized
              Voronoi diagrams and geometric optimization problems, including problems in
              metrology and facility location.  

An important feature of this research is
              the cross-fertilization between basic research in computational and
              combinatorial geometry and various application areas.  Another theme is the
              strong connection between the combinatorial analysis of arrangements and the
              design of efficient algorithms for constructing and utilizing these structures.
              The efficiency of the algorithms often crucially depends on the size of the
              structure to be computed, and most of the work is devoted to bounding this
              quantity. 

