Title       : Photochemistry of Conjugated Polymer/Lanthanide Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a0098240

Award Number: 0098240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $444001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vojislav I. Srdanov srdanov@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guillermo C. Bazan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division supports this award to
              University of California Santa Barbara.  The focus of the research is the
              synthesis and characterization of conjugated polymer-lanthanide blends and to
              determine mechanisms for electronic couplings and charge transfer reactions in
              these systems. Under this award, ultra fast femto-second and time-resolved
              spectroscopic studies will be carried out by Vojislav Srdanov and Guillermo
              Bazan to determine the optical and electronic coupling between the conjugated
              polymers and lanthanides such as terbium neodymium and erbium in the prepared
              blends.  Specifically, photoluminescence and electroluminescence properties of
              rare earth centered conjugated polymers will be studied with this award. 
              Orbital energy levels of the polymer, the singlet and triplet levels of the
              ligand, and those of the lanthanides will be matched for the efficient
              combination of the polymer and the lanthanide.  An understanding of the
              mechanism for the energy transfer reactions in conjugated polymers doped with
              different lanthanides may provide impetus for the development of monochromatic
              light-emitting diodes, flat panel displays and other related electro-optic
              devices.   

An understanding of the mechanism for the charge transfer
              reactions in conjugated polymers with lanthanide rare-earth metals may provide
              impetus for the development of monochromatic light-emitting diodes, flat-panel
              display and other related electo-optic devices. The educational plan will
              integrate interdisciplinary research and education in the area of
              macromolecular chemistry and photochemistry. 
