Title       : Understanding Biased Galaxy Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2001     
File        : a0098584

Award Number: 0098584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123540             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Weinberg dhw@astronomy.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098584
Weinberg

Over the past two decades astronomers have amassed a
              considerable body of evidence for the existence of an unseen component of the
              universe which exerts a gravitational-like influence but has no other
              identified signature. This component is known as "dark matter."  One of the
              outstanding problems in the construction of cosmological models is our lack of
              knowledge of just how the dark matter is distributed with respect to the
              luminous matter. The spatial function which can describe this difference in
              distribution is referred to as "bias" and its determination is critical for
              understanding the structure and evolution of the universe. The goal of this
              project is to construct a series of cosmological models, using a bias model
              known as the "halo occupation distribution" (HOD) which defines the bias of a
              population of galaxies by giving the conditional probability p(NjM) that a dark
              matter halo of virial mass M contains N galaxies, together with prescriptions
              that specify the relative spatial and velocity distributions of galaxies and
              dark matter within virialized dark halos. These models would predict different
              types of galaxy clustering depending on the HOD used. The resulting predicted
              distributions of galaxies generated by these families of cosmological models
              will be compared with the observed galaxy distributions found in the upcoming
              surveys from Australia (the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey or "2dFGRS") and from
              the United States (the Sloan Digital Sky Survey or "SDSS"). These comparisons
              may confirm the basic validity of the models and thus determine an empirical
              form of the HOD. Alternatively, these empirical tests may  show that the
              current theoretical picture of galaxy formation is still missing important
              physical ingredients. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program
              for Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***


