Title       : Fast Algorithms for Wave Scattering in Layered Media for Electronic Packaging
               and Geophysical Exploration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0098140

Award Number: 0098140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Huo Liu qhliu@ee.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Cai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098140
Duke University
Liu, Qing Huo

In this interdisciplinary
              project, we propose to develop fast algorithms for electromagnetic and elastic
              wave scattering in layered media. The impetus for such a joint effort is the
              ever increasing demand for efficient and accurate numerical simulation tools
              for electronic packaging and geophysical exploration where wave phenomenon
              plays an important role for design, evaluation, prediction and production. In
              both applications, there is a pressing need for fast solution techniques for
              full wave equations in layered media, namely, Maxwell's equations for
              electronic packaging and  both electromagnetic and elastic wave equations for
              geophysical exploration.  As the numerical issues involved in the solution of
              both wave equations share many common features, a concerted effort to develop
              fast algorithms for wave scattering in layered media will have a significant
              impact in both areas.

In a high-speed electronic package, interconnects are
              one of the determining factors for the speed performance of the system.  Such a
              high order effect is not easily captured in either equations or tables,
              rendering conventional timing driven layout techniques inaccurate and obsolete.
               One must fully characterize
the interconnect structures to ensure on-chip
              signal integrity and to achieve the expected high-speed system performance. 
              Therefore,  there is a strong need for faster and more accurate full-wave
              electromagnetic analysis tools to extract parasitic parameters such as
              resistance,  capacitance, and inductance.

On the other hand, in geophysical
              exploration for oil and gas, electromagnetic and acoustic sensors are widely
              used to probe complex geologic structures. The goal of electromagnetic and
              acoustic subsurface sensing is to infer from these measurements the
              electromagnetic and mechanical properties of the formation,
and to combine
              with other, such as nuclear, measurements to determine the petrophysical
              characteristics of the reservoir. The interpretation of these easurements,
              however, remains a challenging problem because of the complicated interaction
              of waves with the complex geologic structures and wellbore.  The interpretation
              and processing of these measurements depend on fast and accurate forward and
              inverse solutions of lectromagnetic and acoustic waves in large-scale, highly
              heterogeneous media.

The main emphasis of this proposal is on numerical
              algorithm development relevant to direct problems for electromagnetic and
              elastic waves propagation in layered media. A frequency domain integral
              equation formulation will be used.  Major tasks include fast calculation of
              dyadic Green's functions for general
layered media; fast matrix-vector
              multiplication and robust preconditioner for matrix solver; construction and
              study of high order basis functions for large targets; application of the
              obtained numerical algorithms in electronic packaging and geophysical
              exploration.

Both PI's have extensive experience in the proposed application
              areas---parameter extraction for VLSI and RF component design (Cai) and
              geophysical subsurface sensing and electronic packaging (Liu). 
              The
collaborated research will greatly benefit the electronics and oil
              exploration industry, and our research and educational programs in electrical
              engineering and applied mathematics and scientific computation.
