Title       : Digital Spectral Analysis for Mixed-Signal System-on-a-Chip Testing and
               Verification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0098304

Award Number: 0098304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $513521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Bushnell bushnell@caip.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Hsiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vishwani D. Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              We investigate a new application of the theory of signals and systems to test
              and verification of mixed-signal systems-on-a-chip.  Both digital and analog
              input signals are considered as a set of time-varying waveforms, characterized
              by a correlation matrix.  The matrix elements are the auto-correlation and
              cross-correlation coefficients.  Auto-correlation indicates how much a signal
              resembles its prior values in time. Cross-correlation indicates how similar or
              dissimilar two signals are.  The matrix is determined from circuit inputs
              having "good" fault detection properties.  Auto-correlation was used on tests
              for a sequential digital circuit.  Random vectors were generated, and only
              those detecting faults were retained during vector compaction.  The correlation
              matrix (generated from the vectors) was used to create additional test vectors.
               The results were spectacular -- more faults were detected, using significantly
              fewer vectors, and with less computation, than by any other known method.  The
              shorter vector length significantly reduces testing costs, which are typically
              one third of integrated circuit costs.

We apply this idea to analog and
              mixed-signal circuits.  We compose the Hadamard matrix (which describes the
              time history of prior vectors) for a digital circuit with an analog circuit
              transfer function.  The matrix expresses successful digital test waveforms in
              terms of their digital spectrum.  Analog circuits are tested using spectral
              analysis, but this is the first time that digital circuits have been tested
              spectrally.  In a mixed digital/analog system, we arrange digital test
              waveforms to configure the digital part as a "programmable tone generator" to
              test the analog part. Likewise, the analog part is configured to provide the
              appropriate signal spectrum to test the digital part.  The possible benefits
              would be: (1) Removal of isolation test hardware between digital and analog
              circuits, which are now tested together; (2) Elimination of delays and
              distortion due to test hardware; (3) Lower cost; and (4) Simpler test
              generation algorithms.  We also are applying spectral testing ideas to formal
              hardware verification, which determines whether a circuit, as implemented, is
              consistent with its specification.



