Title       : Singular Integrals and Maximal Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a0098757

Award Number: 0098757
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $447234             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Wainger wainger@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
                 Abstract for Proposal 0098757


I plan to study analytical
              estimates for certain integral operators defined on functions on the Euclidean
              space of dimension greater than or equal to two.  In these operators the
              integration is over surfaces of positive codimension, and we seek estimates
              reflecting curvature properties of the surface.  Suppose for example, for each
              point, P, in
the Euclidean space we have a one dimensional curve emanating
              from P. From a given function, f, we form a new function Mf, called the maximal
              function, whose value at the point P is the supremum of the averages of f over
              the curve emanating from P.  This then defines a transformation from functions
              on the Euclidean space to functions on
the Euclidean space.  We want to know
              for what curves and what values of p this transformation is bounded on the
              Lebesgue space of functions with integrable pth power.  Positive results here
              imply variants of Lebesgue's theorem on the differentiation of the integral. 
              Namely if
the transformation from a function f to Mf is bounded on one of
              these Lebesgue spaces, then for every function f in that Lebesgue space and
              almost every point P, the value f(P) may be recovered as a limit of averages of
              f over small portions of the curve through P.  I am also
interested in
              discrete analogues of these operators in which integration is replaced by sums
              over discrete sets of points.

A basic problem for over a hundred years of
              the branch of mathematics known as Classical Analysis is that of recovering a
              function from averages of that function.  This problem has been intimately
              connected with that of approximating an arbitrary function by a combination
              of
simpler functions which in turn has been one of the main ways mathematics
              is applied to real world problems.  I plan to study the problem of recovering
              functions on Euclidean space of at least two dimensions, from averages over
              small pieces of one dimensional curves. For a continuous function this is an
              easy question, but for wildly discontinuous functions it is a subtle problem
              depending on curvature
properties of the curves.  I also plan to study
              related
transformations and discrete analogues of these transformations where
              the averaging process is over discrete sets of points.



