Title       : Coding and Modulation for Space-Time Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0098209

Award Number: 0098209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Miller smiller@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Wireless communication systems must inevitably deal with the 
severe effects of
              fading, the phenomenon whereby received signals fluctuate 
over very wide
              ranges as the propagation environment changes in time.  
Various forms of
              diversity are commonly employed to combat the effects 
of fading.  In various
              scenarios, it is possible to achieve diversity by 
transmitting a signal that
              is redundant in time or frequency, by using 
multiple transmit antennas and/or
              multiple receive antennas.  While techniques
for achieving time diversity,
              frequency diversity, and space diversity 
through multiple receive antennas
              are well known, developing techniques
for achieving diversity through the use
              of multiple transmit antennas is
a relatively new area which is currently of
              great practical and theoretical 
interest.  This research involves the design
              of improved modulation and coding
techniques for the so-called space-time
              systems, i.e., those with multiple 
transmit antennas.  One main goal of this
              project is to maximize improvement 
in what is in some sense the worst case
              scenario where the number of receive 
antennas is either one or a very small
              number and also where the channel is
fading in a very slow (i.e.,
              quasi-static) manner.  In this environment, 
transmitter diversity and
              possibly frequency selectivity may be the only 
sources of potential
              diversity.

This research studies the potential of improving on existing
              techniques
by overcoming two flaws that plague many existing or proposed
              space-time 
systems: 1) Space time codes have difficulty providing both
              diversity and 
significant coding gain,  Many space-time codes must use up all
              their redundancy 
to provide diversity and actually provide little or no
              coding gain.  By 
splitting the jobs of providing diversity and coding gain
              between either two 
separate codes or between the coding and modulation
              formats, this research 
produces a more effective space-time communication
              system.  2) Space time codes 
which promise significant coding gain often do
              not produce it in a quasi-static 
fading channel (QSFC).  The currently
              accepted design rules for space-time 
codes are in fact shaky when applied to
              a QSFC.  By forming a more solid 
foundation for designing codes for QSFCs,
              this research produces better design 
criteria and ultimately better
              space-time coding techniques.

