Title       : Computation for Structural Biology: Tools to Enable Dynamic 3-D Reconstruction
               of Time-varying Viral Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0098156

Award Number: 0098156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Doerschuk doerschu@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Saul B. Gelfand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098156
Purdue Research Foundation
Doerschuk, Peter C

A key
              challenge in computational structural biology is the determination of the 3-D
              structure of a virus, and
especially dynamical changes in 3-D structure which
              are central to understanding the function of the virus.  This information is
              central to rational design of drugs to combat viral infections and to the use
              of viruses for other purposes, e.g., as vehicles for the targeted delivery of
              drugs to specific organs.  Solving these problems involves the development,
              analysis, implementation and use of new algorithms for two numerical
              computation problems, global optimization and multidimensional
              quadrature.

The investigators compute a 3-D structure by locating the global
              minimum of a cost which is a function of experimental data and of a predictor,
              and which quantitates the difference between the data and the prediction of the
              data.  The predictor, whose evaluation requires multidimensional quadrature, is
              a function of parameters describing the 3-D structure of the virus and any
              unknown aspects of the data collection process and the minimization is with
              respect to these parameters.  Performance of the approach is limited by
the
              global optimization and quadrature tools and therefore these tools are the foci
              of this research.  Key global
optimization issues are exploiting the
              multi-scale structure of the data and parameters in the cost due to the
              presence of Fourier transforms and the tradeoff between accuracy and
              computational expense in the evaluation of the cost due to embedded
              quadratures.  Key multidimensional quadrature issues are the unusual integrands
              and regions of integration, e.g., to integrate a function of three variables
              with icosahedral symmetry over the three Euler angles that define a 3-D
              rotation.

