Title       : Turbo Coded Modulation for Partially Coherent Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0098357

Award Number: 0098357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin J. Belzer belzer@eecs.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:

This research considers the design of bandwidth efficient coded
              modulation for partially coherent channels.  Such channels occur in practice
              when coherent receivers are operated at low or moderate signal-to-noise ratios
              (SNRs), resulting in noisy phase estimates.  This happens for example on
              wireless channels, where multipath fading causes fluctuations in received SNR. 
              This research leverages a recent breakthrough known as turbo coding, wherein
              the outputs of two or more encoders at the transmitter are iteratively decoded
              at the receiver, resulting in reliable communication at SNRs within 1 dB of
              channel capacity. This research integrates phase-tracking error into all
              aspects of turbo coded modulation design, thereby reducing the required SNR for
              practical coherent communication systems.  The new design techniques stemming
              
from this research will therefore interest not only communication and coding
              theorists, but also engineers designing practical communication systems.

The
              goal of this research is to develop theoretically based, practical design
              methods for parallel and serially concatenated turbo coded modulation over
              partially coherent (PC) channels, including PC additive white Gaussian noise
              (AWGN) channels, and PC fading channels with and without channel state
              information (CSI), with and without correlated fading, and with closed-loop and
              open-loop phase estimation.  The investigators study the information capacity
              of PC channels, and determine capacity-achieving input probability density
              functions (PDFs) and capacity-optimal constellations for equiprobable and
              non-equiprobable signaling under average and peak power constraints.  Distance
              metrics based on pairwise symbol error probabilities will be derived for PC
              fading channels, and iterative decoder performance prediction tools based on
              union bounds and convergence-region analysis will be developed.  The
              investigators will then study set-partitioning, bits-to-symbol mapping, and
              code-search procedures for both linear and non-linear recursive convolutional
              encoders used as constituent codes in concatenated trellis-coded modulation
              schemes.  Finally, shaping code design techniques for turbo coded modulation on
              power-constrained PC channels will be developed, based on the
              capacity-achieving PDFs of these channels, which are known to be non-Gaussian.
              These codes will shape the high-dimensional space of encoder output symbol
              sequences so that the induced two-dimensional PDF will 
closely approximate
              the capacity-optimal input PDF.    




