Title       : The Nature of High Redshift Radio Source Hosts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0098349

Award Number: 0098349
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth C. Chambers chambers@ifa.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
AST 0098349
Chambers

High redshift radio galaxies (HZRGs) are
              among the strangest and most distant objects known, there is nothing like them
              in the universe today. Recent observations suggest that they consist of vast
              regions of gas and dust illuminated by an aniosotropic quasar beam that becomes
              visible by scattering like a searchlight in fog. The light scattered by dust is
              polarized, making these objects a good place to study astronomical dust and the
              cosmic evolution of the dust content of galaxies. Radio-loud, double-lobed,
              steep-spectrum quasars (QSRs) are the largest extended objects known at high
              redshift, and studies of their kinematics, dust content, and stellar
              populations will provide insight to the formation of massive galaxies.
This
              project will study these high redshift radio source hosts. Two novel
              observational approaches will be used:
(i) Targeted studies of a sample of
              distant radio sources that have bright (M <13) foreground stars within the
              isoplanatic patch will be observed with the new generation of adaptive optics
              instruments on 8-10 meter class telescopes with 50 milliarcsecond resolution.
              With the adaptive optics systems now available, it is possible to obtain
              two-dimensional surface brightness profiles and color gradients of the most
              distant and reddest galaxies. Integral field spectroscopy of the extended
              emission line regions can be compared with dynamical and dust scattering
              models. Spatially resolved infrared polarimetry will probe the dust content of
              these objects and its evolution with redshift. The vast improvement in
              capability provided by AO with natural guide stars provides a crucial tool to
              advance the field of radio galaxies in the distant universe.
(ii) A wide field
              optical imaging polarimetry survey that will be the first deep sky survey to
              search
for faint polarized objects. With the prime focus camera on the Subaru
              8-meter Japanese National Telescope on Mauna Kea  a deep polarimetry survey can
              reach very faint point sources (greater than 29th magnitude). Observations of
              three separate 0.5 degree fields,  will produce images and a catalog of the
              linear polarization of more than 100,000 extragalactic objects, including more
              than 100 faint radio galaxies. These will be cross correlated with known radio,
              submillimeter, x-ray, and redshift catalogs, and HST morphologies. This wide
              field imaging polarimetry survey will provide a unique and independent measure
              of the nature and evolution of the dusty galaxy population at high redshift and
              measure the impact of dust and reprocessed light on the colors and morphologies
              of high redshift galaxies and AGN hosts.
Funding for this project was provided
              by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***


