Title       : Vortices in Protoplanetary Disks: Their Role in Angular Momentum Transport and
               Planetesimal Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0098465

Award Number: 0098465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip A. Ianna                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262845             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Marcus phil@barkley.me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              " Vortices in Protoplanetary Disks: Their Role in Angular Momentum Transport and
              Planetesimal Formation "
AST- 0098465

From local observation, it is known
              that the Sun and the solar system have effectively the same age and that both
              are likely to have formed through the collapse of a protostellar disk of dust
              and gas. While infalling material is necessary for the collapse to take place,
              angular momentum must at the same time be transported outwards if a stable star
              is to be formed. As a prelude to planet formation, a mechanism must be found
              that will build kilometer-sized planetesimals from sub-centimeter sized dust
              grains. During the period of this award, both problems will be addressed by
              postulating that the formation of small vortices could simultaneously produce
              the necessary mass and momentum transport for star formation and at the same
              time be sweeping dust into their interiors where it can settle and form
              planetesimals. Following on from the work he has done in explaining the
              structures which are seen in the atmosphere of the planet Jupiter, the PI and
              his students will be adapting his mathematical procedures to a study of
              protoplanetary disks, which, he believes, are unlikely to be either
              featureless, laminar or filled with homogeneous turbulence. He expects to show
              that small vortices are likely to thrive in such a disk and that they, rather
              than large-scale turbulence are likely to be responsible for transport within a
              cool protoplanetary disk. These same vortices are able to entrap the dust
              grains and aid planetesimal formation.



