Title       : Iterative Decoding Techniques and their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0098029

Award Number: 0098029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $485000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc P. C. Fossorier marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Over the past decade, iterative decoding methods have received a great deal of
              interest due to the astonishing error performances achieved first by turbo
              codes, and more recently by low-density parity check (LDPC) codes. However,
              since the vast majority of these results have been either theoretically derived
              for, or achieved by computer simulations of very long codes, several
issues
              remain problematic in the implementation of LDPC codes.

This research
              addresses some of these problems and can be divided into three major
              areas:

(1) Algebraic construction of LDPC codes:
This research investigates
              the construction of LDPC codes based on algebra and finite geometries. These
              constructions are motivated by the possibility of describing families of codes
              in a very specific and unambiguous way, which is impossible for codes generated
              with the aid of a computer. Furthermore, tight bounds if not exact values of
              important parameters such as the code minimum Hamming distance can be
              determined. This feature remains interesting to evaluate the error performance
              of applications requiring very small bit error rates such as storage systems.
              In addition, the algebraic structure of the codes constructed can be exploited
              to perform simple encoding or decoding, such as encoding of cyclic or
              quasi-cyclic codes based on linear feedback shift registers.

(2)
              Near-optimum reduced-latency iterative decoding of short to medium length LDPC
              codes:
Although very impressive results have been derived and achieved with
              long LDPC codes,
codes of shorter lengths are more likely to be used in
              practical applications such as wireless communication systems. For codes of
              medium length, iterative decoding alone requires a lot of iterations and falls
              significantly short of the optimum error performance. The investigators devise
              new decoding methods which, combined with iterative decoding, both reduce the
              number of
required iterations and improve the error performance of current
              approaches.

(3) Simplification of iterative decoding methods:

The best
              iterative decoding methods for LDPC codes depend on the operating
              signal-to-noise ratio and are subject to numerical problems inherent to the
              evaluation of probabilities or log-likelihood ratios. The investigators study
              new decoding methods which become universal and are
much less sensitive to
              numerical problems while maintaining near-optimum error performance. Such
              properties are important for implementing these promising new decoding
              approaches in commercial products.


