Title       : Arithmetic and Quantum Intersection Theory on Homogeneous Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0098551

Award Number: 0098551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Helen G. Grundman                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82138              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry Tamvakis harryt@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is in different aspects of intersection theory in algebraic
              geometry: higher dimensional Arakelov theory, a part of arithmetic algebraic
              geometry, and quantum cohomology, a theory on the border between mathematics
              and quantum physics.  The investigator studies the arithmetic and quantum
              intersection rings of homogeneous spaces, such as flag manifolds, as part of a
              general program of extending results of classical algebraic geometry to the new
              settings.  The following are some of the problems considered: a) Understanding
              the arithmetic and quantum Schubert calculus for homogeneous spaces of
              classical Lie groups; b) finding determinantal formulas for Lagrangian and
              orthogonal degeneracy loci and developing further the investigator's theory of
              double Schubert polynomials; c) obtaining arithmetic analogues of Fulton's
              results on degeneracy loci and numerically positive polynomials; d) computing
              arithmetic intersections and heights on Shimura varieties.

During the 19th
              century, mathematicians and physicists were fascinated by the symmetries
              observed in geometric objects.  The many experiments and computations made at
              that time eventually led to the cohomology theories of the 20th century, which
              were applied to solve long-standing open problems in both fields.  Today, we
              are in a similar situation in modern number theory and quantum field theory,
              and it is important to have calculations of specific examples to support and
              guide our intuition.  The investigator examines two new theories, one motivated
              by number theory and the other by quantum physics, in many specific examples
              which are prototypes for this purpose.  The potential applications are a better
              understanding of Diophantine equations and approximation, used in coding theory
              and theoretical computer science, and enumerative geometry of curves, related
              to string theory and symmetry in physics.

