Title       : Hybrid Symbolic-Numeric Computing in Distributed LSC Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0098175

Award Number: 0098175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55366              (Estimated)
Investigator: Markus A. Hitz mahitz@ngcsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Georgia College
	      College Avenue
	      Dahlonega, GA  30597    404/864-3391

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098175
Hitz, Markus A.
North Georgia College

Data collected in
              experiments, or constants in physics and other sciences are of limited
              precision, introducing some degree of uncertainty in computations. Traditional
              exact methods fail to reveal the entire set of solutions to algebraic problems
              that have uncertain parameters. Often, these problems are inherently
              ill-conditioned, such that numerical methods become sensitive to small
              perturbations of the input parameters.

Hybrid symbolic-numeric algorithms
              have proven to be successful for finding "nearest" solutions of problems that
              cannot be solved exactly. Efficient (polynomial time) algorithms have been
              developed for common problems, such as computing approximate GCDs of univariate
              polynomials. For other problems, e.g., finding the nearest singular Hankel or
              Toeplitz matrix, it is currently unknown whether there exist efficient
              algorithms. This project will continue research in this area, in particular on
              the problem of approximate bivariate and multivariate factorization.

For
              both areas, symbolic and numeric computing, vast software libraries and
              programming environments are readily available. For hybrid computing those
              libraries either have features that are computationally expensive (symbolic),
              or lack symbolic support at all (numeric). A new class of systems adds Limited
              Symbolic Capabilities (LSC) to existing libraries that have optimized
              implementations of rational and floating point arithmetic. We will investigate,
              and contribute to, LSC systems.

This is an RUI project.  Undergraduate
              students will engage in research that is appropriate for their level of
              expertise. In the process they will also gain valuable skills in configuring
              local area networks, and in operating clusters of computers which become more
              and more important in server applications.

