Title       : Theoretical Studies of Solvation and Reaction Dynamics in Polar and Nonpolar
               Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0098062

Award Number: 0098062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hyung J. Kim kim@chem.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hyung Kim of Carnegie-Mellon University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to carry out theoretical studies of solvation
              and chemical reactions and related electronic spectroscopy in diversified
              solution environments, such as dipolar and non-dipolar solvents.  By
              incorporating spatial dispersion into reaction field theory with the aid of
              molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, Kim will construct an accurate continuum
              theory to describe equilibrium and nonequilibrium solvation in polarizable,
              non-dipolar, quadrupolar solvents, such as benzene.  Quantum chemistry
              techniques will be applied to solvation of small molecules and various
              charge-shift processes, such as Menshutkin and excited-state electron transfer
              reactions in benzene and other quadrupolar solvents.  With the combined efforts
              of MD, quantum chemistry, and continuum theory, this effort will provide the
              first systematic study of charge-shift reactions in quadrupolar solvents with
              proper account of nonequilibrium solvation and associated solute-solvent
              electronic structure variations.  In parallel with this effort, the truncated
              adiabatic basis-set (TAB) solvent electronic description will be improved to
              study the condensed-phase properties of water.  Specifically, the TAB
              formulation will be extended to incorporate the pairwise-non additive,
              many-body character of both van der Waals and Coulombic interactions into the
              simulations.  This is expected to allow the short- and long-range interactions
              to fluctuate with the solvent configurations and vary with the thermodynamic
              conditions.  This method will be applied to study liquid-vapor phase
              equilibria, solvation dynamics, linear/nonlinear electronic spectroscopy, and
              ion transport in water under ambient and supercritical conditions. 

Many
              chemical reactions occur in condensed phases consisting of reacting solutes
              that are dissolved in nonreacting liquid solvents.  Water, for example, is a
              solvent of vital interest to chemistry, biochemistry, and chemical engineering.
               Supercritical water is technologically important, and this research helps
              provide useful theoretical models that can have long-range impacts on the
              fundamental understanding of industrially significant solvation effects. 
