Title       : Particle Acceleration at Relativistic Shocks: Implications for Models of
               Gamma-Ray Bursts and Active Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0098705

Award Number: 0098705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Baring baring@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098705
Baring

Gamma Ray Bursts (GRBs) are among the most fascinating
              objects known in the universe, possessing a uniqueness embodied in their
              ephemeral nature. Their discovery around 30 years ago has led to a sequence of
              baffling mysteries and startling revelations.  The latest advance among these
              was the discovery in 1997 of fading X-ray, optical and radio afterglows that
              have permitted accurate determination of their distance from Earth, placing
              them in the most remote realms of the universe. Consequently, astrophysicists
              have arrived at the conclusion that GRBs are the most luminous and powerful
              objects in the universe.  Current thinking is that they are spawned by a
              catastrophic event, perhaps an explosion of a massive star.  

The  goals of
              this project are to investigate catastrophic event  models of GRBs.  In these
              models, the GRB occurs when the ejected material from the star ploughs into the
              surrounding ambient gas at highly supersonic and relativistic speeds, creating
              an enormously powerful cosmic shock wave. Energy is liberated, both in thermal
              forms and in the form of extremely relativistic elementary particles. These
              high-speed particles then produce radiative emission, which is detected on
              Earth as gamma rays, X-rays, radio waves and optical light.  The uncertainties
              in this dissipative shock scenario essentially stem from two constraints:  (i)
              the relatively short duration and narrow energy bandwidth of the prompt
              gama-ray data, and (ii) the present crudeness of theoretical models. This
              project addresses these limitations. It explores how the relativistic particles
              can obtain the necessary extreme energies.  It includes much more accurate
              determinations than previously available of the maximum energies attainable. It
              also seeks to establish definitive correlations and trends between particle
              acceleration properties and the radiation we see, using the latter as a
              diagnostic probe on the acceleration physics. The big questions this work seeks
              to answer include (i) whether the GRB environment is an ordered large scale
              phenomenon, or whether it possesses a multitude of chaotic, entangled,
              magnetized cells, (ii) if both of these situations can arise and thereby effect
              an explanation of the observational possibility that there might be two classes
              of bursts, not just one, (iii) how large the mean magnetic field is in a GRB,
              and (iv) whether particle acceleration in bursts is sufficiently rapid to
              account for the pervasive population of ultrarelativistic nuclei (cosmic rays)
              that shower Earth incessantly. This connection between the astrophysical
              environment of gamma-ray bursts and the underlying physics has not been studied
              before. In addition, this work will also address models for  active galaxies,
              since their emission is probably driven by similar types of physics. Success in
              these goals will provide a suitable platform for further advancement of our
              knowledge of the exotic and alluring gamma-ray burst sources over the coming
              decades. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***


