Title       : Collaborative Research: Cosmology with the Lyman Alpha Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a0098506

Award Number: 0098506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59757              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matias Zaldarriaga zaldarriaga@physics.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
AST 0098506
Zaldarriaga

This is a Collaborative Research Project
              with Lam Hui (0098437) of Columbia University.

The light from a quasar (also
              called a qso) often has multiple dips in intensity, or absorption lines, at
              positions corresponding to the redshifted Lyman alpha line (at rest wavelength
              1216 angstroms) from neutral hydrogen. These often occur as a series of
              absorption lines, called the Lyman alpha forest. The redshift is caused by the
              expansion of the universe. If we can calculate
how the universe is expanding
              (based on a cosmological model), we can tell where the photons were absorbed in
              relation to us. Thus, we can use the absorption map to plot the positions
              of
clouds of intervening hydrogen between the quasar and us. The clouds in the
              Lyman alpha systems are not very massive compared to objects like galaxies.
              Because of this, reliable computer simulations (numerical experiments) of their
              gravitational collapse (formation) from primordial fluctuations are possible.
              These Lyman alpha forest simulations produce structure similar to what we see
              in the nearby universe (filaments, walls, and voids ) by starting with small
              fluctuations in matter density and then letting gravity and other known forces
              act. These detailed calculations of  the structure and distribution of matter
              are at the frontiers of current research and 
these recent advances in
              computer modeling have made it possible to use observations of the Lyman-alpha
              forest at redshifts between 2 and 4 as powerful cosmological tools. 

The
              forest has offered, and will continue to offer, interesting constraints on many
              quantities such as the amplitude and shape of the primordial mass power
              spectrum, the neutrino mass, the matter density, the cosmological constant, and
              the reionization epoch. These constraints, in conjunction with those from other
              observations, provide important checks on our fundamental understanding of
              cosmology.

This project will primarily focus on the "transmission power
              spectrum", a statistic used in cosmological models which is directly
              observable. The program has two goals:
1) Examination of fundamental
              assumptions: The project will test several methods to address questions about
              the influence of continuum-fitting in determining the measured fluctuations in
              the forest , the interpretation of these fluctuations in terms of mass
              fluctuations resulting from gravitational instability, and the effect of
              fluctuations in the ionizing background and the effective equation of state of
              the intergalactic medium on the interpretation.
 2) Maximizing the scientific
              return from the data: To this end the program will address
              redshift-distortions, (which affect both the program of mass power spectrum
              recovery, as well as
the ability to measure the cosmological constant through
              its geometrical distortion of the
correlation function), degeneracies among
              parameters (by performing a full likelihood analysis
which will reveal the
              degeneracies in the 4 to 6 free parameters in the current model of the forest),
              and obtaining a better understanding of the thermal history of the universe,
              (by using the drop in temperature with time after reionization to infer or at
              least limit the epoch of reionization from measurements of the temperature
              using the small-scale cut-off of the transmission power
spectrum at  redshifts
              between 2 and 4.)
Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***

