Title       : Kinematics of Stellar Systems: Distances, Mass Distributions, and Binary Star
               Frequencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0098650

Award Number: 0098650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip A. Ianna                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303621             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlton P. Pryor pryor@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore B. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              "Kinematics of Stellar Systems: Distances, Mass Distributions and Binary Star
              Frequencies"
AST-0098650

This project investigates the structure, stellar
              content and dynamical evolution of globular clusters and of the dark matter
              content of the dwarf spheroidal companion galaxies of our own Milky Way.
              Advantage is taken of the enormous amount of data that can be obtained with the
              Rutgers Fabry-Perot imager. This instrument is one of the few that can acquire
              the wide-field radial velocity data which are required to address these
              challenges. Combining Fabry-Perot measurements of the radial velocity
              distribution with HST determinations of the distribution of proper motions for
              member stars will yield direct geometrically based measures of the distances to
              13 globular clusters. These new distances will have uncertainties about
              one-fifth as large as the currently accepted values. Repeated velocity
              measurements are one of the most productive ways of discovering binary stars
              and the greatly increased numbers which are expected will test models for the
              dynamical evolution of globular cluster binaries. The project will use
              three-color stellar photometry with the wide-field imagers to search for tidal
              tails of stellar debris associated with the Draco dwarf spheroidal galaxy.
              Radial velocity measurements of the stars thus found can yield total dark
              matter masses for the dwarf spheroidal galaxy and the rate at which stars are
              being lost from the system.  Thus, the work done under this award will impact
              upon several areas of astrophysics including the extragalactic distance scale
              and the characteristics of dark matter in dwarf spheroidal galaxies.

