Title       : Development of the Mode Isolation Algorithm for Experimental Modal Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2001   
File        : a0098539

Award Number: 0098539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49913              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry H. Ginsberg jerry.ginsberg@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
Principal Investigator: Jerry H. Ginsberg 
The G. W. Woodruff School of
              Mechanical Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
NSF Proposal number
              0098539
Development of the Mode Isolation Algorithm for Experimental Modal
              Analysis

Abstract
        
Experimental modal analysis fits measurements
              of response data to canonical equations representing the analytical response of
              dynamical systems. The objective is to identify the natural frequencies,
              damping characteristics, and modal vibration patterns. Such knowledge can be
              used as a diagnostic tool for existing systems, as well as to identify and
              correct analytical model shortcomings. The project will develop a new algorithm
              for performing such tasks. The algorithm iteratively identifies modes, then
              subtracts them from the data, in order reveal modes that are less evident. A
              specific objective of the project is to provide a robust method for systems
              that exhibit strong modal coupling, in which individual modes lose their
              distinctiveness. Hence, the algorithm will be more widely applicable than the
              most sophisticated of the current approaches, yet it will retain the simplicity
              of implementation offered by elementary methods. The primary tasks for the
              proposed work are to implement and validate the algorithm when it is used to
              fit measured data to a state-space modal analysis formulation that accounts for
              arbitrary damping, gyroscopic, feedback, and circulatory forces. These
              developments will significantly improve the ability to perform experimental
              modal analysis of complex structures composed of advanced composite materials.
              Furthermore, enhancing the ability to correctly identify modal properties will
              lead to designs that use materials more economically. Also, by raising the
              level of experimental error that is acceptable, the algorithm will lead to cost
              reductions in experiments. Success in attaining the project objectives will
              have a major impact wherever vibration control is an issue.


