Title       : Translation Validation of Advanced Compiler Optimizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0098299

Award Number: 0098299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lenore D. Zuck   (Principal Investigator current)
              Amir Pnueli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Title:  Translation Validation of Advanced Compiler Optimizations 
PI:  Lenore
              Zuck
Proposal Number:  CCR-0098299

This goal of the research is to advance
              the state of the art in ensuring the correctness of compilation in the presence
              of extensive optimization.  This will be achieved via the use of translation
              validation where, rather than verifying the compiler itself one constructs a
              tool that formally confirms that the target code produced by each run of the
              compiler is a correct translation of the source program.  The methods being
              developed will handle an extensive set of optimizations for modern
              architectures, ranging from high level loop optimizations that dramaically
              change the structure of a program to low level machine dependent optimizations,
              such a instruction scheduling.  

The research will first develop the theory
              of a correct translation.  Special care will be taken to obtain a maximally
              faithful representation of hardware factors characteristic of modern
              architectures, such as instruction latencies, CPU resources, etc.

The
              preferred (and often mandatory) approach is that the validator tool should
              derive all of this information automatically by a carefully analysis of the
              source and the target.   A major component of the secondpart of the proposal
              will be dedicated to the development of heuristics and analysis techniques by
              which this task can be accomplished.
