Title       : Topics in the Theory of Automorphic Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0098003

Award Number: 0098003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dihua Jiang dhjiang@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator studies two fundamental problems in the modern theory of
              automorphic forms.  The first problem is concerned with the intrinsic symmetric
              structures of automorphic forms of reductive groups over number fields.  Such
              structures of automorphic forms can be characterized by the existence of
              various period integrals of automorphic forms.  Periods become recently a very
              useful tool to characterize various basic properties of automorphic forms and
              L-functions.  In this project, the investigator and his colleagues intend to
              use periods to characterize new families of automorphic forms, especially, the
              degenerate cuspidal automorphic forms.  The first example of such degenerate
              cuspidal automorphic forms is systematically studied by I. Piatetski-Shapiro in
              early 1980's in order to understand the generalization of the Ramanujan
              conjecture on estimate of Fourier coefficients of automorphic forms.  These new
              families of automorphic forms characterized by the relevant periods are
              expected to share the basic structures with the ones suggested by J. Arthur
              from his work on general trace formula over the space of square integrable
              automorphic forms of reductive groups.  The second problem is to study local
              and global Langlands reciprocity laws.  The investigator and his colleague
              intend to establish local Langlands reciprocity law for classical groups by
              studying local gamma functions and using recent progress in the local and
              global theory of automorphic forms.

The investigator and his colleagues
              study the theory of automorphic forms, an abstract, transcendental theory that
              describes repeating phenomena like sound and waves.  A cornerstone of modern
              mathematics, it provides the foundation for relevant areas of mathematics and
              has applications to computer network theory and string theory in physics. 
              Using this theory, the investigator and his colleagues can examine the
              reciprocal relations among objects from geometry, analysis, and number theory. 
              The theory played an essential role in recent solution of the Fermat's last
              theorem by A. Wiles, and has also been important to the recent development in
              coding theory and cryptology.  The investigator and his collaborators study in
              the project the intrinsic symmetric structures and transcendental invariants of
              automorphic forms. 

