Title       : High Performance Model Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0098093

Award Number: 0098093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292685             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hantao Zhang hzhang@cs.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Two software systems, SATO (SAtisfiability Test Optimized) and SEM (a System
              for Enumerating Models), developed with the NSF support, have been widely and
              successfully used for solving many problems often considered a challenge for
              automated reasoning systems. SATO and SEM were used to solve over a hundred
              cases of of previously open problems in algebras and logics. The proposed
              research will further increase the reasoning power of SATO and SEM. A new
              experimental software system called HOTTER (a Humble OTTER) will be fine-tuned
              for the high-performance first-order satisfiability testing. The main objective
              of this research is to develop high performance model generation techniques.
              These software systems will be serve as an environment for experimenting and
              developing these techniques, and will be available to the public. Many
              computational problems from a variety of fields, i.e., software and hardware
              verification, circuit design verification, scheduling and planning, can be
              reformulated as a model generation problems. Instead of creating
              special-purpose software for these problems, an alternative and competitive
              approach is to write the problems in a model-generation language and then
              submit the problems to a model generator optimized to this language. Another
              objective of this research is to support this approach by designing a
              general-purpose language for model generation, and implementing it with SATO,
              SEM, and HOTTER as its components. The language will provide an easy-to-use
              model generator for people in various fields.


