Title       : Contributions from Stellar Mixing and Primordial Enrichment to Globular Cluster
               Abundances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0098453

Award Number: 0098453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip A. Ianna                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graeme H. Smith graeme@ucolick.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Kraft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Smith, Graeme
" Contributions from Stellar Mixing and Primordial Enrichment to
              Globular Cluster Abundances "
AST- 0098453


Globular clusters are among
              the oldest objects that we recognize. Determinations of their ages are critical
              for setting limits to the age of the universe. In addition, because of their
              long lifetimes, they contain within their constituent stars a "fossil record"
              of the chemical history of our own galaxy.  However, the situation is more
              complicated that one might hope. Although globular clusters were once thought
              to be chemically homogeneous objects, spectroscopy has shown that the brightest
              red giant stars within the same clusters commonly exhibit abundance differences
              in the surface elements C-N-O-Na-Mg-Al. At least some of these differences
              appear to arise from deep mixing in which material is transported from near the
              hydrogen-burning shell to the surface of the star. But over and above this,
              there are the primordial abundances which were set when some cluster stars were
              formed from gas which had been selectively enriched in heavy elements from
              high-mass stars of a former epoch. The present award looks to a main goal of
              measuring abundances of red giants in clusters that are less metal poor than
              those previously studied. This will allow the investigation of the effects of
              metallicity on the deep mixing process. Deep mixing as a function of stellar
              mass will also be investigated. The degree to which primordial effects have
              contributed to globular cluster abundance inhomogeneities will be investigated
              by spectroscopy of the fainter red giant stars and main sequence stars in
              several other globular clusters. Here one expects that deep mixing has been an
              effective agent. Observations with the Keck telescopes and associated
              spectrographs form the core of this work. Interpretation will follow from the
              application of state-of-the-art model atmosphere theory.


