Title       : Evaluating Object-Oriented Designs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0098202

Award Number: 0098202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Bieman Bieman@cs.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project develops techniques to quantify design attributes of object-oriented
              software in terms of architectural structures and patterns, and demonstrates
              that these design attributes are related to external quality attributes such as
              maintainability, reusability, testability, and reliability.  The focus is on
              identifying design structures and patterns that will make software easier to
              adapt and test. Design measurement is based on the structure of interconnected
              objects including the links between objects, the properties of these links, and
              the properties of individual object classes.  Design patterns are identified
              through program and design analysis and the use of existing design pattern
              recognition technology.  External design quality evaluations are based on
              process data from commercial organizations and analytical evaluation of change
              difficulty.  Relationships between design attributes and external quality are
              identified by examining commercial software engineering data and through
              analyses of the connection between internal and external attributes. Results
              from this work demonstrate costs and benefits of alternative object-oriented
              software designs.  The work should lead to improved design methods to produce
              software that is easier to adapt, extend, and test as it evolves. 


