Title       : Vlsi Design Methods for Low Power Embedded Encryption
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a0098361

Award Number: 0098361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ingrid Verbauwhede ingrid@ee.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Internet and wireless communication explosion increase the demand for
              privacy, authentication and security in general. Encryption is not only added
              to PC's and Internet routers. There is a whole new class of embedded
              applications that requires high levels of security at low power. Examples are
              smart cards, cell phones, PDA's, sensor networks, etc. The current approach is
              to build an ASIC library of so-called IP (Intellectual Property) modules, each
              implementing one algorithm: DES, triple DES, RSA, SHA-1, and so on. Due to the
              increased demand for security, there is also a proliferation of encryption
              algorithms. Examples are the new AES standard, the Camellia initiative of the
              Japanese NTT, Kasumi for 3th generation cellular standards, IPSEC, etc. So this
              IP approach can no longer be sustained. 
Therefore, the focus of this research
              is the design of new fast, low power encryption platforms that at the same time
              can easily be reprogrammed and reconfigured. On top of this, cryptographic
              implementations need to withstand power and timing attacks. To withstand these
              attacks, the execution time and the power consumption has to be independent of
              the data or the key. This is in contradiction with low power or high speed
              implementation techniques. The VLSI design methodology to build these
              processors covers different levels of abstraction. At the circuit level, new
              circuit styles are developed that withstand power and timing attacks. At the
              interconnect level a novel RF on-chip wireless LAN technique is integrated. At
              the architecture level, reconfigurable data path modules are designed which
              execute the unusual arithmetic of encryption algorithms.


