Title       : Structure-Sensitive Geometric Algorithms and Data Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0098151

Award Number: 0098151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255003             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Mount mount@cs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098151
Mount, David
U of Maryland, College Park

The vitality of
              computational geometry depends heavily on its relevance to real-world problems
              and applications.  This field has made significant contributions to these
              areas, but continued success requires an understanding of the constraints and
              structure present in the problems that arise in typical applications. 
              Traditional worst-case asymptotic analysis is often too blunt a tool for
              establishing the efficiency of geometric algorithms, since geometric data sets
              often contain simplifying structure, which worst-case efficient algorithms may
              ignore.  Another reason is that worst-case analyses may lead designers to
              concentrate on difficult data configurations that arise only rarely in
              practice.  As a result, many designers of geometric software do not look to
              computational geometry as a relevant source of algorithms, and instead rely on
              heuristics of unproven performance.

The goal of this research is counter
              this perception by developing ad implementing algorithms and data structures
              for geometric problems that are both efficient in practice and whose efficiency
              is formally provable.  Our approach in achieving practical efficiency is
              through a sensitivity to presence of simplifying structure.  For most
              algorithms this structure may be present in the input.  For data structures
              this structure is present in the distribution of the queries.  Our goal is to
              design and analyze algorithms and data structures that are most efficient when
              this simplifying structure is present.  In the absence of this structure, these
              algorithms would ideally degrade to the best worst-case algorithms.  This
              approach will be applied to geometric problems in information retrieval
              (multidimensional nearest neighbor searching and point location) pattern
              recognition, robust statistics, and in clustering. 


