Title       : Non-Lipschitz Optimization Problems Involving Eigenvalues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a0098145

Award Number: 0098145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Overton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098145
New York University
Michael Overton

Non-Lipschitz
              Optimization Problems involving Eigenvalues

Optimization problems involving
              eigenvalues arise in many applications.  In recent years, attention has focused
              on semidefinite programs, which are linear optimization problems in the space
              of real symmetric matrices, with positive semidefinite constraints.  This
              project focuses on optimization problems in the larger space of square
              matrices, not necessarily symmetric.  

In the problems being studied,
              eigenvalues may appear in the optimization objective, in the constraints, or
              both.  The dependence of eigenvalues as functions of a matrix is non-Lipschitz
              at points where the eigenvalue
multiplicity is greater than one.  Hence, such
              optimization problems are non-Lipschitz. They arise in areas ranging from
              control theory (e.g., stability constraints) to Markov chains (e.g., optimizing
              convergence rates).

The goal is fourfold:  analyze theoretical questions
              including necessary and sufficient conditions for optimality; build on these
              theoretical foundations to develop numerical algorithms that are able to find
              minimizers and verify that they satisfy optimality conditions; implement the
              algorithms in software that can be used by the general scientific community;
              and apply the results to the solution of important interesting problems that
              arise in practice.
