Title       : Surface and Motion Capture for High Fidelity Synthesis of Digital Humans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0098005

Award Number: 0098005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoran Popovic zoran@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian L. Curless  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098005
Popovic, Zoran
U of Washington

We propose a multi-layered
              approach to capturing and synthesizing realistic human shapes and motions.  To
              capture the static shape of real humans, we will employ 3D scanning techniques
              including hierarchical light striping, simultaneous multi-striping, and
              photometric stereo.  A feature-tracked motion capture system as well as 3D
              scanning techniques will generate motion data.  The investigators will acquire
              this motion data at varying resolutions in order to drive the analysis of
              skeletal motion, body part deformation such as bulging due to flexing a muscle,
              and secondary motion such as leg vibrations that occur when stomping on the
              ground.

This wealth of human data will then drive an analysis, modeling, and
              synthesis stage. The static scan data will be analyzed to construct the space
              of possible human shapes.  This human shape model together with the body part
              motion capture and full-body motion capture will be used to construct a
              detailed kinematic
model of the human body.  Modeling human shape movement at
              such different levels of detail will allow control of the human motion on the
              coarse skeletal level while preserving the fine details such as muscle bulging.
               Furthermore, this multi-layered approach will enable selective replacement of
              different layers in the human model structure.  For example, it will be
              possible to map the animated movement onto a different body scan and observe a
              different surface shape movement and creasing.  The detailed kinematic human
              model will be further extended with a model of human dynamics by taking into
              account a number of physical properties of the human body such as muscle usage
              and mass distribution.  This additional dynamic information provides a way to
              preserve the realism of motion even when the structure of motion is
              significantly modified.  In addition, the investigators will extend the
              skeletal dynamic model with secondary motion simulations constructed to
              replicate the loose skin and tissue vibrations that occur in high-energy
              movements.

The investigators will incorporate their work into new curriculum
              both at their university and in courses being offered to the professional
              community.  This work will be folded into CDROM's that reach a wide audience,
              including the general public and a broad spectrum of high school students who
              may be considering careers in information technology.  The results of the
              research will include complex databases of human shape and motion to be
              distributed to the general research community in order to encourage further
              research in this area.


