Title       : Molecular Relaxation by ESR Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0098022

Award Number: 0098022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack H. Freed jhf@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Jack H. Freed of Cornell University is funded for his research on molecular
              relaxation by ESR spectroscopy and related phenomena by the Physical Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division.  Studies of dynamic molecular processes and
              structure in complex fluids will be continued.  New two-dimensional Fourier
              transform (2D-FT) ESR, including electron-electron double resonance (2D-ELDOR),
              and far infrared (FIR) ESR techniques and accompanying theoretical developments
              will be employed to study rotational molecular dynamics in liquids over the 9
              to 250 GHz regime.  In particular, the dynamic cage model will be tested,
              especially in the context of glass-forming liquids. These methods also will be
              applied to the study of the quantum  rotational nature of spin relaxation in
              argon matrix trapped methyl radicals below 40K.  Comparisons of microscopic and
              macroscopic translational diffusion in liquids will be made using
              dynamic-imaging of diffusion (DID)-ESR for the measurement of macroscopic
              diffusion and 2D-ELDOR for microscopic diffusion.  The new double-quantum
              coherence (DQC)-ESR method will be developed for the measurement of distances
              in organic biradicals, and for distance distributions in bilabeled polymers. 
              

The detection and analysis of structure in fluids remains a challenging and
              important area of physical chemistry and is key to many important chemical
              processes.  Dr. Freed's laboratory at Cornell Unviersity will continue
              extending the utility of ESR spectroscopy to the analysis of diffusion
              processes in complex liquids (such as polymeric solutions).  The advances
              provided by these studies provide technical leadership in the discipline, and
              impact many other laboratories.  The results to be provided will extend our
              understanding of liquid structure and of solution structure.

