Title       : Dynamos and the Structure of Ionized Accretion Disks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0098615

Award Number: 0098615
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ethan T. Vishniac ethan@pha.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098615
Vishniac

This project deals with the intersection of two
              important  issues in the field of astrophysics, the generation of large scale
              magnetic fields, and the accretion of gas onto collapsed objects, such as black
              holes, neutron stars, or white dwarfs.  There has been continuing work on the
              `dynamo problem' for more than 80 years.  Very recently, numerical simulations
              have indicated that there are problems with the dynamo equations.  Some
              simulations designed to produce strong magnetic fields have failed to do so, 
              while others that fail to meet the basic conditions for dynamo activity show
              strong magnetic field generation. Meanwhile, the last thirty years has seen
              steady progress in our understanding of how gas collects together to form
              stars, or to fall into black holes.  When the gas is able to radiate its
              energy, it tends to form a disk of ionized material that slowly spirals into
              the center, eventually falling onto the central object. This process is
              believed to lie at the heart of such diverse objects as quasars, where the
              central object is a supermassive black hole, and proto-stars, where the central
              object is a newly formed star. Crude models of this process have been
              successful in providing qualitative models of kinds of radiation emitted from
              such objects, and some of the time-varying behavior seen in dwarf novae (where
              the central object is a white dwarf) and soft X-ray transients (where the
              central object is usually a black hole, with a mass several times the mass of
              the Sun). Within the last ten years there has been a growing consensus that
              these two problems are actually closely related, and that the `friction' in
              accretion disks is actually due to magnetic fields that spontaneously wiggle
              inside the accretion disk.  The behavior of accretion disks is actually closely
              connected to the way that they generate magnetic fields.  Computer simulations
              indicate that the turbulent motions generated by the magnetic field actually
              helps generate the magnetic field.

This project will study the generation of
              large scale magnetic fields in hot accretion disks using a novel approach to
              dynamo theory recently developed by the PI and collaborators.  The project will
              have three main components.  First, the new dynamo theory will be extended and
              tested quantitatively to ensure that it provides a viable explanation for the
              generation of large scale magnetic fields.  Second, models of accretion disks
              in which the detailed evolution of the magnetic field can be replaced with
              large scale approximate equations will be constructed.  These will describe the
              evolution of the large scale magnetic field, and its ability to provide a
              source of `friction' and therefore heating within the disk. Finally, this
              approach will be used to study dwarf novae disks. These disks have a number of
              features which make them ideal for comparison with the models.  In particular,
              they are largely unaffected by the radiation coming from the inner parts of the
              disk and the central object, and they show outbursts in which the properties of
              the disks change dramatically.  They are also well-observed, so that the
              success, or failure, of the models will be immediately apparent. Funding for
              this project was provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy &
              Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***





