Title       : Control of Communication Networks: Modeling, Simulation, and Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0098089

Award Number: 0098089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Givan givan@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin K. Chong  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes a novel approach for designing network control
              algorithms that incorporate online simulation using traffic models.  The
              approach facilitates rapid heuristic analysis of simulation data, and can be
              applied to a wide variety of network control problems, and can be applied to a
              wide variety of network decision problems.  The PIs have proof-of-concept
              implementations of this approach for two simple problems: the multiclass
              weighted scheduling problem, and the problem of selecting a dropping policy for
              random early detection (RED).  In both cases, they have empirically
              demonstrated substantially superior performance when comparing to previous
              control policies.  

The PIs propose the substantial exploration, analysis,
              and implementation of their technique.  They plan to apply these ideas to
              network decision problems including admission/access control, flow/congestion
              control, various problems relating to proxy services, and selection of
              diagnosis and recovery actions.  They also plan to extend these ideas to
              closed-loop systems such as TCP flows, as well as to evaluate the issues that
              arise in utilizing various traffic models, including fluid-flow and long-range
              dependence traffic models.  This plan exploits the growing work on traffic
              modeling, providing the potential to use such models to impact network control
              performance.  The broad applicability of the proposed approach opens the
              possibility for simultaneous improvement of a wide array of control algorithms
              across the network.  The use of this control approach together with familiar
              model inference techniques to update the traffic model under changing network
              environments (including attacks) also leads naturally to adaptive control
              mechanisms for the same wide variety of problems. 

