Title       : Orbits of Milky Way Globular Clusters and Satellite Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0098687

Award Number: 0098687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219471             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. van Altena   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana Dinescu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terrence M. Girard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale Southern Obser, Inc.
	      
	      New Haven, CT  06501    203/436-8318

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098687
Van Altena

With this award Dr. William Van Altena of Yale
              Southern Observatory will determine the absolute proper motions, and hence
              tangential velocities, for approximately twenty Galactic globular clusters and
              several Milky Way satellite galaxies. The tangential velocities in combination
              with their measured distances and radial velocities, and assumed Galactic mass
              models, will enable Dr. Van  Altena to calculate their orbits and project their
              trajectories backwards in time to study their association with existing or
              newly identified remnant streams. In particular, the distribution of target
              globular clusters is such that it will provide an excellent probe of the inner
              Galaxy, allowing the researchers to kinematically disentangle its various
              components.

Tangential velocities and Galactocentric orbits will be
              determined for the Large Magellanic Cloud, the Small Magellanic Cloud, an
              Intercloud region, the Sagittarius dwarf galaxy, and numerous Galactic globular
              clusters within the declination and magnitude limits of the first-epoch
              Southern Proper Motion program (SPM) plates, during this three-year award
              period. The absolute proper motions will be anchored to the International
              Celestial Reference System (ICRS), via Tycho-2 stars, which will serve to form
              this proper- motion reference frame. The anticipated accuracy of the derived
              tangential velocities ranges from 10 to 20 km/s for the majority of the
              globular clusters, roughly 35 km/s for the remaining clusters as well as for
              the Sagittarius dwarf spheroidal, and from 70 to 90 km/s for the three separate
              Magellanic Cloud fields.

The entire set of data obtained with this award
              should be available prior to the results from planned astrometric satellite
              missions, such as FAME and SIM. In fact, limitations in the ability of the FAME
              instrumentation to measure high-density fields, renders most of these proposed
              targets inaccessible to it. SIM will provide definitive measures for most if
              not all of these targets, but not until 2015. With the use of the SPM material,
              Dr. Van Altena will provide reasonably accurate determinations by 2004. At some
              future date, when the SPM has been completed, it will be possible to reduce the
              currently under-construction Schmidt sky survey catalogs into the SPM system
              and use those transformed Schmidt data to improve the accuracy of the
              tangential velocities further.
***


