Title       : Combinatorics of the Affine Hecke Algebra and Module Categories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0098830

Award Number: 0098830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88308              (Estimated)
Investigator: Viktor Ostrik ostrik@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Lusztig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal consists of 4 parts. In the first part the investigator and his
              colleagues study the asymptotic affine Hecke algebra introduced by G. Lusztig. 
              The asymptotic Hecke algebra is a suitable limit of the usual Hecke algebra as
              parameter tends to zero.  Its representation theory is closely related with
              representation theory of the Hecke algebra itself.  One of the aims here is a
              proof of Lusztig's Conjecture describing the asymptotic Hecke algebra in the
              elementary K-theoretic terms.  In the second part the investigator studies
              module categories over monoidal categories.  This subject is closely related
              with modern physics where module categories appear in the context of the
              Boundary Conformal Field Theory.  In the third part the investigator and
              collaborators study distinguished involutions in the affine Weyl group.  In
              particular they make extensive explicit calculations of canonical distinguished
              involutions in number of cases.  In the fourth part the investigator and his
              colleagues study the Double Affine Hecke Algebra.  The aim here is to describe
              Intersection Cohomology of certain infinite dimensional algebraic varieties in
              terms of Kazhdan-Lusztig type combinatorics of this algebra.

In this
              proposal the investigator studies various questions of Representation Theory.
              Representation Theory is a part of mathematics that studies all possible ways
              in which symmetry can be used for solving concrete physical or technical
              problems.  Many physical and technical systems do not change under some
              transformations (e.g. the gravitational field of the Sun depends only on the
              distance from the Sun and so it does not change under rotating of the space
              around the Sun).  Such transformations are called symmetries of the system.  In
              many cases symmetries can be used to simplify the study of such systems.  So it
              is not surprising that Representation Theory has many applications in physics
              (where continuous symmetry is one of the most fundamental concepts), chemistry
              (especially in quantum chemistry where it is used in computations of chemical
              forces inside molecules), computer science (for example, Fourier analysis,
              which can be considered as a simplest case of Representation Theory, is one of
              the most widely used of all calculation techniques), and inside of mathematics
              itself, in number theory (where Representation Theory is an essential part of
              the Langlands program). One of the central objects of study in Representation 
              Theory is the affine Hecke algebra, because answers to many seemingly unrelated
              questions are encoded in the structure of this algebra.  This proposal is
              mainly devoted to the study of the affine Hecke algebra.


