Title       : Integer and Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedral and Graph Theoretic Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0098427

Award Number: 0098427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530939             (Estimated)
Investigator: Egon Balas eb17@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard Cornuejols  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1271,2865,5514,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses basic theoretical and computational aspects of integer
              programming and combinatorial optimization, using tools of linear algebra and
              graph theory. In the nineties the principal investigators have developed a
              computationally successful approach to mixed 0-1 programming known as
              lift-and-project.  A central theme of the research is to develop this approach
              in new directions that seem computationally even more promising.  One of these
              directions uses a one to one correspondence recently established by the
              investigators' team between basic solutions to the higher dimensional linear
              program used to generate lift-and-project cuts, and certain basic solutions of
              the LP relaxation of the mixed integer program itself. This correspondence can
              be used to generate "deepest cuts" in the lift-and-project sense without
              explicitly generating the higher dimensional linear program.  Another important
              topic is the creation of bridges from integer programming to the branch of
              computer science known as constraint programming.  A recently discovered linear
              characterization of cardinality rules and similar logical constructs, along
              with the linear time separability of the inequalities involved, makes it
              possible to develop symbolic constraints usable in an integer programming
              context that may significantly enhance the power of algorithms dealing with
              problems involving logical conditions.  A third line of research pursued under
              this project investigates properties of a 0-1 matrix that make the set packing
              problem or the set covering problem (or both) defined by it have only integer
              basic solutions.  Structural properties of balanced matrices were obtained
              under previous NSF grants.; ideal and perfect matrices are currently under
              investigation.

Decision makers often face problems that have a combinatorial
              aspect: choose one among a very large number of possible decisions. A standard
              approach is to formulate such problems as integer programs and to use a
              "solver" to find the best solution.  Although integer programming solvers have
              improved significantly over the last decade, they are still unable to solve
              many large scale problems to optimality.  This project lays the theoretical and
              analytical foundation for a new generation of solvers for integer programs. 
              The lift-and-project approach developed by the principal investigators  has
              proved well suited to solve hard integer programming problems. Speed remains an
              issue however.  This research project addresses the speed issue by
              investigating new, faster ways of computing the cuts, lift-and-project as well
              as other.  The potential benefits of the project are significant since cut
              generators are already being implemented in commercial integer programming
              solvers and, obviously, the performance of these solvers would be improved by
              better cut generators.  Based on the recent increase in the use of solvers by
              managers in most fields of business, solvers with improved performance have the
              potential to increase productivity in the industries where these solvers are
              used (manufacturing, airline, financial and other industries).

