Title       : Code Modulated Self-Encoded Multiple Access Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0098273

Award Number: 0098273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75383              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lim Nguyen nguyenl@unomaha.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Won M. Jang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates novel self-encoded multiple access (SEMA)
              communications for the transmission of digital information in multiuser
              wireless channels.  The approach is based on the unconventional self-encoded
              spread spectrum technique that has been developed at the University of Nebraska
              for the modulation and detection of spread spectrum signals. The application of
              self-encoded spread spectrum to multiple access communications entails a number
              of considerations in system and coding designs. They arise from the fact that
              self-encoding does not guarantee pair-wise code isolations between the
              spreading sequences. Multiuser channel coding can mitigate code collisions and
              improve the system performance. The research will characterize the system
              performance under various wireless channel disturbances such as noise,
              interference and fading.  The results from this project demonstrate the
              feasibility of SEMA communications that will have a developmental impact on
              mobile communications technology.

The focus of this project is the analysis
              and applications of code-modulated SEMA communications.  An analytical model of
              the system is developed that incorporates multiuser channel coding to control
              statistical code collisions between the self-encoding sequences.  Cooperative
              channel coding among the users is exploited to determine the balanced
              trade-offs between signal despreading, capacity (code rate) and error
              correction capability.  The bit-error-rate and capacity of the system are
              analyzed under various channel conditions.  The research includes investigating
              the use of training sequences and preambles for synchronization acquisition and
              tracking of self-encoded signals.  The development of SEMA multiuser detectors
              is of particular interest given the fact that the spreading sequences are
              random, time varying, and not known a priori.  SEMA turbo receiver that employs
              iterative, joint multiuser detector and channel decoding is also studied.  The
              goal of the research is to develop the theoretical foundation for self-encoded
              multiple access communications, with the potential applications spanning from
              terrestrial wireless to satellite and optical fiber communications systems.


