Title       : Interstellar Scintillation and MHD Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0098301

Award Number: 0098301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Goldreich pmg@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098301
Goldreich

Dr. Peter Goldreich, at the California Institute of
              Technology, will direct theoretical investigations in several topics in
              astrophysics. Most of his effort will be in the area of interstellar
              scintillation and magneto-hydrodynamic (MHD) turbulence. Most of the baryonic
              matter in the universe has such high electrical conductivity that magnetic
              fields diffuse very slowly through it. Thus fluid motions and motions of
              magnetic field lines are closely coupled. Large scale motions are generally
              turbulent, and incompressible MHD is the simplest approximation under which
              these complex coupled motions can be investigated. Dr. Peter Goldreich will
              carry out a series of numerical simulations of incompressible MHD turbulence to
              test specific predictions of a theory set forth earlier by Goldreich & Sridhar.
               These predictions include:  1. A scale dependent anisotropy relationship
              between correlation lengths that are parallel and perpendicular to the local
              magnetic field.  2. That velocity and magnetic field differences in planes
              perpendicular to the local magnetic field obey the Kolmogorov scaling
              characteristic of hydrodynamic turbulence.  3. That shear Alfven waves control
              the cascade dynamics and slow waves play only a passive role.

Scintillations
              of small angular diameter radio sources reveal a spectrum of interstellar
              electron density fluctuations. To a good approximation, these conform to the
              Kolmogorov scaling, with a constant of proportionality that varies over a wide
              range in different regions. It is plausible to assume that this spectrum is a
              consequence of MHD turbulence. Elliptical, scatter-broadened images imply the
              density spectrum is anisotropic, presumably due to the presence of a large
              scale magnetic field. A quantitative connection will be made between velocity
              and magnetic field fluctuations predicted by the Goldreich & Sridhar theory of
              MHD turbulence and the fluctuations of interstellar electron density. The
              amount of ionized gas along lines of site to pulsars will be correlated with
              the pulsars' scattering measures to help identify the sources and sites of the
              turbulence.

Dr. Goldreich will also examine processes in planet formation in
              which he will concentrate on dynamical problems posed by the large orbital
              eccentricities of detected extra-solar planets. Finally, he will explore the
              phenomenon of amplitude saturation in multi-mode stellar pulsations.  He will
              attempt to explain why Cepheid variables and RR Lyrae stars pulsate with large
              amplitudes while many other types of stars pulsate at much smaller amplitudes. 
               
***


