Title       : Computational Studies of MHD Accretion Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0098625

Award Number: 0098625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180862             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Stone jstone@astro.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eve C. Ostriker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098625
Stone
A wide variety of objects, ranging from new stars in
              formation (protostars), to objects which are the cinders of burned out stars
              (white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes), to active galactic nuclei (AGN,
              such as quasars) are thought to have accretion disks surrounding them. Inflows
              of gas from these disks onto the central object seem to account for some of the
              most dramatic components of the Universe. They emit prodigious amounts of power
              and radiate it over a tremendous swath of the electromagnetic spectrum (from
              the mid-infrared to hard X-rays and gamma rays).  Our theoretical understanding
              of these accretion flows, however, is still limited by the complexities
              involved in developing the necessary magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) and radiation
              hydrodynam-ics computer models. Our understanding of the local physics that
              control such flows has progressed rapidly in the last few years. It is now
              important to examine how local processes such as the magnetorotational
              instability (MRI) determine global disk structure and evolution, especially
              since only global disk models can be directly compared to high spatial-,
              spectral-, and time-resolution observations of accretion flows around
              protostars, white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes.
Using computational
              methods, this project will develop the first time-dependent, three-dimensional
              MHD models of the interaction of an accretion disk with a magnetized and
              rotating central star. These calculations will allow quantitative measurement
              of the mixing rate of the stellar field into the disk, the size of the
              interaction region, the time-averaged torque exerted on the star, and the
              geometry and kinematics of any polar cap accretion flows that might form. Such
              quantities are fundamental to the theory of how magnetized stars interact with
              accretion disks, yet to date they have yet to be calculated from first
              principles. Direct comparison of the simulations to a large and varied set of
              observations will be undertaken, including spectroscopic observations of
              magnetospheric funnel flows and accretion shocks in T Tauri stars, and the
              observed distribution of the rotation rates in T Tauri stars. Synthetic spectra
              of the models will be compared to that observed for accreting black holes at
              the center of early type galaxies and the galactic center, while fluctuations
              in the mass accretion rate can be compared to X-ray variabil-ity observed by
              RXTE in X-ray binaries. These global calculations are the first step towards
              star-disk interaction models which span many decades in radius.
The
              calculations will all be performed with a variety of 2D and 3D MHD computer
              codes, using large allocations of supercomputer time on massively parallel
              machines at the national supercomputer centers. Funding for this project was
              provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology
              (AST/EXC).
***


