Title       : Quantifying Intractability and the Complexity of Heuristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0098197

Award Number: 0098197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351711             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell Impagliazzo russell@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramamohan Paturi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Search and optimization problems are central to all areas of computer
              science
and engineering. Finding the optimal layout for a VLSI circuit or  the
              lowest 
energy configuration of a crystal are both examples of optimization
              problems.
While such problems are believed to be intractable, requiring
              exponential time 
to solve the worst-case instances, many heuristic methods
              have been observed 
to be relatively successful on instances that arise in
              different applications.
This project addresses questions concerning the
              quantitative measures of the 
intractability of search and optimization
              problems, as opposed to qualitative notions
such as NP-completeness.  The
              following are some of the questions addressed in this project:

1. Which
              instances of optimization problems are the most intractable ones?

2. Exactly
              how difficult are these problems?  

3. What are good heuristic methods for
              solving optimization problems ?  
When and how well do they work?  

4. Are
              specific non-complete problems such as factoring also intractable?   

5. How
              much does randomness help in solving problems? 

6. Are hard problems
              suitable for cryptographic applications?
If so, what levels of security do
              they provide these applications? 

Unconditional answers to these questions
              first require solving the P=NP problem. 
However, this project will use two
              approaches to find the most likely answers to 
these questions.  The first
              approach is to provide proofs resolving these issues under
plausible
              complexity assumptions.  The second approach is to examine restricted but
              
powerful classes of algorithms that include the most successful heuristics
              for the problems
under study. This approach will include attempts to  both
              explain the success of 
such heuristics and to show limitations that can be
              used as a guide for the likely inherent
complexity of the problems.
