Title       : A Control-Theoretical Approach to Performance Guarantees in Performance-Critical
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0098269

Award Number: 0098269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Stankovic jas9f@cs.virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gang Tao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sang H. Son  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tarek F. Abdelzaher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many important applications must provide guaranteed real-time 
performance in
              spite of uncertain workloads, highly varying 
computation times for tasks, and
              with a large number of 
interacting sites. Examples of such applications
              include 
smart spaces, financial markets on the Internet, collections 
of
              factories supporting agile manufacturing, and high-tech 
battlefield
              coordination. The objective of this research is 
to develop a
              software-oriented theory and practice of feedback 
control that will provide
              aggregate performance guarantees for 
these types of systems. Methods to embed
              such controllers in 
the operating systems of these types of applications is
              
investigated. The ultimate vision of this research is that 
software
              designers will be able to model parts of software 
systems and use those
              models to develop software control 
algorithms based on a theory of feedback
              control.
This work establishes a scientific basis upon which to design 
and
              analyze the aggregate behavior of large systems that operate 
under a great
              deal of uncertainty. The solutions can be embedded 
in operating systems to
              meet the performance specs in transient 
and steady states, such as deadline
              miss ratio, stability, 
overshoot, settling time, and sensitivity
              requirements.

