Title       : REU: Roswell Park Summer Research Experiences for Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a0098082

Award Number: 0098082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur M. Michalek arthur.michalek@roswellpark.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Roswell Pk Cancer Inst
	      
	      Buffalo, NY  142630001    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract
Proposal #0098082

The NSF REU Program at the Roswell Park Cancer
              Institute presents upper division science majors with pre-graduate school
              summer research experiences.  Students will participate in a challenging ten
              week program focused in the area of molecular biology.  Special efforts will
              continue to be made to recruit members of recognized under-represented groups
              and females.  More importantly our goal is to recruit undergraduate students
              that are interested in pursuing scientific careers and may come from colleges
              that do not have active research programs.  Senior faculty serve as mentors. 
              Participants learn science by doing science.  Under the tutelage of senior
              faculty, students are exposed to the realities of a life as a scientist.  An
              environment is created in which the student evolves from a passive, dependent
              learner to an active member of the research team.  The Institute's commitment
              to the Research Experience for Undergraduates Program is genuine.  This program
              has been in continuous operation since 1953 and it has served as a model for
              other summer research programs.  The "scientific lifestyle" is further explored
              throughout our program in various seminars/activities and culminates in our
              concluding three-day scientific mini-conference.  This is where the students
              give oral and poster presentations of their research to their peers and the
              Institute's scientific faculty.  Other summer experiences include attendance at
              our distinguished lecture series, career counseling sessions, and weekend
              social activities.

