Title       : Insights into Earthquake Propagation Processes from the Chelungpu Fault
               Drilling, Project, Taiwan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0098108

Award Number: 0098108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59205              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Evans jpevans@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1576,5924,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0098108
Evans


In September 1999 a large earthquake occurred on the
              Chelungpu fault in Taiwan.  The fault forms the boundary between the highlands
              of central Taiwan and the coastal  plain along the western side of the island. 
              The earthquake resulted in 2400  fatalities, ~$11 billion in damage, and the
              development of spectacular fault scarps along an 85Km long surface
              rupture.

The Chelengpu rupture illustrates one of the outstanding questions
              in earthquake rupture dynamics and the related issues of earthquake hazard
              analysis - how does seismic energy radiate to the ground surface, and what are
              the near surface conditions that lead to the distribution of slip and ground
              motion associated with large earthquakes?  The Japanese geophysical community,
              with funding from the Japanese Ministry of Science and Technology (JAMSTEC),
              plans to address this and related questions by drilling two 300-m holes through
              the tip of the fault at two sites.  These cored holes will examine the
              character of the fault zone and attempt to address questions regarding the
              nature of slip propagation in the near surface region.  These cored holes
              provide a unique opportunity to extend our understanding of fault zone
              structure beyond that typically examined in paleoseismological investigations
              into a region where very little is known about the structure and composition of
              the fault zone and its relationship to the radiation or dispersal of seismic
              energy.

This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) award will allow
              the Principal Investigator to take advantage of this rare opportunity to
              investigate the near surface tip zone of a large, recently rupture fault by
              providing funds for the full suite of borehole geophysical logs and to provide
              two on-site structural geologists to collaborate on the initial core logging
              and borehole geophysical logging of the two holes.  They will analyze the
              borehole data, and integrate detailed surface rupture trace maps, bedrock
              exposure mapping, and shallow seismic reflection data in collaboration with
              Japanese and Taiwanese geologists, to provide a detailed description of the
              fault zone, including fault composition and structure, fluid characteristics,
              location and nature of the high-slip zones.  Samples will be collected for
              further testing and analysis.

Drilling will begin in November 2000 and last
              for approximately two months, thus the time urgency of this SGER request.  This
              work, through international collaboration and integrated methodologies, will
              provide a detailed view of the processes and structure of a major seismogenic
              fault in the upper km of the earth, and yield significant new insights into the
              processes by which seismic energy reaches the earth's surface during large
              earthquakes.
***

