Title       : SGER: Testing and Optimization of DNA-based Methods of Zooplankton Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2000   
File        : a0098196

Award Number: 0098196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Neigel jneigel@louisiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The life histories of the large majority of marine species include planktonic
              stages, and the availability of planktonic larvae may regulate benthic as well
              as pelagic populations. Because the distributions of planktonic organisms are
              extremely variable in space and time, large numbers of samples are needed to
              adequately characterize them. Using conventional methods, organisms must be
              identified and counted in each sample by tedious microscopic examination by
              highly skilled biologists. The PI will attempt to resolve this sampling
              bottleneck by developing a novel approach for rapid, quantitative analysis of
              larval abundance using inexpensive molecular methods. This new approach is
              referred to as CADRE, for "competitive amplification of a diagnostic repetitive
              element. CADRE exploits the widespread occurrence of taxon-specific repetitive
              DNA sequence elements. Amplification of these elements by the polymerase chain
              reaction (PCR) will be used to detect and quantify the target species in mixed
              plankton samples. Quantification of larval biomass can be achieved by
              competitive PCR, in which a known amount of a DNA template standard is used as
              a control for variable PCR conditions. The standard has the same primer binding
              sequences as the targeted template DNA, and therefore it acts as an internal
              control for the efficiency of amplification. The products amplified from the
              standard and target can be distinguished by size, and the ratio of these
              products, the PCR product ratio, provides an estimate of the initial amount of
              the target sequence. Although other DNA sequences, including ribosomal RNA
              genes and mitochondrial DNA genes can be used to detect or quantify planktonic
              organisms, repetitive elements offer a unique combination of advantages. They
              are easily detected and quantified, taxon-specific, and relatively independent
              of the physiological state of the organism.
