Title       : Memory-Centric Resource Management for Data-Intensive Workloads on Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0098055

Award Number: 0098055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Voigt rvoigt@compsci.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaodong Zhang  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Clusters of workstations have become standard system platforms for many
              scientific, commercial, and educational applications.  This research focuses on
              effective usage of global memory resources to deal with dynamic job demands in
              large cluster systems.  The targeted workloads are data-intensive scientific
              applications, Internet web accesses, and data processing for commercial
              databases.  The first objective is to develop analytical/experimental
              performance models/tools to quantitatively examine the impact of the technology
              changes and data-intensive workloads to resource management policies, and to
              provide resource management guidance.  The second objective is to design
              several memory-centric load sharing schemes by comprehensively considering
              dynamic job interactions and global cluster system resources.  Finally, these
              schemes will be implemented and tested in a large cluster system.  The impact
              and contributions of the proposed projects will be: (1) providing insights into
              memory systems performance and understanding potentials of memory-centric load
              sharing in clusters; (2) providing effective system solutions to adapt rapid
              changes of technology and workloads in cluster computing; and (3) making
              low-cost clusters more accessible for both scientists and business users to
              effectively run their large and demanding applications.
