Title       : Viscosity solution methods in partial differential equations and applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2001      
File        : a0098565

Award Number: 0098565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej Swiech swiech@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal concentrates on the analysis of certain classes of nonlinear
              partial differential equations and their applications. Linking them together is
              the notion  of viscosity solution. Part of the proposal focuses on equations of
              Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) type that are related 
to optimal control of
              stochastic partial differential equations. The HJB equations associated with
              their control are equations in infinite dimensional spaces. The theory of such
              equations is not well developed. The principal investigator (PI) studies them
              in the project paying special attention to several equations related to
              problems of particular interest. One of such problems is 
optimal control of
              fluid flow that can be reformulated as optimal control of  deterministic or
              stochastic Navier-Stokes equations. Another problem comes from mathematical
              finance and is related to option pricing. It includes analysis of infinite
              dimensional equivalent of ``Black-Scholes" equation and its nonlinear version,
              so called ``Black-Scholes-Barenblatt" equation. HJB equations in Hilbert (or
              Banach) spaces are the key to the dynamic programming analysis of optimal
              control problems of systems driven by partial differential equations.
These
              HJB equations must be investigated from the point of view of generalized
              solutions. Viscosity solutions should provide the right approach to such
              equations and the proposed research should be an important ingredient in
              setting the stage for optimal control of infinite dimensional stochastic
              systems. The PI also proposes to investigate a class of fully nonlinear
              non-divergence form uniformly elliptic equations that includes generalizations
              of quasilinear 
equations and certain equations of geometric type, an
              important class in the elliptic theory. Such equations have not been studied
              systematically, especially when they are discontinuous in the spatial variable.
              The equations do not have classical solutions and the PI wants to extend the
              theory of so called L^p-viscosity solutions to this class. In particular the PI
              plans to investigate 
the question of regularity of solutions of such
              equations. This is a major open problem of elliptic partial differential
              equations and the PI proposes several possible new approaches to it that may
              give rise to new and interesting techniques.


The notion of viscosity
              solution is one of the main tools of nonlinear partial differential equations
              and it has found applications in areas as diverse as optimal control, image
              processing, moving fronts and phase transitions, statistical mechanics,
              economics, mathematical finance. The motivation for studying some problems
              described in the proposal comes from optimal control,
especially control of
              stochastic partial differential equations. Their theory is in a state of rapid
              development and is fueled by modeling questions coming from physics, population
              biology, chemistry, and economics and mathematical finance. The problem of
              optimal control of fluid flow  is one of the basic engineering problems and has
              numerous applications in areas like combustion theory, aero and hydrodynamic
              control, Tokomak magnetic fusion, ocean and atmospheric prediction just to name
              a few. Problems related to the Musiela model of interest rates come from the
              modern theory of option pricing. The research of the project should contribute
              to the development of new directions in partial differential equations and
              should also have impact on the applied areas mentioned above.

