Title       : Noncommutative Harmonic Analysis, Operator Algebras, and Interpolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0098157

Award Number: 0098157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gelu Popescu gpopescu@math.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               

Abstract
Popescu

The proposed research considers  problems in
              noncommutative harmonic analysis, operator algebras, and interpolation in
              several variables.  The framework of this proposal is mainly the full Fock
              space, certain noncommutative (resp. commutative) analytic Toeplitz algebras,
              and the algebra of all bounded linear operators on a Hilbert space. 
              Noncommutative dilation theory,  Poisson transforms on $C^*$-algebras generated
              by isometries, and  commutant lifting theorems are considered  in order to find
              noncommutative (resp. commutative)  multivariable analogues to some classical
              results. The main directions of this proposed research are the following:
              harmonic analysis on Fock spaces; power bounded sequences of operators,
              structure, and numerical invariants; central intertwining lifting,
              suboptimization, and analytic interpolation in several variables; dilation
              theory for tuples of operators (noncontractions) and non-analytic interpolation
              in several variables.
 

The motivation of this research is the recent
              worldwide interest in the noncommutative aspect of harmonic analysis originated
              from the concept of quantization which links together several branches of
              mathematics and is closely related to mathematical physics. The objective of
              this research is to advance the understanding of the relatively new area of
              multivariable operator theory and  apply some of these results to  the study of
              completely positive maps and their invariants, function theory and
              interpolation in several variables, multivariable linear systems, scattering,
              control theory, and model theory for tuples of operators.


 


 


              



 








 
 

Abstract
Popescu

The proposed research
              considers  problems in noncommutative harmonic analysis, operator algebras, and
              interpolation in several variables.  The framework of this proposal is mainly
              the full Fock space, certain noncommutative (resp. commutative) analytic
              Toeplitz algebras, and the algebra of all bounded linear operators on a Hilbert
              space.  Noncommutative dilation theory,  Poisson transforms on $C^*$-algebras
              generated by isometries, and  commutant lifting theorems are considered  in
              order to find noncommutative (resp. commutative)  multivariable analogues to
              some classical results. The main directions of this proposed research are the
              following: harmonic analysis on Fock spaces; power bounded sequences of
              operators, structure, and numerical invariants; central intertwining lifting,
              suboptimization, and analytic interpolation in several variables; dilation
              theory for tuples of operators (noncontractions) and non-analytic interpolation
              in several variables.
 

The motivation of this research is the recent
              worldwide interest in the noncommutative aspect of harmonic analysis originated
              from the concept of quantization which links together several branches of
              mathematics and is closely related to mathematical physics. The objective of
              this research is to advance the understanding of the relatively new area of
              multivariable operator theory and  apply some of these results to  the study of
              completely positive maps and their invariants, function theory and
              interpolation in several variables, multivariable linear systems, scattering,
              control theory, and model theory for tuples of operators.


 


 


              



 








 

