Title       : High Energy Neutrinos and Photons from Gamma-Ray Bursts and Active Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0098416

Award Number: 0098416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter I. Meszaros nnp@astro.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eli Waxman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098416
Meszaros

Gamma ray bursts (GRBs) and the active nuclei of
              galaxies (AGNs) outshine every other gamma-ray source in the sky. GRB are
              stellar remnants thought to be powered by black holes with masses several times
              the mass of the sun, which, in a few seconds, emit as much energy as our entire
              Milky Way does in a hundred years. However, it is not understood what kinds of
              stars give rise to these events, nor what is the exact mechanism whereby they
              produce gamma-rays, neutrinos and charged cosmic rays, nor how frequently or
              how far back in time they occur. AGNs, on the other hand, are suspected of
              harboring giant black holes, more massive than millions of suns, and are known
              to accelerate jets of electrons, which produce radio waves, light and
              ultra-high energy gamma rays. However, it is unclear if these jets also contain
              protons and neutrons, like some giant neutron gun, which would also entail
              highly penetrating neutrinos. Both ultra-high energy protons and neutrinos are
              targets for giant cosmic ray and neutrino telescopes being built by NSF in
              Argentina and in the South Pole, which will probe energies millions of times
              higher than any ever achieved in Earth laboratories. This is uncharted
              territory, and we need to know the theoretical ranges of possible results. A
              comparison of theoretical models with these experiments is imperative, in order
              to test the validity of current ideas (or the need for new ones) about how our
              Universe functions. This project will identify key features distinguishing
              different conceptions, which will allow an optimization of the design of
              planned experiments, and the testing of the various competing theories.  The
              results would have far-reaching consequences for a range of questions in
              astrophysics, including how far into the cosmic past can we peer, what is the
              total energy content of the Universe, and are the laws of physics different or
              not at these higher energies and earlier times in the age of the Universe
              Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic
              Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***


