Title       : RUI: Radioactive Nuclear Beam Physics with Undergraduates at Hope College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a0098061

Award Number: 0098061
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163123             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. DeYoung deyoung@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Graham F. Peaslee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Hope College Nuclear Group is involved in research with the
              Radioactive
Nuclear Beams (RNB) available at the University of Notre Dame
              (ND), the
National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory at Michigan State
              University,
and the BEARS facility at Lawrence Berkeley Labs. With this
              proposal, the
Nuclear Group will continue to apply the expertise developed
              over many years
of work in traditional areas of nuclear reaction studies and
              our recent
experience with RNB to address questions about the behavior of the
              exotic
nuclei. Specifically, this project seeks to develop the disciplines
              understanding of
unstable nuclei.  To do this measurements of various cross
              sections for a
variety of unstable particles will be made including: two- and
              one-neutron
transfer cross sections, near-barrier fusion-fission cross
              sections, and total
reaction cross sections.  To facilitate these studies, we
              will develop a
variety of detectors (parallel-plate avalanche counters,
              neutron detectors and
electron multipliers).  We will also continue our
              analysis of a previous
experiments and the preparation of other papers from
              past work.
Undergraduate students from Hope College will participate in all
              aspects of
the experiments: planning, detector development (including
              detector
fabrication and testing),  detector and  electronic setup, data
              taking,
off-line analysis, and modeling.  Our experience over the years
              demonstrates
that undergraduate research enhances a student's education and
              better prepares
the student for graduate work or a wide variety of careers in
              either industry
or academia.


