Title       : Performance Driven Layout and Logic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2001      
File        : a0098069

Award Number: 0098069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malgorzata Marek-Sadowska mms@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The increased chip complexity causes that average interconnect lengths increase
              and proportionally
larger and larger fraction of chip's area is occupied by
              interconnects. This proposal addresses several is-sues
related to
              interconnects in submicron technologies.

We will concentrate on simultaneous
              switching cross-talk noise effects in RC interconnects. Our goal
here is to
              develop efficient, easy to compute and accurate bounds on delay in the presence
              of crosstalk and
to characterize and prevent propagating crosstalk signals.
              Besides correcting the crosstalk caused prob-lems
we will also develop
              methodologies of circuit optimization in the presence of crosstalk. We will
              develop
gate sizing tool, buffer insertion, spacing and net reordering which
              will consider both cross-talk and delay.
At the same time we will explore
              regularity at the Boolean level to achieve layouts with mostly
              local
interconnects. The ultimate goal is to develop logic synthesis
              methodology which would produce highly reg-ular layout structures without large
              area penalty. We propose to continue our work on wave steered design
              methodology and we will develop tools for logic synthesis and physical design
              of such circuits.
