Title       : Spline-Wavelet Frames in Computer Graphics and other Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0098331

Award Number: 0098331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles K. Chui chui@arch.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wenjie He  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joachim Stoeckler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal 0098331  
Charles K Chui, Wenjie He, and Joachim Stoeckler
U of
              Missouri, Saint Louis

Abstract:  Tight frames with scaling factor 2,
              generated by the standard affine operations of dilation and translation of two
              compactly supported cardinal splines, called frame generators, can be easily
              constructed for any spline order m (or degree m-1), by applying matrix
              extension techniques.  However, regardless of the number of (spline) frame
              generators being used, at least one of them has only one vanishing moment, when
              the matrix extension approach is followed.

In our recent work, we introduced
              the notion of "vanishing-moment recovery" Laurent polynomial factors S(z) is
              introduced to show that the maximum number m of vanishing moments can be
              achieved by both compactly supported tight frame generators, for any order m. 
              Furthermore, the Laurent polynomials S(z) can be formulated explicitly when
              tight frames are relaxed to be sibling frames; that is, both frame generators,
              together with their corresponding duals, are compactly supported cardinal
              splines of the same order m.  These additional vanishing moments are essential
              for effective use of the wavelet coefficients for feature extraction, noise
              removal, etc.

Cardinal splines are spline functions with an equally spaced
              knot sequence extending from.  However, in most practical applications, the
              intervals of interest are bounded and data samples may not be uniformly
              distributed.  Hence, mth order splines with arbitrary knots, or at least with m
              stacked knots at one or both end-points of the interval of interest, are
              needed.  This new research project is concerned with formulation of the matrix
              equivalent Sk of the Laurent polynomials S(z), construction of  Sk and the
              corresponding tight (and more generally sibling) frame generators of  mth order
              compactly supported splines with arbitrary knots and with m vanishing moments,
              achievement of such important features as inter-orthogonality for sibling
              frames, development and integration of the associated frame algorithms with the
              existing spline tools, investigation of spline-wavelet frame tools for adding
              sparsification and editing fearures for applications in computer graphics, and
              development of a portable software library.

