Title       : Workshop on Access and Participatory Approaches Associated with the Use of
               Geographic Information, Rome, Italy, Fall 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a0098389

Award Number: 0098389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27321              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harlan J. Onsrud onsrud@spatial.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5914,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The continuing rapid diffusion of geographic information technologies throughout
              societal applications and the growing use of geographic and location data use
              has spawned diverse notions in the scientific community regarding priorities
              for research and the nature of appropriate research.  This divergence in
              thinking is particularly noticeable when comparing "GIS and Society" research
              agendas in the U.S. and Europe.  European nations are responding to the
              expanded use of geographic information by individuals, businesses, government
              agencies, and scientists in a manner quite different from the responses
              witnessed in the U.S.  Laws and policies regarding the handling of scientific,
              technical, business, personal, and government data are very different on either
              side of the Atlantic, and these differences have influenced technical and
              social science research directions in the field.  The growing gaps between U.S.
              and European approaches to data handling and the divergence in "GIS and
              Society" research priorities highlights the need to reestablish links among
              U.S. and European researchers in order to enable researchers in these
              communities to inform each other about the underlying influences affecting the
              directions of research and the different paths they are taking.  This award
              will support the involvement of U.S. and European  researchers in a joint
              workshop to be held in Rome, Italy, during Fall 2001.  The objectives of the
              workshop will be (1) to assess the current state of research on access to
              geographic information and on geographic access theory, (2) to evaluate the
              impact of evolving policy and legal trends in the U.S. and Europe on access to
              scientific and technical data generally and to geographic data specifically,
              (3) to assess the current state of research on participatory approaches
              surrounding the use of geographic information, (4) to explore commonalities and
              differences in U.S. and European directions of research within these arenas,
              and (5) to develop a joint U.S.-European research agenda on geographic
              information access and participatory issues.  The workshop arises from recent
              research discussions among members of the University Consortium for Geographic
              Information Science (UCGIS) and the Association of Geographic Information
              Laboratories in Europe (AGILE).  The workshop will be structured as a series of
              plenary presentations, breakout small group discussions, and plenary
              discussions, a model successfully used by the National Center for Geographic
              Information and Analysis in the U.S. and by the European GISDATA program for
              more than a decade.  over the years.  Findings will be issued in a workshop
              report, and several print and electronic means will be exploited to distribute
              additional workshop results.

This workshop should facilitate communications
              among U.S. and European scientists examining the dissemination and use of
              geographic information systems as well as the barriers to more complete and
              effective use of GISs and related technologies within and across different
              nations.  Through publication of the results of this workshop, the broader
              research community will benefit from the focus attention given to this issue in
              Rome.  The workshop will contribute to a number of major activities in which
              the U.S. government is engaged, including the work by the Federal Geographic
              Data Committee (FGDC) to develop an institutional framework for allowing
              individuals and organizations to share and exchange geographic data and
              services while retaining substantial public access rights for much of the data.
               It also will contribute toward comparable international efforts, such as the
              Global Spatial Data Infrastructure effort, which is promoting mechanisms to
              allow cross-national collaboration in the sharing and exchange of geographic
              information as well as more open access to geographic data.

