Title       : The Warm Ionized Medium: A High Resolution Northern Hemisphere [SII] Survey and
               an Emission Measure Atlas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a0098487

Award Number: 0098487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Simonetti jhs@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian K. Dennison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
AST 0098487
Simonetti

This research probes the structure and physical
              properties of the warm ionized medium (WIM), a phase of the interstellar medium
              in which gas is in mostly ionized form at approximate temperatures of 6000 to
              10,000 K. The investigators use a sensitive charge-coupled device (CCD) camera
              system in conjunction with narrowband interference filters to image the
              distribution of the WIM over the entire northern sky with approximately
              arcminute resolution. Their previous work included a survey of the WIM in the
              H-alpha emission line ( 6563A ).  In this research they extend previous imaging
              in the [S II] forbidden-line doublet  to cover the northern hemisphere.
              Hydrogen is excited by photoionization, whereas [S II] is collisionally
              excited. Thus, the [S II] survey is an ideal complement to their H-alpha
              survey, making it possible to study the physical properties of the gas. Most
              importantly, this research will globally address fundamental questions
              concerning the sources of heat in the WIM by providing the [S II]/H-alpha
              emission ratio is a large variety of structures. These surveys are presented to
              the astronomical community (consisting of both researchers and educators ) at
              the Virginia Tech Spectral-line Survey (VTSS) website
              (http://www.phys.vt.edu/vtss).  The researchers will also produce an H-alpha
              atlas which combines their VTBB Ha-alpha survey with the WHAM H-alpha survey of
              Reynolds and collaborators at the University of Wisconsin. These two surveys
              are ideally complementary. 

The surveys produced by this research will
              enable astronomers to study the relationship of the WIM to other phases of the
              interstellar medium. Through comparison with maps of H I, CO, infrared, and
              X-ray emission, astronomers will be able to discern how the WIM is distributed
              in space relative to neutral gas, cold gas, dust, and gas heated to very high
              temperatures by supernovae and stellar outflows. The angular resolution of the
              VTSS surveys is well matched to major surveys such as IRAS and ROSAT. This work
              will involve Virginia Tech undergraduate and graduate students. The researchers
              are building on previous successes with students trained in conjunction with
              this research. The camera system is located at a dark site within easy reach of
              the Virginia Tech campus -- an arrangement that fits the scientific needs of
              the project, minimizes cost, and enables student involvement. In addition to
              research uses, the survey images are readily accessible for a wide range of
              educational uses at the high school and college levels. With this in mind, a
              simple to use web-based image viewing and processing program is provided for
              displaying, manipulating, and analyzing the FITS-format images.
***


