Title       : Approximation of NP-Hard Problems: Algorithms and Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a0098180

Award Number: 0098180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjeev Arora arora@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Approximation of NP-hard problems: Algorithms and Complexity
Sanjeev
              Arora
Princeton University

The broad goal of  the project is a study of the
              approximation properties of
NP-hard problems. NP-hard problems are those that
              do not have any efficient
algorithms if the classes P and NP are different, as
              is widely-believed. They arise in a variety
of application areas in science
              and technology, including scheduling, VLSI
design, artificial intelligence,
              design of optimum networks, etc. 
Since we do not expect to solve these
              problems optimally, there is a need to 
design efficient approximation
              algorithms for them: algorithms that compute a 
solution whose cost is within
              a small factor of the optimum. The PI has been
involved in designing
              approximation algorithms during the past decade. He has
also been part of an
              ongoing research program that shows that for many of these problems,
computing
              approximate solutions is no easier than computing optimum
solutions. (In other
              words, approximation is also NP-hard.) These
inapproximability results shed
              important light on the problems as well.

The project takes a two-pronged
              approach, combining a search for good
approximation algorithms with a search
              ---using the theory of probabilistically 
checkable proofs (PCPs)--- for
              inapproximability results. The project focusses
on a collection of important
              algorithmic problems, including: learning mixtures
of distributions (a problem
              important in AI and data  mining/analysis),
learning bayes nets and markov
              random fields  (useful in speech recognition,
machine vision, medical
              diagnoses systems etc.), lattice problems (useful in
cryptography and
              cryptanalysis), and graph coloring (a central problem in complexity
              theory).
Progress, especially algorithmic progress, on any of these problems
              has
important consequences.
