Title       : SGER: Stage-Discharge Relationship (Rating Curve) and Associated Uncertainties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2002    
File        : a0098835

Award Number: 0098835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39881              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcelo H. Garcia mgarcia@civilgate.ce.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ben C. Yen  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0098835
Yen

The flow rating curve showing the relationship between
              water-surface stage and the flow discharge has been widely used in hydrology
              for over a century.  Direct measurements of discharge in open channels is
              costly, time consuming, and impractical during floods.  Difficulties with
              stage-discharge ratings have long been recognized.  The relation between stage
              and discharge is not unique.  The water slope and changing channel cross
              sections result in a range of possible discharges for the same stage.  A number
              of methods have been proposed to improve the fit but have not adequately
              assessed the fundamentals of stage-discharge ratings based on fluid mechanics. 
              This work would explore the feasibility of deriving the rating for a stream
              reach theoretically.

An important feature in the project design is the close
              collaboration with the Illinois USGS office that tie the theoretical to work 
              years of practical experience.  The approach would develop rating curves
              without stage or discharge measurements by using the unsteady-flow equation. 
              The  recently developed Hydraulic Performance Graph (HPG) contains all the
              information needed to develop a relation between the stage, the water-surface
              slope, and the discharge.  Unsteady-flow equations will also be explored.  The
              result sought is a rating curve supplemented with graphs or equations
              representing the correction due to additional contributing factors, such as
              water-surface slope, in a nondimensional form.  Measured data will be used to
              verify the rating curve, instead of deriving it, allowing considerable savings
              in time, cost, and effort in data collection.  

Furthermore, the work
              includes a preliminary investigation of the uncertainties associated with the
              individual contributing factors and the overall uncertainty of discharge
              determination from stage. 

