Title       : Production-Oriented VDDT and IDDQ Device Testing Methods Based on Multiple Power
               Supply Pad Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0098300

Award Number: 0098300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318259             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Plusquellic plusquel@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors identifies a need for
              innovative testing and diagnostic methods for digital and mixed-signal devices.
              Traditional testing strategies are becoming less effective for several reasons.
              As device operational frequencies increase, the cost of functional test
              equipment, capable of testing devices at their native speed (at-speed), is
              becoming cost prohibitive.   Testing methods which use slower, cheaper test
              equipment need to be able to detect defects that cause at-speed delay failures.
              The increasing complexity and diversity of these devices also make it difficult
              to access internal nodes and achieve good fault coverage and parametric device
              information. Technology trends, such as increases in 
device leakage currents,
              have reduced the effectiveness of alternative tests such as IDDQ. This research
              is designed to address these short-coming by investigating device transient and
              novel quiescent 
signal techniques. 

In previous work, process-tolerant
              VDDT and IDDQ methods have been demonstrated to (1) detect resistive shorting
              and open defects, (2) predict performance in defect-free devices, and (3)
              predict defect 
location in defective devices. These methods are based on the
              cross-correlation of multiple static and transient power supply signals.  
              Cross-correlation is used to calibrate for process and technology-related
              
variations, such as shifts in transistor betas and increases in leakage
              current. This research focuses on the implementation of these techniques in a
              production test environment, and on identifying their capabilities 
and
              limitations. The scalability of the methods to large commercial devices is
              investigated with industrial partners. Production test environment issues, such
              as measurement noise and instrumentation 
sampling requirements, test
              generation strategies and specialized hardware are also investigated. 

