Title       : RUI: Activity in Near and Distant Comets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0098583

Award Number: 0098583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Womack womack@r2d2.stcloudstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St. Cloud State University
	      740 Fourth Avenue South
	      St. Cloud, MN  56301    320/255-2122

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098583
Womack

Comets provide a unique opportunity to study the
              formation of the Solar System since they are among the best-preserved specimens
              of the material of the proto-solar nebula out of which the Solar System formed.
              Understanding how comets become active and generate comae is critical to
              developing more accurate models of nucleus composition and structure. One
              complication in modeling observations is that some comets exhibit different
              kinds of activity, depending on how far they are from the Sun. The activity of
              comets within 3 Astronomical Units (AU) of the Sun, for example, is well
              understood to be dominated by the sublimation of water ice from the nucleus. On
              the other hand, the activity of many comets that are active beyond 4 AU appear
              to be driven by CO outgassing and sometimes expel dramatic outbursts of gas and
              dust. A second complication is that some molecules are often released into
              comae by distributed sources, which can give misleading results about the
              relative molecular abundances and kinds of activity in comets. Another issue of
              concern is the amount of processing that comets experience after their
              formation due to different volatilities of molecules in the nucleus and the
              effect of anisotropic outgassing on derived production rates. The principal
              goal of this project, lead by Dr. Maria Womack at St Cloud State University, is
              to derive and analyze CO production rates in near and distant comets from
              mm-wavelength spectra.  
A large dataset of millimeter-wavelength mapping data
              of molecular emission in comets Hale-Bopp and Hyakutake and spectra for eight
              other comets is in hand and reduced, and new observations are proposed for
              other sufficiently bright comets. These data will be used with recently
              improved kinematic and excitation models in order to constrain outgassing
              mechanisms and excitation conditions of molecules in comae near the Sun.
              Lineshapes and spatial brightness profiles from the data will be used to
              analyze anisotropic emission and to quantify the amount of distributed sources
              in comae for CO, H2CO, HCN and other species. Spectral lineshapes and
              production rates of CO and other volatiles in comets beyond 4 AU will be
              modeled in order to investigate the quiescent and outbursting stages of distant
              cometary activity, and to measure properties of molecules sublimating from icy
              grains in the coma.
St Cloud State University (SCSU) undergraduate students
              known as "Cometwatchers" will participate in this project as employed research
              assistants and in upper-level astrophysics courses. Funds will be used to pay
              students and to improve the student-run SCSU observatory in order to provide
              them with a collaborative learning environment in scientific research.  This
              award is made under the Research in Undergraduate Institutions program at NSF. 
              
***


