Title       : Adaptive Conformal Arrays for Next-Generation Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0098547

Award Number: 0098547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen L. Virga virga@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Marcellin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0098547
Virga

The rapid explosion in the number of wireless communications
              systems demands an ever
increasing system performance capacity. It is
              imperative that innovative design paradigms that
maximize system performance
              be pursued. Significant attention has been given to maximizing
performance in
              the communications protocols, while less has been given to the
              system
throughput available from "smart" array antenna design. Adaptive
              conformal antenna arrays are
arrays with radiating elements that are placed in
              arbitrary locations and the elements may be
directed in different directions.
              The interest in adaptive conformal antennas at the base station
and on the
              mobile terminals is motivated by previous work reported on indoor wireless
              channels
and on novel space-time coding techniques that suggests the use of
              conformal arrays improves
the reliability of the communications over
              multi-path propagation effects and fading, and in
general, improves the
              overall quality of service of the entire wireless network.

This proposal
              addresses the development of simulation, design, and analysis approaches
              for
adaptive conformal array antennas and provides an in-depth investigation
              to quantify the
performance capabilities available from conformal arrays. The
              result will be a new class of array
antennas and design tools for fourth
              generation wireless systems and beyond. This work will be
focused in two main
              areas. The first area involves developing novel simulation algorithms
              to
understand how the particular array weights for several conformal array
              configurations
influences the spatial distribution of the transmitted or
              received signal. This work will include
the development efficient tools to
              determine the optimal set array weights necessary to obtain a
specified
              spatial response. The research will use the results of previous antenna
              modeling efforts
to factor in the effects of realistic designs of typical
              antenna elements, (element patterns, gain
and phase imbalance, and mutual
              coupling etc.) and real-time processing resources. The second
area involves
              developing processing methods to determine space-time characteristics
              for
conformal arrays. This will allow the determination of the
              angle-of-arrival of an incoming signal
and will allow the PI's to adapt the
              array weights in order to maximize signal to noise ratio and quality of the
              wireless channel.

The intellectual and creative aspects of the proposed
              activities include advancing the
state-of-the-art for general conformal array
              antennas for wireless communications, implementing
evolutionary programming
              methods that take into account multi-design criteria for conformal
antenna
              arrays, quantifying fundamental characteristic design formulas to understand
              the
capabilities and limitations of conformal array antennas, and utilizing
              directional elements in the
design of conformal arrays and quantifying the
              performance enhancements obtained from the use
of directional elements in
              conformal arrays. Other activities include investigating the mutual
coupling
              between radiators in conformal arrays, and developing novel adaptive
              processing
methods specifically for conformal arrays for angle-of-arrival and
              time-of-arrival estimation. The
PIs plan to interface with research activities
              in this proposal with work in a wireless networking
project when applicable.
              This will have broader impact beyond the research described in the
present
              proposal.

