Title       : Lower Bounds for Time-space Tradeoffs, Data Structures, and Proof Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0098066

Award Number: 0098066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Beame beame@cs.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research addresses several problems in three areas of computational
              
complexity.   The overall objective in each case is to understand the limits
              
of the capabilities of computers and the algorithms that run on them.  
The
              first area of research concerns tradeoffs between the processing time and
              
storage requirements of computations: 
When can one solve problems using
              algorithms that are both fast and 
use small amounts of storage and when is
              one limited to trading off these
two resources, reducing storage requirements
              only at the cost of 
additional running time?
The second area of research
              concerns the increased efficiencies in data 
structures that are possible by
              taking advantage of the wide range of 
instructions in modern processors that
              operate on entire computer words at 
once.
The third area of research
              involves the analysis of algorithms to solve 
NP-hard search problems.
When
              many such algorithms search but do not find a solution to a problem,
they
              implicitly provide proofs that no such solution exists.
In this portion of the
              research, the investigators analyze the form of these 
implicit proofs to show
              the limits of the efficiencies of these search 
algorithms.

More
              specifically, the research in time-space tradeoffs builds on the
              
investigators' previous work on time-space tradeoff lower bounds and is aimed
              
at extending these results to other natural problems such as graph
              
connectivity and improving the complexity limits shown by current lower bound
              
techniques.
The research in data structures works in the model of
              random-access machines 
with arbitrary unit-cost operations on word-size
              quantities.
The goal of this data structure research is to understand the
              limits of the
algorithmic improvements possible in this model, particularly
              for 
nearest-neighbor queries, priority queues, sorting, and garbage
              collection.
The research on the complexity of NP-search algorithms focuses
              on
the proof complexity of co-NP properties of random structures.
The goal is
              to show that for randomly-chosen inputs, natural proof systems 
such as
              resolution almost always require exponential-size proofs of membership 
in the
              co-NP sets corresponding to the duals of natural NP problems.
A consequence of
              this would be proofs that large classes of algorithms for 
solving the NP
              problems require exponential time on large numbers of inputs.
