Title       : Theoretical Particle Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0098631

Award Number: 0098631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederick Cooper                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1710000            (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Peter Lepage gpl@mail.lns.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andre LeClair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S.-H. Henry Tye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthias Neubert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1286      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical particle physics is concerned with understanding matter 
and energy
              at its most fundamental level. The field is just now 
entering an unusually
              interesting phase. After more than twenty years 
of repeated and stunning
              success, the "Standard Model" of subnuclear 
physics is almost certain to fail
              in the next round of high-energy 
experiments, beginning an era of intense
              discovery that will 
dramatically deepen our understanding of the fundamental
              physics. 
This imminent revolution will be addressed from three directions.
              
First, detailed analyses of Standard Model predictions will be used 
to look
              for discrepancies that would provide hints about the new 
physics that is to
              come. These discrepancies are most likely in rare 
processes, such as the
              radioactive decays of elementary particles, 
and in highly precise
              calculations of the electromagnetic properties 
of such particles as the
              electron-like muon. Second, new numerical 
methods will be further developed
              for analyzing theories in which the 
forces between elementary particles are
              very strong. These methods 
are essential for precise analyses of the Standard
              Model (and for the 
large experimental programs at SLAC, Cornell, etc.), and
              could also 
be essential for understanding the new physics to come --- strong
              
forces are a quite common, almost generic feature of particle 
physics.
              Finally, there will be wide-ranging exploration of 
theoretical possibilities
              for the new physics, including such options 
as exotic new properties, like
              "supersymmetry", or extra directions 
in space-time. Central issues concern
              the relationship between 
quantum mechanics and gravity ("string theory"), and
              also between 
particle physics and cosmology. A fourth component of this
              project 
is interdisciplinary: Analytical and numerical techniques from
              
particle physics will be applied to important problems in condensed 
matter
              and solid state physics.

