Title       : Investigation of Nuclear Structure with Intermediate Energy Photons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0098674

Award Number: 0098674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $523270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel I. Sober sober@cua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hall L. Crannell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James T. O'Brien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Catholic University of America (CUA) group will study the
structure of
              nucleons and the role of quarks in determining this
structure,  principally
              using instrumentation in Hall B at The
Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator
              Facility (JLab).  An essential tool
In this work is the photon tagger -- a
              device which measures the
Incident energy of a photon that subsequently
              produces a reaction of interest
in a nuclear target.  The reaction products
              are then collected and
analyzed, typically by the CEBAF Large Acceptance
              Spectrometer
(CLAS), in order to extract fundamental information of
              interest
about the nuclear interactions involved.  The CUA group had
              major
responsibility for the design, construction and commissioning of 
the
              tagger, which has subequently been used by about 40% of the 
experiments in
              Hall B. In addition to ongoing commitments to Hall B, 
we have begun work on a
              tagger design for the new Hall D -- a 
component of the proposed upgrade of
              JLab to higher energy.

As founding members of the CLAS Collaboration, the
              CUA group will
continue to participate in data-taking and analysis activity
              for most
experiments that use the tagger.  A study of special interest to us
              is the 
photoproduction of K mesons and hyperons in order to
              improve
understanding of the role of strange quarks in the nucleon. 
              Current
investigations include production of neutral K mesons, the
              dissertation project for
a CUA doctoral student.  We are refining a proposal
              to study
contributions to the Gerasimov-Drell-Hearn sum rule, a quantity
              related to the most fundamenetal properties of the proton.  Apart from the
              CLAS
collaboration, we are partners in two other projects which use the tagger
              but not
the CLAS detector - a measurement of rare decays of the phi meson, and
              a
forthcoming measurement of the lifetime of the neutral pion using the
              Primakoff
effect.


