Title       : Problems in Commutative Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0098654

Award Number: 0098654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig L. Huneke huneke@math.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports research in commutative algebra.  The investigator together
              with students and collaborators will study problems in four connected areas:
              the theory of tight closure, rings of F-finite Cohen-Macaulay type, the theory
              of integrally closed ideals with applications to evolutions, and the study of
              infinite free resolutions.  At its core, tight closure theory rests on
              reduction to positive characteristic.  The principal investigator will study
              two main problems using tight closure.  The first deals with recent work
              concerning the behavior of symbolic powers in regular local rings, and the
              second concerns the question of whether tight closure commutes with
              localization.  To study rings of finite (or F-finite) Cohen-Macaulay type, this
              proposal places the study in the broader context of understanding the
              decomposition of purely inseparable extensions of a fixed Cohen-Macaulay domain
              into direct sums of indecomposable Cohen-Macaulay modules.  Integral closures
              of ideals are a basic object in commutative algebra.  This proposal
              concentrates on questions pertaining to the existence of evolutions over the
              complex numbers.  The study of infinite free resolutions and vanishing to Tors
              is the focus of the last part of the proposal, especially over Gorenstein rings
              of dimension zero.

Commutative algebra studies the relationship between
              algebraic equations, such as polynomial equations, and geometry.  This idea
              goes back to Descartes and the idea of coordinatizing the plane, and has proved
              to be a powerful tool.  A wide range of problems can be put into the context of
              solving systems of equations. For example, linear algebra studies systems of
              linear (degree one) equations.  Commutative algebra studies the solutions of
              polynomial or power series equations of higher order by forming an algebraic
              object consisting of the 'generic' solutions.  The algebraic properties of
              these generic solutions then give insight into the geometric and algebraic
              nature of the equations. 


