Title       : Collaborative Research: Completion of the Southern Proper Motion Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0098548

Award Number: 0098548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312251             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. van Altena   (Principal Investigator current)
              Terrence M. Girard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale Southern Obser, Inc.
	      
	      New Haven, CT  06501    203/436-8318

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098548
Van Altena

In a collaborative research project, Dr. William Van
              Altena, of Yale Southern Observatory, and Dr. Timothy Beers, of Michigan State
              University, will use the newly installed CCD cameras at the Yale Southern
              Observatory in Argentina in order to complete the Yale/San-Juan Southern Proper
              Motion (SPM) program. The first two catalogs of the SPM have already
              demonstrated the high quality of the absolute proper motions that are
              attainable within this program.  The CCD system will allow completion of the
              2nd-epoch observations of the southern sky and, furthermore, will provide the
              first full southern-sky set of photometry in V and B, down to a magnitude limit
              of V = 18.0 and B = 19.0. While the first two SPM Catalogs were based on input
              lists of interesting objects as well as randomly selected stars for kinematic
              studies, the new CCD camera system, and recent completion of the digitization
              of all SPM plates by the Precision Measuring Machine of the U.S. Naval
              Observatory, will allow the new version of the SPM Catalog to be complete to
              the limiting magnitude of the 1st-epoch plates. The science return from this
              effort will be enormous! During this award period,  about 6000 square degrees,
              or three-quarters of the remaining SPM fields should be observed and
              analyzed.

The immediate motivation for the project is  linked to exploration
              of the kinematics and dynamics of the Galaxy, using not only randomly selected
              anonymous stars but also subsets of special interest; primarily the recently
              completed lists of tens of thousands of metal-poor (MP) and field horizontal-
              branch/main-sequence A-type (FRB/A) candidate stars obtained from digital scans
              of the HK survey plates of Beers and colleagues, and the even larger set of
              interesting targets generated from the stellar component of the Ramburg/ESO
              Survey.  These two surveys form the basis for present spectroscopic exploration
              of the nature of the early Galaxy and its chemical and dynamical evolution, and
              hence are of immediate interest. This information will be combined with radial
              velocities already in hand, or to be obtained from planned large-scale
              spectroscopic follow-up, in order to determine full space motions for the most
              interesting targets from the other surveys  long before proper motions and
              distance measurements are obtained with the space missions FAME and
              SIM.
***


