Title       : Graph Visualization and Geometric Algorithm Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2001 
File        : a0098068

Award Number: 0098068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Goodrich goodrich@acm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Tamassia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098068
Michael T. Goodrich
Johns Hopkins University

This project
              is focused on the development of data structures and algorithms for performing
              computations involving the representation, transformation, and visualization of
              collections of objects that can be modeled geometrically, such as vertices,
              edges, lines, planes, polygons, curves, and spheres. In particular, it
              addresses the following topics:

1. Graph visualization: the design of
              efficient data structures and algorithms for efficiently representing and
              visualizing relational information.

2. Geometric algorithms: the development
              of efficient algorithms for solving problems involving geometric data,
              particularly for problems related to graph visualization.

3. Geometric data
              structures: the design of fast and efficient data structures for representing
              graphs and sets of geometric objects.

4. JDSLviz: the implementation of a
              prototype of a Java library of algorithms for graph visualization. Building on
              our existing JDSL library of fundamental data structures in Java, we shall
              identify algorithm engineering design patterns for the geometric computations
              performed in graph drawing, and implement fundamental graph visualization
              algorithms as reusable software components.

5. GraphNet: the implementation
              of an Internet computing infrastructure for graph visualization. Extending
              previous work on the GeomNet system for geometric computing over the Internet,
              we plan to build a prototype of a novel Web-based graph layout service in the
              ASP (application service provider) model.

The main objective of this work is
              the development of general methodologies for the design of geometric data
              structures and algorithms, as well as their incorporation into software
              libraries and internet computing services. This work has potential impact in
              areas of science and engineering that model physical objects or that use
              geometry for information visualization.

