Title       : Constrained Power and Performance Optimization for Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0098335

Award Number: 0098335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajesh K. Gupta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Constrained Power and Performance Optimization for Embedded Systems

The goal
              of this research is to explore techniques for power management of
embedded
              systems with provable bounds on power efficiency as well as adverse
effects on
              latency due to power management.  The current state of the art in
system-level
              power management is limited to shutting parts of a system after
a certain
              period of idle time, thus ignoring the application timing
constraints, runtime
              traffic and application usage information.  This work
will develop
              power-performance control "knobs" that will allow us to make
effective online
              decisions. Specific applications will include power-aware
resource scheduling
              in RTOS, timing-aware power optimizations and tradeoffs
between power savings
              and application quality of service (e.g., missed
deadlines).

Our technical
              focus is on solving two key problems:  (a) latency-constrained
power
              optimization, i.e., minimization of system-level power consumption
with
              constrains on the effect of system latency due to power management; and
(b)
              power-constrained performance optimization, e.g., system-level
              task
implementation and scheduling within a given power budget. As a first
              step,
we focus on analytic bounds on the effectiveness of online power
              management
algorithms and their efficiency by developing bounds on latency
              increases
due to power management.  We introduce the notion of a competitive
              ratio as
a quantitative measure of how well a given power management
              algorithm
performs against an optimum power consumption profile. Next, we
              incorporate
these analytic bounds in a broader system-level timing and power
              simulation
engine which enables an accurate performance simulation while
              minimizing the
details related to actual system functionality. Our
              experimental evaluation
is through RTOS implementation of  new power
              management services through
coordinated scheduling and resource shutdown.


