Title       : Average Reward Reinforcement Learning: Scaling up
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0098050

Award Number: 0098050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasad H. Tadepalli tadepalli@cs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first year funding of a three year continuing award.  Imagine a
              factory of the future that teems with intelligent autonomous robots and
              machines engaged in production.   Machines that can not only sense and act, but
              can also optimize their own behavior without being explicitly programmed.  And
              robots that can learn to coordinate their actions with other robots in order to
              satisfy an overall optimization criterion.  The ability to build such machines
              and robots radically reorganizes the factories, so that people's role is
              reduced to specifying an optimization criterion and giving feedback to the
              machines, leaving the low level control and optimization issues to the machines
              themselves.  This project seeks to design and study  the algorithmic and
              computational tools necessary to build such machines and robots.  The long-term
              scientific goal  is to gain a better understanding of the tradeoffs involved in
              the design of adaptive autonomous multi-agent systems;   in particular, the
              tradeoffs between the optimality of the behavior, computational and
              communication efficiencies, generality, and speed of learning.  Optimizing the
              performance of programs via rewards and punishments, or reinforcement learning,
              appears to be the most promising approach to building such adaptive multi-agent
              systems for complex real-world domains.  Many real-world problems in
              manufacturing, such as production scheduling and inventory control, are best
              seen as "average-reward reinforcement learning" (ARL) problems, where the
              optimization criterion is to maximize the average reward received per unit of
              time.  The goal of this project is to develop scaleable algorithms, programs
              and techniques for solving large ARL problems, with manufacturing as the
              primary application domain.  The PI will push the frontiers of this technology
              to the point where it can be applied to factories with hundreds of machines and
              job types, with realistic assumptions such as partial observability and
              scalability to multiple agents.  Successful completion of this project will
              lead to new scaleable algorithms and programs for solving large ARL problems,
              which could well have significant economic impact.


