Title       : Non-Uniformly Hyperbolic Dynamical Systems with Singularities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0098773

Award Number: 0098773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91297              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nandor J. Simanyi simanyi@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is devoted to a special class of chaotic dynamical systems,
namely
              hyperbolic mathematical billiards. They serve as the prototype examples
of
              non-uniformly hyperbolic dynamical systems with singularities. Such
              systems
play an increasingly important role in the rigorous mathematical
              foundation of
statistical physics, so that the study of their chaotic (i. e.
              mixing)
properties is getting more and more physical relevance. The project
              mainly
focuses on a fundamental conjecture regarding this family of
              dynamical
systems, namely the celebrated "Boltzmann-Sinai Ergodic Conjecture",
              which
states that any finite system of (totally elastic) hard spheres moving
              on a
flat torus is fully hyperbolic and ergodic, of course, on the level set
              of its
trivial first integrals. The proof of this conjecture (in its full
              generality)
has been so far notoriously withstanding any attack against it.
              The first
major part of the present proposal directly targets this conjecture.
              The
second and fourth parts are blueprints for further research in this
              direction
by generalizing the original Boltzmann-Sinai Conjecture to cylindric
              billiards
(mathematical billiards with cylindric scatterers) and billiards in
              physically
more relevant containers, like rectangular boxes. The third part of
              the project
aims at the biggest open question in the topic of Wojtkowski's
              one-dimensional
falling balls: Wojtkowski's still unsolved conjecture on the
              full hyperbolicity
of the falling ball system with nonincreasing masses. (And
              such that not all
masses are the same, of course.) Beside these, the question
              of ergodicity
(possibly, under the condition that a strictly concave potential
              acts) is also
posed and targeted.

 The foundation of statistical physics
              (like heat theory, dynamical theory
of fluids and gases) took place in the
              last third of the 18th century, mainly
by the groundbreaking works of
              Boltzmann and Helmholz. That foundation was,
however, based upon a strong
              hypothesis made by Boltzmann himself. That
hypothesis claims that any physical
              system with a huge number of interacting
particles (like molecules) has the
              property that for any fixed total energy
and initial state, the system will
              evolve to any other state with the same
energy. Although this conjecture, if
              taken literally, mathematically cannot
happen, yet the precise mathematical
              formalism and its rigorous verification
for different models of statistical
              physics bears a particular importance to
the understanding the physics of the
              surrounding world.


