Title       : RUI: Probing the Physics of Active Galaxy Jets: High-resolution Radio Studies of
               a Complete Sample of Lobe-dominated Quasars and Related Radio Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0098253

Award Number: 0098253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137994             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Hough dhough@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098253
Hough

The principal objective of this project is to extend and
              expand a high-resolution radio study of active galactic nuclei (AGN) that will
              make major contributions to our understanding of the physics of relativistic
              jets in these objects and, in the process, shed light on unified models of
              active
galaxies. Active galaxies, including quasars and radio galaxies, most
              likely harbor supermassive black holes in their central regions that are
              ultimately responsible for the intense, episodic emission the nuclei of these
              galaxies exhibit. By electromagnetic processes which are still not well
              understood, material is accelerated in the vicinity of the black hole and
              channeled into
jets that travel outward near the speed of light. Physical
              models of jets generally predict that their observed properties will strongly
              depend on the orientation of the jet axis to our line of sight
from Earth.
              Thus to perform statistical tests of these models, extended radio sources
              covering a very wide range in orientation will be studied. Radio telescopes
              will be used to image the jets in these objects on scales from light-years up
              to millions of light-years; the images will be used to look for systematic
              trends in the jet structures as a function of orientation angle,  to determine
              the statistical distribution of apparent faster-than-light, or "superluminal",
              jet speeds and to follow the trajectories of the relativistic outflows.
              Observations will also be used to determine physical conditions in the jets and
              to map their magnetic fields, Several undergraduates - from both Trinity
              University and the Alamo Community College District - will be direct
              participants in this research. This will enhance their preparation for graduate
              study and offer students from underrepresented groups the opportunity to do
              science as they consider career options in the physical sciences.
Funding for
              this project was provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy &
              Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***


