Title       : RUI: Guiding Gamma-Ray Burst Classification with the KDD Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a0098499

Award Number: 0098499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon Hakkila hakkilaj@cofc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Haglin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Roiger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy W. Giblin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Charleston
	      66 George Street
	      Charleston, SC  294240001    843/953-5673

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1207,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098499
Hakkila

Despite tremendous scientific breakthroughs during the
              past two decades, gamma-ray burst (GRB) astro-physics is still in its infancy.
              GRBs are the most energetic events in the universe. Further understanding of
              the GRB phenomenon rests in part on understand-ing distinct behaviors that can
              be associated with physical mechanisms. Identification of distinct physical
              behaviors (e.g. classification) is an important component of the scientific
              method. However, distinct behaviors do not always indicate the presence of
              separate source populations. The complex, overlapping properties of GRBs are a
              case in point: they have long confounded efforts to subclassify their
              behaviors. Many identified behaviors have been shown to result from either
              instrumental or sampling biases. GRB classification can be better carried out
              using statistically and computationally rigorous approaches of Knowledge
              Discovery in Databases (KDD) combined with a detailed understanding of
              instrumental and sampling biases. 

Recently, there have been claims that
              certain attributes correlate with burst lumi-nosity. The claims, however, are
              based on a very limited data set of GRBs with afterglows, and on attributes
              that have only been defined for a small subset of bursts observed by BATSE (the
              Burst And Transient Source Experiment on NASA's defunct Compton Gamma-Ray
              Observatory). Are the correlation's between luminosity and these attributes
              self-consistent with observations of the large BATSE data set? Do instrumental
              biases play any role in these apparent correlations? All GRBs with afterglows
              thus far belong to the long class of GRBs; is there similar evidence for these
              behaviors in the short class of GRBs? Do these attributes indicate the presence
              of other GRB subclasses? These questions will be addressed in this project
              using a large GRB database, a set of well-defined and appropriate attributes,
              detailed knowledge of the instrument(s) from which the observations are made,
              and  KDD methodology. After this database has been produced, pattern
              recognition algorithms will be applied to GRB classifica-tion. Based on
              preliminary results, it is expected that general GRB subclasses will be
              identified, as well as substructures indicative of specific GRB
              behaviors.

As a part of this project, a database of complex preprocessed GRB
              attributes will be developed and made available via the World Wide Web. Funding
              for this project was provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy &
              Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***


