Title       : Structure-Reactivity Relationships in Carbanion-Forming Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0098553

Award Number: 0098553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405668             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claude F. Bernasconi bernasconi@chemistry.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Clause F. Bernasconi, of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
              University of California, Santa Cruz, is exploring structure-activity
              relationships in carbanion forming reactions. His studies focus on the
              deprotonation of Fischer-type carbene complexes, which offer stabilization of
              both the neutral carbene (through electron donation) and the corresponding
              anion (through delocalization). The complex interplay between electron donating
              and electron withdrawing groups, which leads to unusual reactivity patterns, is
              being explored through a combination of experimental and computational
              methods.

Carbanions are negatively charged molecules that are of central
              importance in organic and organometallic chemistry. They can be generated by a
              number of reactions, including, perhaps most commonly, the removal of a proton
              from a molecule ("deprotonation"). In some cases, the resulting carbanion is
              sufficiently stable to allow its observation, permitting the measurement of its
              properties and thereby yielding important information about reaction
              mechanisms. Professor Claude F. Bernasconi, of the Department of Chemistry and
              Biochemistry at the University of California, Santa Cruz, is studying such
              carbanion forming reactions with the support of the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program. His studies address fundamental questions about chemical
              reactions and how they are affected by molecular structure, and in addition
              provide students with a broad educational experience, ranging from synthesis
              and spectroscopic characterization to kinetics, data analysis, and
              computational chemistry.
