Title       : Using Fast Neutrons to Explore Nuclear Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0098813

Award Number: 0098813
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $756000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Yates yates@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcus T. McEllistrem  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research in nuclear structure at the University of Kentucky is focussed on
              related topics in nuclear spectroscopy, neutron-induced reactions, and neutron
              scattering.  Most of this work will utilize fast neutrons produced at the
              University's accelerator facility and the unique gamma-ray and neutron
              detection capabilities of this laboratory; complementary, collaborative
              research with colleagues at several other institutions is in progress and these
              collaborations are expected to continue.  Neutron scattering experiments are
              primarily oriented toward exploring multiphonon vibrational excitations of the
              quadrupole and octupole types in nearly spherical nuclei, examining the
              separate roles of magnetic and electric dipole transitions in collective
              excitations, defining the roles of protons and neutrons in collective modes,
              and understanding nuclear shell structure and the nature of nuclear shape
              transitions.  The characterization of phonon-coupled excitations of
              mixed-symmetry states, a new type of collective mode, in weakly deformed nuclei
              will receive a high priority.  A new direction is the use of higher-energy
              neutrons to produce final nuclei that are not readily accessible with
              charged-particle fusion-evaporation reactions.  Lifetime determinations with
              the Doppler-shift attenuation method and gamma-gamma coincidence measurements,
              for which the methodologies have been developed in our laboratory, will play
              crucial roles in many of these studies.  Neutron scattering studies, which aid
              in elucidating the differences between neutron excitation and other probes,
              will complement studies of the microscopic basis of collective excitations. 
              Carefully selected studies in other areas, e.g., nuclear astrophysics and the
              properties of light nuclei, which are particularly appropriate to the
              capabilities and facilities at the University of Kentucky accelerator
              laboratory will be pursued.  Education continues to be an important component
              of all activities in our laboratory, and efforts to provide an excellent
              working environment for undergraduate, graduate, and post-graduate education in
              nuclear science at the University of Kentucky will be made.


