Title       : The Formation of Galaxies from Gas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0098492

Award Number: 0098492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161790             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Rauch mr@ociw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
AST 0098492
Rauch

How do galaxies form? Studies show that the
              Quasars (QSOs) have many high redshift absorption lines from elements heavier
              than Helium in their spectra. Most current theories indicate that the chemical
              elements which give rise to these absorption lines must have been made in stars
              formed after  the Big Bang (the so called Pop III stars). Yet when observed in
              quasar spectra, these absorption lines show that the metal enriched gas must be
              in clouds which lie between us and the QSOs.
The goal of this project is to
              try and understand the role of this gas in galaxy formation in the early
              universe, at high redshift. This program is designed to complement traditional
              studies of galaxy formation where the emphasis has been more on the formation
              and fate of the stars in galaxies during the early merger or clustering
              process. Over the past decade, cosmological hydrodynamic computer simulations
              have shown that most of the early stages of galaxy formation (in particular the
              "dark" ones, before stars started to shine) can be observed using the
              absorption lines which they form in the spectra of  background QSOs. The
              velocity structure of these lines shows infall of gas and protogalactic
              fragments, from the turnaround of perturbations in the intergalactic medium, as
              well as stellar feedback into the gas and the gasdynamics of the high redshift
              interstellar medium itself.
The aim of this program is to use the observed
              properties of these low density, high ionization absorption lines to understand
              the relation between galaxies and gaseous inflows and outflows at high
              redshift. The statistics of the observed absorption systems (to be obtained
              from several large telescopes) will be interpreted with the help of
              state-of-the-art cosmological hydrodynamic -simulations. The clustering
              properties of metal lines on large scales will be used to trace the high
              redshift large scale structure at densities much lower than those probed by
              bright high redshift sources (e.g. radio galaxies, QSOs, Lyman-break galaxies).
              Absorption line profiles will be examined to determine the kinematics of the
              gas, and attempts will be made to identify the precise origin of the gas phases
              revealed by various metal absorption lines and to directly observe the infall
              of matter into forming galaxies. Observations of absorption systems in very
              close multiple lines of sight to lensed QSOs will help to quantify the density
              and velocity structure of the metal enriched gas near the potential wells of
              young galaxies. Measures of the turbulence of the gas will decide to what
              degree the surprisingly widespread metal enrichment of the intergalactic medium
              is a recent process or the result of an ancient Population III phase of
              starformation. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***

