Title       : Mixed Integer Programming Applied to Radiation Treatment Planning Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0098219

Award Number: 0098219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva K. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098219
Eva K. Lee
GA Tech Res Corp -GIT

The field of mixed
              integer programming (MIP) involves a fascinating and lively blend of
              theoretical analysis, algorithm and software development, and scientific
              computing. Over the past thirty years, real applications have provided
              invaluable insight and motivation for advancing the frontiers of this evolving
              discipline. In particular, the MIP modeling paradigm and the associated
              algorithmic branch-and-bound, branch-and-cut, and branch-and-price solution
              strategies have been applied extremely successfully to a broad range of
              industrial applications, from scheduling and process planning applications, to
              VLSI and telecommunication network design. Integral to these successful
              applications of MIP were close collaborations between optimization researchers
              and the domain experts in each application area. In each case, much research
              was devoted to developing a superior model (versus simply a correct
              formulation, as the solution process depends heavily on the underlying
              structure of the formulated model) and effective computational strategies for
              the specific application at hand. Beyond this active research came the
              technological transfer of computational advances into commercial software
              (e.g., CPLEX, XPRESS), enabling the integration of these advances into the
              decision support systems used daily by practitioners.

The primary focus of
              this research is to explore applications of mixed integer programming
              strategies to radio-therapy treatment planning optimization. The initial focus
              will be radiosurgery treatment planning. Radiosurgery involves small field,
              stereotactic external beam irradiation to the brain. It has evolved over the
              past decade into a common method for treating and controlling certain central
              nervous system lesions such as arteriovenous malformations, metastatic lesions,
              acoustic neuromas, pituitary tumors, malignant gliomas and other intracranial
              tumors. Although radiosurgery provides an excellent potential for effectively
              curing these disorders, the complexities and functional dependencies both
              within and between brain structures means that the procedure is inherently
              high-risk and can bring about severe complications. Hence, accuracy and
              precision are of paramount importance in both the planning and execution of
              stereotactic radiosurgery.

