Title       : Collaborative Research: High Quality Tests for Scan Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0098091

Award Number: 0098091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irith Pomeranz pomeranz@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to develop scalable procedures for the derivation
              of high-quality tests specifically designed for digital logic circuits that
              contain scan to enhance testability. Such procedures are needed since scan
              (either full or partial scan) is currently used in most electronic chips, and
              is expected to continue to be the prevalent design-for-testability technique
              for design paradigms such as core-based design. The investigators develop
              procedures for test generation, test compaction, identification of undetectable
              faults, built-in test generation and delay fault testing specifically targeting
              scan circuits.

In the test application scheme used in this research, a
              sequence of one or more primary input vectors is applied between every two scan
              operations.  In all the procedures developed, the goal is to use sequences of
              primary input vectors that are as long as possible. The reasons are that long
              sequences of primary input vectors contribute to at-speed testing of the
              circuit, which is important for detecting delay defects, and they allow the
              number of tests to be kept low, which reduces the test application time. In
              addition, the circuit operates in its normal mode of operation, potentially
              resulting in average power consumption which is typical of normal operation.
              Several commercial tools use the test application scheme adopted in this
              research, justifying its consideration. However, only a small number of studies
              have been reported in the literature of effective solutions to the various
              testing problems under this scheme. This research develops tools that may be
              used together to provide a comprehensive and scalable solution to the special
              problems associated with testing
of scan circuits under this test application
              scheme.

