Title       : Self-Timed FPGA Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0098272

Award Number: 0098272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229857             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Reese reese@ece.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cherrice Traver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mitchell A. Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9215,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research proposes a new generation of Field Programmable Gate Arrays
              (FPGAs) based upon a self-timed design methodology known as Phased Logic. One
              of the principle attractions of FPGAs is that they
give users a streamlined
              methodology for implementing large gate-count digital designs that are
              specified in a Hardware Description Language (HDL) such as Verilog.  FPGAs
              shield designers from the time-consuming
physical design details that
              Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASICs) designers must face and offer a
              flexible implementation substrate with a quicker time to market.  However,
              design complexity is increasing significantly for both FPGA designers and users
              due to timing issues related to global clock distribution over larger arrays
              operating at higher frequencies.  Spending more design effort on reaching
              timing closure can increase time to market and threatens to undermine one of
              the key benefits of FPGAs for its users.

Phased Logic (PL) is a self-timed,
              delay-insensitive methodology that allows automatic mapping of clocked netlists
              to netlists of PL gates.  Preliminary work has indicated that PL gates based
              upon a four input
LookUp-Table (LUT4) can implement designs that are
              competitive with clocked approaches in both power and performance.  This
              research investigates new FPGA architectures using both LUT4-based gates
              and
traditional product-term-based gates.  PL offers a general capability for
              data dependent computing; synthesis techniques that take advantage of this for
              general logic are investigated.  Extensions for supporting these new
              architectures and PL gate designs are made to the current mapping tool that
              transforms clocked designs to PL designs.  Tradeoffs that sacrifice some delay
              insensitivity for extra performance are studied.
