Title       : Collaborative Research: The Last of FIRST: Completing Our View of the Radio
               Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a0098355

Award Number: 0098355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Becker becker@physics.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research: The Last of First: Completing Our View of the Radio
              Universe"
AST-0098355


A ten-year program to use the world's most powerful
              radio telescope to provide
Faint Images of the Radio Sky at Twenty-cm (FIRST)
              is nearing its goal of mapping the
entire northern sky outside the Milky Way
              with a resolution and sensitivity that exceed previous surveys by a factor of
              fifty or more. Over three-quarters of
a million radio emitters have been
              detected to date, ranging from nearby active
stars to the most distant quasars
              known. The images and source catalogs are all
available on the World-Wide Web,
              and have been used to date by more than
three hundred astronomers.

The
              FIRST team is pursuing a number of major projects with this massive
              new
database. Matching the radio catalog to the near-infrared sources
              cataloged
by the 2MASS survey, they have discovered a number of highly
              obscured quasars --
objects emitting a thousand times the energy of the whole
              Milky Way from a tiny
region in a distant galaxy core that is so dust-ridden
              that no visible
light escapes.  Another major project is using the entire set
              of radio images to attempt to
determine the distribution of the mysterious
              dark matter in the Universe.
Recognizing Einstein's dictum that mass bends
              light, they look for the slight
distortions in the shapes of distant radio
              galaxies caused by the passage of
their radio waves through the mass
              distribution of the intervening space.
While optical astronomers have been
              conducting such "weak lensing" experiments
on patches of sky the size of the
              full moon and smaller, this research will study the
clumpiness of the dark
              matter on scales ten to one hundred times larger,
thus making a direct
              connection between the galaxy distribution in the local 
Universe and the
              fluctuations seen in the cosmic background radiation which
tells us the
              distribution of matter at the earliest times.



