Title       : Experimental High Energy Physics Research at the D-Zero and CMS Collider
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0098824

Award Number: 0098824
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $770554             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikos Varelas varelas@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cecilia E. Gerber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for the research program of the experimental
              high-energy physics group of the University of Illinois Chicago.  This group
              has been a member of the D0 collaboration since 1990 and of the CMS
              collaboration since 1995.  On the D0 experiment at the Fermilab Tevatron
              collider, the group will concentrate on Run II physics analysis, the Level-2
              trigger system, and on possible detector upgrades needed to achieve an
              integrated luminosity of at least 20 inverse femtobarns before LHC turn-on.  On
              the CMS detector, currently under construction for the LHC collider at the CERN
              laboratory in Geneva Switzerland, this group intends to expand its involvement
              in the hadron calorimeter and start a new effort on the silicon tracker.  CMS
              is expected to become the group's main focus by the time the LHC turns on,
              currently expected in 2006.
	For the D0 detector, this group is developing the
              calorimeter Level-2 trigger that will identify electrons and jets, and
              calculated missing transverse energy.  The group will remain responsible for
              operating, maintaining and improving the calorimeter Level-2 trigger system. 
              The group will participate in considering various detector upgrade scenarios
              concentrating on studies related to the silicon tracker and the trigger system.
               The research focus of the group is to continue study of high pT physics at the
              highest energy possible.  Previous analysis experience and technical
              responsibilities put this group in a unique position to take a leading role in
              the search for the long-sought Higgs boson at the Tevatron.
	This group has
              designed and fabricated part of the optical readout system for the CMS hadron
              calorimeter and has recently accepted responsibility for development of the
              Level-1 readout and control processors for the same system.  With the addition
              of Gerber to the faculty, involvement in the CMS detector will expand, as the
              group becomes one of five US universities responsible for the outer silicon
              tracker of CMS.  The UIC Department of Physics has a long history in education
              and research training of undergraduates, graduate students and post-docs, as
              well as outreach to the community.  These efforts will be continued and
              expanded.

