Title       : Coordination Services for Distributed Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a0098179

Award Number: 0098179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149871             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gurdip Singh singh@cis.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              To isolate a designer from the complexity of a distributed system, there is a
              need for appropriate middleware abstractions.  It has been recognized that
              these abstractions must be flexible and customizable to accommodate the wide
              ranging application requirements.  Although many customizable frameworks have
              been proposed, a general framework that can be used to implement different
              synchronization-related requirements of a distributed application is lacking. 
              The goal of the proposed project is to design a coordination service that
              provides a basic infrastructure to implement synchronization.  A coordination
              service will be designed that accepts a synchronization specification from an
              application and interact with the application entities to allow only those
              execution sequences permitted by the specification.  The used of
              event-notification technology will be explored to implement the coordination
              service.  New synchronization elements to be added to convert an
              event-notification service into a coordination service will be identified.  The
              research will focus on developing a scalable, fault-tolerant and customizable
              coordination service.  A critical challenge will be to accommodate
              synchronization without sacrificing the scalability of the event-notification
              mechanism.  The effectiveness of the coordination service in providing services
              to other middleware services will be evaluated.
