Title       : Configuration and Dynamics in Large Polymer Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2002  
File        : a0098321

Award Number: 0098321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne L. Mattice wlm@polymer.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernst von Meerwall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0098321
Mattice

New types of catalysts permit the tailoring of the
              atomisticially detailed structure of known polymers in ways that were not
              previously possible. The properties of the resulting polymers are often
              strongly affected by these changes. The properties have their origin at
              distance scales on the order of a few tenths of a nm, because it is on this
              distance scale that the atomistically detailed structure is defined. However,
              the import physical properties of bulk materials produced from these polymers
              arise from the mixing and organization of long chain molecules, an issue that
              affects much longer distance scales.  The new bridging methods are required in
              order to connect these two distance scales. The new hierarchy will be employed
              to understand how these atomistically detailed changes can affect the
              properties of a single polymer, as illustrated by "elastomeric polypropylene",
              and the blends obtained upon mixing two chemically similar polymers.  The
              change in the dynamics of polymers at the entanglement transition will be
              studied in a way that uniquely takes advantage of the hierarchical nature of
              the family of simulations. This hierarchy permits study of the interesting, but
              relatively slow, dynamics of the entangled system using a coarse-grained model
              that can unambiguously be related to an atomistically detailed structure.
              Therefore it becomes possible to perform laboratory experiments with precisely
              the same system that is the subject of the simulation. The experiments, using
              pulsed gradient NMR, and simulations will employ precisely the same bidisperse
              polyethylene melts. The unambiguous connection with experiment will provide a
              very strong constraint on the development of the simulation, which will cover
              the transition region in which the system changes from "unentangled" to
              "entangled" behavior. Analysis of the simulations should produce a better
              understanding of the changes in the types of motion polymers in this transition
              region.

The broad range of time and distance scales covered by important
              properties of dense polymers has historically produced two different, and
              disconnected, models for these materials. Models expressed with atomistically
              detailed structures are limited to short distance and time scales. Phenomena at
              long distance and time scales are described using coarse grained models, or,
              for very large scales, continuum models. The project will produce a hierarchy
              of models that bridges between the atomistically detailed structures and a
              series of increasingly more coarsely grained structures that extend well into
              the nanoscale regime, where one sees the transition from molecular to continuum
              behavior. 


