Title       : Delay Fault Modeling, Test, and Diagnosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0098329

Award Number: 0098329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316281             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duncan M. Walker walker@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Weiping Shi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As integrated circuit speed and density increases, more circuits fail due to
              delay faults -- manufacturing defects that cause the circuit to operate at a
              speed slower than intended.  Such circuits either cannot be used or must be
              sold at a lower price.  The behavior of delay faults is complex, and
              traditional manufacturing test approaches are increasingly ineffective in
              detecting them.  This research attacks this problem by developing a novel
              realistic delay fault model.  This model is being used to develop powerful
              techniques for fault simulation, automatic manufacturing test generation, and
              diagnosis for next-generation integrated circuits.  This work is being done in
              cooperation with U.S. semiconductor manufacturers.  These test and diagnosis
              techniques are being integrated into a state-of-art software system and will be
              tested on real manufacturing problems.

The new realistic delay fault model
              considers resistive bridges and opens, the impact of process variation on
              interconnect, device, and defect parameters, and the influence of interconnect
              parasitics.  Fast layout and parasitic extraction algorithms, and model order
              reduction techniques are being developed to reduce model cost for a given
              accuracy level.  The model is encapsulated in a parameterized static timing
              analysis engine for use in fault simulation, test generation and diagnosis.  A
              constraint-based fault coverage analysis is used to determine fault coverage
              over a set of vectors.  Together, these techniques can accurately predict fault
              coverage and achieve very high delay fault coverage for scan-based CMOS logic
              circuits.

