Title       : Climate Change on Venus and the Role of Geological Sources of Volatiles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0098483

Award Number: 0098483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Bullock   (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Grinspoon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Research Inst
	      6220 Culebra Road
	      San Antonio, TX  782385166    /   -

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098483
Bullock

Drs. Mark Bullock and David Grinspoon, at the Southwest
              Research Institute, are developing an evolutionary climate model for Venus that
              calculates surface temperature evolution as a result of outgassing of volatiles
              by volcanoes, heterogeneous reactions of atmospheric gases with surface
              minerals, and the exospheric escape of hydrogen.  This model should serve as a
              guide for geophysicists to examine the role that large changes in surface
              temperature may have played in the tectonic and volcanic history of the planet.
               The Venus evolutionary climate model will be improved substantially by
              incorporating a detailed microphysical model of the clouds, parameterizing
              solar absorption in the clouds to account for changes in the near-UV absorber,
              and by investigating the effects of comet and asteroid impacts as both sources
              of volatiles and dust to the atmosphere.  The model will also take advantage of
              improved estimates of the time-dependence of volcanic activity, now becoming
              available from a more detailed global analysis of Magellan spacecraft
              data.

The present climate of Venus is controlled by an efficient carbon
              dioxide-water greenhouse effect and by the radiative properties of its global
              cloud cover.  Both the greenhouse effect and sulfuric acid clouds are sensitive
              to perturbations in the abundance of atmospheric water vapor and sulfur gases. 
              Outgassing of carbon dioxide, water vapor, and sulfur dioxide by volcanic
              activity has most likely played a major role in establishing the planetary
              albedo, through cloud formation, and high surface temperatures through the
              greenhouse effect.  Planetary-scale processes involving the transport and
              sequestering of volatiles affect these abundances over time, driving changes in
              climate.  
***


