Title       : Self-Stabilizing Group Communication for Mobile Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0098305

Award Number: 0098305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Welch welch@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Group communication services form important building blocks for applications in
              dynamic
distributed systems, where processors and communication links can
              repeatedly fail and recover.
Such dynamic behavior is especially descriptive
              of mobile environments, in which processors can
change their physical location
              continually. The key features of a group communication facility are
(1)
              indicating to each processor with which other processors it can currently
              communicate, and (2)
letting processors within a group communicate with each
              other in an ordered and reliable manner.
A typical approach to developing
              fault-tolerant software is to assume certain limitations on the
behavior of
              faulty components. However, in reality there is a non-zero probability that any
              such
assumptions will be temporarily violated; in fact, this probability grows
              with time. In particular,
mobile communication networks are exposed to
              environmental noise whose level is hard to predict
in advance. Thus, it may be
              too optimistic to approach correctness by assuming that the system
is
              consistent initially and each subsequent step maintains consistency.
              Self-stabilizing algorithms
cope with temporary faults in an elegant way. A
              self-stabilizing algorithm can be started in any
global state, which could be
              reached due to an arbitrary combination of failures, and always en-sures
that
              the task of the algorithm is achieved, assuming that the designer's assumptions
              hold for
sufficiently long intervals.
The goal of this research is to design
              self-stabilizing group communication services and apply
these services to
              mobile networks.
One part of the research will focus on the specification and
              design of initialized group services,
in which the establishment of a new
              group ensures that messages related to previous incarnations
are discarded.
              Various synchrony assumptions will be considered in order to identify the
              necessary
and sufficient conditions for the specified initialized group
              services. One approach to be investi-gated
is using transient fault detectors
              that will trigger the establishment of a new group whenever
inconsistency is
              detected. Impossibility results will be developed to indicate which system
              assump-tions
are necessary; lower bound results will be proved to shed light
              on the degree of optimality of
the solutions obtained. A second part of the
              research will study how different mobile applications
can take advantage of
              the self-stabilizing group communication services developed. A third part
of
              the research will explore the interactions between the group communication
              services and other,
lower level, mobile services.
Group communication
              services have been incorporated in several existing academic and
              indus-trial
distributed systems. However, none of them is self-stabilizing and
              none of them is specifi-cally
tailored for mobile environments.
              Self-stabilization and group communication are important
paradigms for the
              design of dynamic communication networks, and in particular wireless
              net-works.
There is no doubt that the new methods developed in this project
              will contribute to future
implementations of robust group communication
              systems.
