Title       : Nature and Evolution of Gas in Galaxy Groups and Elliptical Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0098351

Award Number: 0098351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Mathews mathews@ucolick.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098351
Matthews

This project lies at the intersection of two emerging
              revolutions in astronomy: the scientific maturation of our understanding of
              galaxy evolution and cosmology and the exploitation
of the riches of X-ray
              observations of violently heated regions of the universe.

The origin and
              heating of X-ray luminous hot gas around massive elliptical galaxies are both
              internal and external.  Deep inside the stellar galaxy, most of the hot gas
              originates from mass loss from normally evolving stars; further out, gas has
              accumulated by intergalactic accretion.  When cosmic gas falls onto the dark
              matter halos surrounding giant elliptical galaxies, its kinetic energy is
              converted into heat, reaching temperatures as hot as the center of the
sun! 
              This gas is heated even further -- and enriched in heavy elements -- by
              supernovae explosions from young massive stars. Understanding this latter type
              of heating is a central problem in modern cosmology -- the "feedback" problem
              -- and this is one of the key problems addressed in this project.  Elliptical
              galaxies are perhaps the most dramatic manifestations of these ancient heating
              activity.

The theoretical calculations in this project are aimed at
              understanding the complex interplay of gas ejection from young star-forming
              galaxies and the subsequent evolution of this gas into the enormous X-ray
              clouds typically observed around elliptical galaxies. The calculations begin
              with initial concentrations of dark matter in an expanding universe, and after
              13 billion years the computed radial variation of gas density, temperature and
              iron enrichment all agree with X-ray observations of large elliptical galaxies.
              This project will build on these results to study the heating of diffuse gas in
              groups of galaxies, the way collective supernova-driven galactic winds can
              produce the abundances of elements typically observed in the richest clusters
              of galaxies, the physics of the gas cooling process in clusters of galaxies,
              and the way X-ray emission lines in from the cores of cooling flows is absorbed
              by partially cooled gas. In addition, the project will study a variety of
              additional problems relevant to recent XMM and Chandra (x-ray satellite)
              observations. 
Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***


