Title       : Mapping Intergalactic Metals at High Redshift
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0098480

Award Number: 0098480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antoinette S. Cowie acowie@ifa.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098480
Cowie, A.

Over the past decade, numerical models of the growth
              of structure in the Universe have made vast strides in understanding how the
              first stars and galaxies in the Universe formed from initial density
              perturbations.  One of the great successes of these models has been in
              revolutionizing our understanding of the intergalactic gas (IGM) as revealed to
              us in the "forest" of Lyman alpha absorption lines and associated metal lines
              seen in the spectra of distant quasars.  Previously, absorption in the IGM was
              understood in terms of individual clouds in pressure balance within a hot
              underlying smooth IGM component, or in terms of absorption in individual dark
              matter mini-haloes at high redshift; now the models have successfully shown
              that the Lyman alpha forest traces the lower overdensity portions of the
              "cosmic web" of filaments and voids that is the early phase of the buildup of
              structure --- stars, galaxies and clusters --- in the Universe.  The study of
              quasar absorption lines is thus complementary to the study of high redshift
              galaxies and clusters, and allows us to see the earliest stages of galaxy
              formation. Stars form out of he IGM, and it  in turn is enriched with heavy
              elements ("metals") from these stars as they return materials to the gas. 
              Ionizing radiation from stars, galaxies and quasars also affects the balance of
              ions of hydrogen and other elements in the IGM.  The distribution of metals in
              the IGM and the distribution of ions are therefore both diagnostics of the star
              formation history of the Universe.  In addition, the models predict that the
              IGM is where the bulk of the baryons in the Universe exist at high redshift,
              thus, since this gas is fairly easily observable in quasar absorption lines, we
              are in the lucky position of being able to account for most of the material in
              the Universe at high redshift.

This project will be directly concerned with
              understanding how the IGM comes to be rather uniformly enriched with metals,
              even at redshifts of 3 and higher. One possibility is that all the metals that
              have been observed in the Lyman alpha forest come directly from stars that are
              forming in the first structures that will later become present-day galaxies,
              but another possibility is that the whole IGM was pre-enriched by a first
              generation of stars at very early times: the so-called population III.  Since
              the pre-galactic clumps form in the regions of higher overdensity in the IGM,
              any enrichment from these stars would necessarily be confined also to these
              higher density regions. In contrast,  the population III stars  would enrich
              the IGM more broadly.  As numerical models become more sophisticated at
              incorporating feedback into the IGM from star formation and evolution, their
              predictions of metallicity as a function of distance form the star-forming
              site, and therefore of density, will become more refined.  There is therefore a
              clear rationale for investigating the distribution of metals with density, and
              this will be a main focus of this project. Funding for this project was
              provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology
              (AST/EXC).
***


