Title       : Efficient Representation of Massive Geometric Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a0098170

Award Number: 0098170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Garland garland@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098170
U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
Michael Garland

Numerous
              graphics applications in areas ranging from CAD/CAM to realistic immersive
              simulators rely on increasingly complex datasets to achieve convincing levels
              of visual realism.  However, the enormity of the raw geometric data frequently
              makes it impossible to efficiently process such datasets given limited hardware
              capacity.  Surface models containing millions of triangles are now commonplace,
              and advances in acquisition technology are making models containing several
              billion triangles available.  Consequently, there has been considerable
              interest over the last decade in techniques for the automatic simplification of
              highly detailed polygonal models.  However, current methods are, almost without
              exception, completely incapable of
processing input models of this enormous
              magnitude.  This is a very serious shortcoming, as these are exactly the class
              of models for which effective simplification methods are most pressingly
              needed.  The goal of this project is to develop new techniques for representing
              and processing very large scale polygonal surface models, enabling the
              efficient use of extremely complex models far beyond the capability of current
              systems.

Algorithmic scalability is essential in this domain.  This research
              is focused on developing simplification methods which combine simple
              out-of-core data operations with more complex output-sensitive (i.e., dependent
              only on the output, rather than the input, size) processing phases.  The
              general approach
of this project is to adopt recursive partitioning strategies
              directed by quadric error metrics.  An approximation can be produced from any
              partition of the vertex set by merging all vertices within each cell of the
              partition.  The use of quadric error metrics means that the aggressive
              simplification methods
designed for this project can be seamlessly coupled
              with other quadric-based simplification algorithms in a multi-phase process.

