Title       : Collaborative Research: Using the Lyman Alpha Forest to Probe the Structure of
               the Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0098731

Award Number: 0098731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Tytler dtytler@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098731
Tytler 
In the last few years, astronomers have shown that
              supernovae (SN), in distant galaxies are fainter than expected. The obvious
              explanation is that they are farther away than we had thought. If true, this 
              implies that the expansion of the universe is speeding up. This change in
              expansion is attributed to a so called "vacuum energy" by theoretical physics.
              This discovery presents both major new opportunities, and a long list of 
              troubling basic new questions. Up to now Gravity has been the hardest part of
              physics to understand, in part because it has been described by a single
              number: the Newtonian gravitational constant G which  measures its strength. If
              the universe is speeding up there must be a second number, which should help us
              understand gravitational physics. In this way, astronomical observations are
              redefining our understanding of fundamental physics and the universe as a
              whole. 

The goals of this project are to provide an independent check of the
              claim that 70% of the energy density of the universe is some form of mysterious
              vacuum energy. Astronomical observations are the only way to explore the vacuum
              energy experimentally, because the effects are significant only over
              exceedingly large distances.  In particular, this project will provide an
              independent check of the results from supernovae by using angular size as a
              distance measure. The amount of clumping of the gas between the galaxies will
              be measured both along the line of sight, and in angle across the sky. The
              relationship between the two measures gives the distance and hence the
              acceleration of the universe. The method is insensitive to changes in the state
              of the universe over long times. The project is urgent, because the vacuum
              energy remains an unconfirmed, though very plausible, result, and highly
              significant, because we will have the sensitivity to decisively rule out the
              amount of vacuum energy suggested by the supernovae, if none were present.
              

In addition to providing an independent check on the SN decelerating
              universe measurement, this project will also give improved measurements of the
              clumping of gas between galaxies at early times. This clumping  is believed to
              have arisen from primordial quantum fluctuations when the universe was young..
              These fluctuations have been measured at different epochs, and in different
              ways.  However, the methods used in the present project will give the only 
              measurement of the amount of clumping of matter on galaxy sized scales at early
              times. These new data and simulations will be compared with theoretical
              predictions, to act as a check on recent investigations which suggest that our
              present ideas about the growth of small scale structure in the universe are
              inadequate. Funding for this project was provided by the NSF program for
              Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***



