Title       : RUI: Pulsar Scintillation and the Interstellar Medium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0098561

Award Number: 0098561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156011             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Stinebring Dan.Stinebring@oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098561
Stinebring

The scintillation, or intensity variation, of pulsars
              can be used to probe the interstellar medium on sizes similar to that of the
              Solar System. Since scintillation is caused by slight density variations in the
              ionized component of the interstellar gas, a detailed study of pulsar
              scintillation yields information about how the interstellar gas is clumped,
              whether or not it exhibits turbulence, and how the density variations are
              initiated and sustained. These questions are central to an understanding of the
              dynamics of our galaxy and, hence, of other spiral galaxies like ours.

A
              dynamic spectrum is a sequential collection of radio spectra obtained,
              typically, at one minute intervals for several hours. Occasionally dynamic
              spectra exhibit a loosely organized crisscross pattern as well as the more
              typical random pattern due to multiple path scattering in the interstellar
              medium. Recently it has been shown that when harmonically analyzed this
              crisscross pattern has a distinct and well-delineated signature in transform
              space. Dr. Daniel Stinebring at Oberlin College will explore this phenomenon
              using high-sensitivity observations from the Arecibo radio telescope and the
              new fully steerable radio telescope in Green Bank, West Virginia. By seeing how
              the harmonic signature is curved in frequency and time, the location of the
              scattering material can be determined. From this and other details of the
              observations, the physical size of the scattering objects can be found. This
              will aid in understanding the physical nature of the scattering material and in
              linking it to other astrophysical phenomena such as supernova remnants or the
              turbulent outflow from very young or very old stars. Determining the frequency
              of occurrence of this phenomenon as well as its variation with radio frequency
              will give additional insights into its physical origin.

This research
              program will involve undergraduate students in the excitement of exploring a
              new phenomenon and piecing together parts of a bigger puzzle: how does large
              scale stirring of the interstellar gas create small scale turbulence which is
              eventually dissipated as heat? By working closely with experienced researchers,
              the students will gain a broad range of technical skills as well as further
              develop their ability to independently explore problems. Using state-of-the-art
              electronics and computers at the largest radio telescopes in the world, the
              students will gain confidence in their ability to tackle large and complex
              problems. Opportunities to collaborate with scientists in the U.S. and abroad
              and to report their work at conferences and in publications will enhance
              students' research experience and prepare them for graduate training or other
              roles in the technical workforce.  This award is made under the Research in
              Undergraduate Institutions program at NSF.  
***


