Title       : Formation of Asteroid Satellites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0098484

Award Number: 0098484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Durda   (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Bottke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Research Inst
	      6220 Culebra Road
	      San Antonio, TX  782385166    /   -

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098484
Durda

At least two major satellites in our Solar System, the
              Moon and Charon, are thought to be by-products of large-scale impact events. 
              Modeling the formation of these bodies, however, is challenging because (i) the
              initial conditions which existed prior to impact are not well constrained, (ii)
              the physical characteristics of these binaries today represent the subsequent
              results of modification by multiple collisional, dynamical, and geochemical
              processes, and (iii) the necessary simulations push our theoretical
              understanding and computational resources to the limit.  It is possible,
              however, that similar processes on a smaller scale may provide valuable
              insights into how the Moon and Pluto originated.  For this reason it is
              advantageous to examine the formation of satellites of main-belt asteroids,
              four of which have now been detected.  Studies of the  formation mechanism of
              asteroid satellites may also yield constraints on the internal structure of
              asteroids and Kuiper Belt objects that are clues to their origin.  Dr. Daniel
              Durda, at the Southwest Research Institute, will lead a theoretical
              investigation of modeling and simulation of various impact phases between
              colliding asteroids.  Results will be used to estimate binary formation
              efficiency as a function of collision parameters and to measure the relative
              importance of each mechanism in forming satellites.  Satellite systems formed
              by the models will be compared to observed asteroid satellites.  
***



