Title       : Irradiation of Low Temperature Solids: Physical Mechanisms and Astrophysical
               Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0098523

Award Number: 0098523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Johnson rej@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1214      PLANETARY ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0098523
Johnson

Dr. Robert Johnson, at the University of Virginia,  will
              continue a research program to model the radiolysis and photolysis of low
              temperature solids in the outer Solar System and the interstellar medium (ISM).
               Irradiation by charged-particles or UV-photons of ice, molecules trapped in an
              ice matrix or hydrated minerals can determine the ambient neutral envelopes and
              the spectral properties of outer solar system satellites and of grains in the
              ISM.  An understanding of the interaction of energetic ions, electrons and UV
              -photons with surfaces is needed to interpret many recent observations .

A
              large body of laboratory data now exists on the sputtering and decomposition of
              low temperature condensed-gas solids. This data set has some inconsistencies,
              as well as large gaps in the materials studied and in the incident particle
              type and energies studied.  It has only recently been shown that the
              long-ignored energetic electrons are important when describing the alteration
              of icy satellite surfaces. Therefore, Dr. Johnson will carry out  a
              materials-based calculation program to model the available data and then use
              the results to expand the applicability of these data. His recent molecular
              dynamics calculations of energy transport during the sputtering of ices will be
              used to describe the sputtering of volatile and refractory species trapped in
              an ice matrix. In addition, he will incorporate and test those solid-state
              chemistry models that have been proposed for the production and desorption of
              new molecules due to irradiation of ice. The goal is to be able to calculate
              results for all charged particle types and energies, including cluster impact,
              for application to sputtering of a grain in the ISM, a ring particle, or a
              satellite regolith with a grain size and porosity much different than that used
              in laboratory studies. Such work is possible due to the rapid improvements in
              the computational tools available in materials science and because there exists
              an extensive set of data that can be used to test and calibrate these methods
              for the materials of interest in the outer Solar System and the ISM .  Monte
              Carlo (MC) particle transport codes, which determine the distribution of energy
              deposition in a material, will be used along with molecular dynamics (MD)
              models and a continuum model to describe the energy transport and sputtering.
              The suggested chemical pathways for radiolysis and photolysis will be
              integrated in the MD model in order to describe aspects of the
              radiation-induced solid-state chemistry occurring in ice. Finally, Dr. Johnson
              will continue to assemble laboratory data from the large number of groups
              studying ion, electron and photon-induced sputtering and implantation and then
              incorporate these data into the proposed calculations .
***



