Title       : Orbital Dynamics in Asymmetric Galaxies -- Exploring the Gravitational Potential
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0098419

Award Number: 0098419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Sparke sparke@astro.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
AST 0098419
Sparke


Most of the Universe's mass emits no light;
              we know of its existence only through its gravitational pull on the luminous
              stars and gas. Within galaxies, this `dark matter' is most influential in the
              outer parts.  This project will study polar ring galaxies.  In these, a huge
              ring of gas, stars and dust encircles a rotating inner disk of stars, much like
              our own Milky Way -- but the ring stands perpendicular to the central disk. 
              The motions of stars and gas in both the ring and the central galaxy are
              controlled by gravitational forces, including those of the `dark halo' of
              non-luminous matter.  If the dark halo is roughly spherical, gas in the ring
              should orbit in circles around the galaxy center, while if the dark stuff lies
              in a Milky-Way-like disk, the ring will be squashed into an oval by its
              gravitational force.  From observations these motions, the investigators will
              determine whether the halo is roughly round, or forms a flattened disk.  The
              latter finding would support the idea that the dark material is 'normal' matter
              (such as burned-out stars), rather than weakly-interacting particles that have
              not yet been observed on Earth.

The investigators also intend to study
              another gravitational problem: the orbits of stars that experience a
              gravitational force that is not always the same, but varies with time.  An
              example is that of a star belonging to a small galaxy that follows an
              elliptical orbit around a much larger galaxy -- our Milky Way has several such
              satellites.  As the satellite swoops in low, the increased gravitational force
              of the Milky Way can remove stars from its outer regions.  The PI has developed
              a novel method, that of 'invariant loops', that will be used to tackle this
              problem, and to find which stars will remain with the satellite and which will
              be stripped from it.  It will then be possible to use observations of stars
              around these small galaxies, now being gathered by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
              and other surveys, to measure the gravitational force of the satellite galaxy
              in comparison to that of the Milky Way.  In this way the masses of the
              satellites can be estimated and their 'dark matter' content calculated. Funding
              for this project was provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy &
              Cosmology (AST/EXC).
***

