Title       : Advances in Language-Based Security Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0098096

Award Number: 0098096
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andre Scedrov scedrov@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns links between programming language theory and semantics
              and formal methods in security analysis, on two levels of modeling detail. 1)
              Multiset rewriting framework (MSR), in which protocol execution is carried out
              symbolically, detects common protocol errors. The project studies decision
              problems for reachability in the MSR formalism extended with disequality
              testing. MSR formal analysis is also extended to properties of fair exchange
              protocols. The relationship between MSR and the secure pi-calculus is
              investigated. 2)A different approach develops an analysis of cryptographic
              protocols based on the methods of programming language theory, but
              incorporating the probabilistic techniques of cryptography. This approach
              allows the analysis of probabilistic protocols and probabilistic encryption.
              The proposed work in this direction develops principles and proof rules for
              reasoning about probabilistic observational equivalence. Foundational questions
              about probabilistic process calculus are addressed, such as a precise
              operational semantics of the calculus and the establishment of polynomial upper
              bounds on process execution in an extended version of the calculus that allows
              polynomial iteration. An information-theoretic variant of the calculus and the
              relationship to MSR are investigated.   


