Title       : Group Travel Support for U.S. Participants to the 20th International
               Cartographic Conference, Beijing, China, August 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a0098832

Award Number: 0098832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold Moellering   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In cartography as in many other scientific fields, advances in research and
              education increasingly rely on the development of international collaborations
              that bring together skilled scholars and educators from many different nations.
               International contacts and collaborations develop through many different
              means, but one of the most successful has been periodic meetings of the
              International Cartographic Association (ICA).  The ICA has been the primary
              international forum for cartographic research since 1959, and it currently
              involves 79 nations.  The ICA's next biennial meeting will occur in Beijing,
              China, in August 2001.  To facilitate the continued involvement of U.S.
              scientists in ICA activities and to facilitate the involvement of more
              Americans in international networks at early stages of their careers, this
              award will provide group-travel support to enable at least ten early-career
              cartographers from the U.S. to attend the ICA meeting.  Funds will be
              distributed to U.S. cartographers whose applications are evaluated using a
              number of criteria associated with active participation in the meeting.  Travel
              grants will be given to more junior scientists in order to encourage their
              participation in international discussions and communications.  This award will
              foster greater participation by U.S. cartographers in the global forum of the
              International Cartographic Association.  As has been demonstrated in follow-up
              reports from Americans who have been supported with previous travel grants to
              other major international meetings, opportunities abound for meeting
              professional colleagues from many other nations, for hearing ideas and
              information from a broad range of different perspectives, and for participating
              in discussions that frequently result in successful research collaborations.

