Title       : A CHNS Analyzer for Examining the Biochemical Composition of Marine Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0098409

Award Number: 0098409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40158              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn L. Van Alstyne kathyva@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian L. Bingham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne L. Strom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Sulkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gisele Muller-Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to aid in purchase of a
              carbon/hydrogen/nitrogen/sulfur (CHNS) analyzer for the Shannon Point Marine
              Center of Western Washington University. Because of its location on the Puget
              Sound basin, the significance of the marine environment and its resources to
              the local region, and interest on the part of students, the research emphasis
              at the Center is shifting to more physiologically and biochemically based
              studies, a shift that will be aided by purchase of the analyser. The instrument
              will enable study of the input of nitrogen into marine systems from natural
              sources, agricultural runoff, and other anthropogenic sources.  Nitrogen can be
              an important driver of many processes in the marine environment. Thus, the
              ability to measure nitrogen concentrations in the oceans and in marine
              organisms is critical to understanding how these systems function. The CHNS
              analyzer will be available for use by the five resident researchers the Center,
              by undergraduate and graduate students and by faculty from the main University
              campus in Bellingham, WA.
