Title       : Elastic Wave Scattering by Surface-Breaking Cracks and Cavities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0098418

Award Number: 0098418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226342             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Bogy dbogy@cml.me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: 

  

The project is intended to develop practically efficient and
              theoretically rigorous solutions to a broad class of problems in technology
              with specific applications to problems in non-destructive
 evaluation by
              elastic wave scattering from surface breaking cracks and cavities in
              structures.

 

In the method, wave fields are represented through
              auxiliary phase and amplitude functions. The phase function, known also as the
              "eikonal", is determined by the classical Hamilton-Jacobi method in dynamics.
              The amplitude function is determined by the random walk method whose systematic
              use is the core innovation of the project. This method provides the description
              of the wave fields by extremely simple and explicit probabilistic formulas.


               

The proposed work is expected to significantly affect most areas dealing
              with the modeling of complicated phenomena in continua. Such areas as
              non-destructive evaluation, geophysics, acoustics, radar, telecommunication
              technologies, and other areas dealing with wave propagation are expected to
              especially benefit from the project.               

       

Such
              considerable impact is provided by the use of a novel approach that combines
              the simplicity of asymptotic methods with the versatility of direct numerical
              methods. The method to be utilized is compatible with conventional methods, and
              it employs scalable algorithms with low memory requirements and with unlimited
              capability for parallel processing. It is an approach that is ideal for
 the
              present state of development of computational facilities, relying on
              theoretical developments in statistics that have occurred since the 1920's. 
              






