Title       : An Aspect-based Approach for Analyzing Security System Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2001  
File        : a0098120

Award Number: 0098120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271516             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi Deng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Security system architecture, which defines structure of the system, the
              interaction and coordination among its components, has profound impacts on the
              security system' performance, reliability, interoperability and consistency
              among other critical properties.  The purpose of this project is to develop a
              formal methodology to model security systems architectures and to assess key
              quality attributes of the composition.  The proposed methodology has several
              integrated elements:  First, an aspect-based architecture modeling framework is
              developed, which organized heterogeneous system properties into self-contained
              and yet integrated multi-level aspect models.  Each aspect model can be
              constructed, changed and analyzed individually with minimal burden of
              complexity from the other models.  Second, architecture-based constraint
              patterns are investigated.  These constraint patterns define what conditions or
              properties that each component and their composition must satisfy under a
              security architecture.  Based on the aspect architecture models, techniques
              will be developed to decompose system-wide constraint patterns onto individual
              components and to verify the consistency between global and component
              constraints.  These patterns are the behavioral basis for checking and assuring
              end-to-end properties in system composition.  Third, mature but individually
              homogeneous analysis techniques will be combined into a flexible and scalable
              method for analyzing the aspect models against their constraint patterns.
