Title       : Perspectives on Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0098323

Award Number: 0098323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew P. Black  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Our ability to build complex software systems relies on composition techniques
              that enable complete programs to be constructed from smaller pieces.  A
              particular decomposition imposes a structure that makes it possible to manage
              the complexity of a large system.  But the same decomposition can also make it
              harder to add or change features that cut across the structure. The thesis of
              this project is that the design, evolution, and comprehension of software can
              be better supported by tools that allow programmers to examine and work with
              multiple perspectives of a system.  In particular, such tools empower
              programmers to think of programs, not as linear texts, but as equivalence
              classes of concrete views, each of which might be appropriate for different
              tasks.

The project develops both foundational results and practical tools
              for representing and manipulating software.  Firm semantic foundations are
              provided by a new algebraic framework for reasoning about the construction of
              complex software systems.  Practical experience is obtained by developing and
              experimenting with an interactive browser and editor based on the same algebra.
               This tool will allow programmers to explore and modify a software system from
              multiple perspectives, some user-defined, and some automatically generated.

