Title       : Algorithmic Studies in Applied Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0098172

Award Number: 0098172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. B. Mitchell jsbm@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Esther M. Arkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098172
Mitchell, Joseph S. B.
SUNY Stony Brook

Algorithmic
              Studies in Applied Geometry

The methodologies of computational geometry will
              be applied to design, analyze, implement, and test algorithms for problems that
              arise in several application areas, including manufacturing,
              computer-aided
design, graphics and visualization, robotics, air traffic
              management, and cartography.  An important aspect of the project is
              dissemination of the technology to industry, helping to transfer algorithms
              into practice, while, at the same time, extracting from practitioners a set of
              high-priority problem areas for further investigation.  New industrial
              collaborations will be pursued, while building on the several industrial
              partnerships that have already been established.  In visitations with
              practitioners, new applications and mathematical formulations of geometric
              problems will be developed, and critical algorithmic issues in geometric
              computation will be identified.  Further, as solutions are proposed and
              developed, the industrial
partners will be assisted with the implementation
              and integration phases of the projects.

The specific repertoire of problems
              includes: (a) manufacturing process planning (tool path generation, NC
              verification, bending and folding, deposition, cutting) and virtual
              manufacturing and maintenance (collision detection, assembly planning); (b)
              computer graphics and visualization (rendering large polygonal models, data
              compression, irregular grid volume visualization, visibility preprocessing,
              optimized texture mapping); (c) Air Traffic Management (conflict detection and
              resolution, congestion modeling); (d) Mobile
robotics (multiple robot search
              and exploration); (e) Geographic Information Systems (GIS), including map
              generalization, optimal route planning in geometric environments under a
              variety of constraints and
objectives, and network design and optimization
              (e.g., for fiberless optical networking).


