Title       : Design and Analysis of Cryptographic Protocols for Secure Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2001       
File        : a0098123

Award Number: 0098123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihir Bellare mihir@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

Innovations in computer and communications technologies are making it
              easier
and faster to do things but also bring with them new security risks. 
              This
proposal is concerned with cryptography, which is an important component
              in the
provision of security in the electronic world.  A cryptographer
              designs
schemes, or protocols, for tasks such as data authentication, data
              encryption,
identification, and key distribution which are implemented and
              incorporated
into the computer systems and are responsible for imbuing data
              and transactions
with attributes like privacy and integrity.  Providing
              high-quality,
cost-effective cryptography is a challenge because cryptographic
              protocols are
easy to specify but hard to analyze, and notorious for
              containing bugs that
take a long time to be discovered.  The goal of this
              project is to identify and
tackle practical problems in cryptographic protocol
              design and analysis based
on theoretical techniques, delivering real-world
              usable protocols backed by
theoretically sound security analyses, and thereby
              impact implementation, usage
and standardization of cryptography in the
              computer and communications
industry.

The specific research proposed here
              is on three broad topics: anonymity,
authenticated encryption and asymmetric
              identification protocols.  The term
``anonymity'' is broadly used to refer to
              issues regarding keeping private the
identities of parties engaging in
              electronic transactions.  The researchers
will investigate anonymity for
              mix-nets, anonymous encryption, and blind
signatures. In each case they will
              look at both foundational issues such as
definitions, and then the possibility
              of practical, proven secure
constructions. In the authenticated encryption
              domain they will investigate the
security of the popular
              encrypt-with-redundancy paradigm.  Finally they will
consider the design of
              identification protocols secure against attackers having
the powerful
              capability of resetting the internal state of the client machine
and also seek
              improved transformations of identification protocols to digital
signature
              schemes.
