Title       : Empirical Validation of Information Theory-Based Software Metrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0098024

Award Number: 0098024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Allen edward.allen@computer.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rayford B. Vaughn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
CCR-0098024
Empirical Validation of Information Theory-Based Software
              Metrics

Edward B. Allen, P.I, and Rayford B. Vaughn, co-P.I.

Empirical
              Validation of Information Theory-Based Software Metrics is a
research project
              of Mississippi State University that is empirically
validating the usefulness
              of a new generation of software metrics, based
on information
              theory.

Software engineers employ a wide variety of diagrams during
              development
of software. Because many abstractions of software are represented
              by
graphs, metrics of graph attributes have the potential for
              wide
application. Information theory is an alternative to counting,
              focusing
on the amount of information in an attribute. The contribution of
              this
project to the state of the art is empirical evidence that
              information
theory-based software metrics of size, length, complexity,
              coupling and
cohesion can be useful timely predictors of software quality, and
              that
they have advantages over counting-based metrics.

Case studies in
              collaboration with industrial and government software
development
              organizations are providing a meaningful evaluation by
examining a variety of
              real-world software systems large enough to be
comparable to other industry
              projects. Collaborators include EDS Inc.,
Ericsson Inc., and MPI Software
              Technology Inc.  Results will be
disseminated throught the Center for
              Empirically Based Software
Engineering (CeBASE).  The empirical evidence
              generated by this project
is aimed to facilitate a new level of cost-effective
              improvement to
software quality.




