Title       : Partially-Melted-Zone Cracking in Aluminum Welds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a0098776

Award Number: 0098776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299092             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sindo Kou kou@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0098776
Kou

Aluminum alloys are susceptible to hot cracking in the region
              right outside the fusion zone called the partially melted zone (PMZ), where
              grain boundary liquation occurs during welding. Studies on 6000 alloys (Al with
              Mg, Si and some Cu, Cr and Fe) have demonstrated that the composition of the
              weld metal is critical in preventing PMZ cracking. It has been proposed that
              cracking occurs if the weld metal composition is such that TWS (the weld metal
              solidus temperature) > TBS (the base metal solidus temperature). However,
              contradictions to this TWS > TBS criterion for cracking have been reported
              possibly because of inaccurate TWS and TBS and/or non-equilibrium
              solidification. This collaborated study between UW-Madison and ALCOA on PMZ
              cracking in aluminum welds focuses on the mechanism of cracking and the effect
              of the weld metal composition. First, the PMZ microstructure of several
              aluminum alloys will be observed to prove that the solidifying and shrinking
              weld metal pulls and tears the liquated PMZ to cause cracking. Second, binary
              and ternary alloys of known TWS and TBS will be prepared and welded to test the
              TWS > TBS criterion for cracking. Al-4.5Cu alloy will be welded with pure Al
              (TWS > TBS) and Al-6.3Cu (TWS < TBS) fillers, and the resultant welds will be
              checked for PMZ cracking. Likewise, Al-1Mg-0.6Si alloy (close to the popular
              alloy 6061, which is being used for car frames) will be welded with pure Al
              (TWS > TBS), Al-5.2Si (TWS < TBS) and Al-5Mg (TWS < TBS) fillers and checked.
              Third, the feasibility of assessing the PMZ cracking susceptibility with
              non-equilibrium T (temperature) vs. fs (fraction of solid) curves will be
              checked with the welds of the binary and ternary alloys. TWS and TBS reflect
              equilibrium solidification but non-equilibrium solidification prevails in
              welding. A PMZ higher in fs than the weld metal at any T is likely to be
              stronger than the weld metal, resisting its pulling and tearing. T vs. fs will
              be calculated using a computer code developed at UW-Madison based on
              thermodynamic and kinetic models and tested extensively with aluminum alloys.
              
%%%
As the auto industry is moving to all-aluminum cars, it is essential to
              better understand and control defects in aluminum welds. ALCOA has a strong
              interest in hot cracking in aluminum alloys and will cast the binary and
              ternary alloys for UW-Madison. Graduate students will go to ALCOA to learn how
              to cast special alloys for welding and duplicate the ALCOA facility at
              UW-Madison. 
***

