Title       : Exact Computation in Sparse Linear Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0098284

Award Number: 0098284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254993             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. David Saunders saunders@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Proposal #0098284
Saunders, B. David
University of Delaware

This
              is a program of research in the area of exact solution of systems of linear
              equations and related problems. There will be an emphasis on Diophantine
              problems, wherein the input data (coefficients) are integers and the solutions
              sought must also have integer coefficients. There will also be an emphasis on
              parametric linear systems, wherein the input data contain symbolic parameters
              and the solutions must be expressed in terms of these parameters, including all
              special cases (ranges of values of the parameters for which the solutions have
              form different from the general case). New efficient algorithms are sought and
              high performance software is to be developed based on both new and previously
              described methods.

The work will be largely carried out in the context of
              the LINBOX collaboration. LINBOX is a group of twelve researchers in three
              countries (USA, France, Canada) who are conducting research in the design of
              efficient algorithms for linear algebra, in their implementation in a software
              library, and in how to interface the library to widely-used scientific
              computing software. such as Maple and Mathematica.

There are two basic
              approaches to sparse matrix problems, iterative and direct. Both approaches
              have been significantly developed by the numeric linear algebra community.
              Iterative methods involve finding recurrence relations in a series of vectors
              resulting from matrix-vector products. In LINBOX these have been called "black
              box" methods, and the adaptation of such methods to symbolic problems has been
              the emphasis to date. There has been substantial theoretical work in the past
              two decades in this area. The emphasis of LINBOX is to find and to demonstrate
              in software the variants and extensions and improvements to these methods which
              will work in practice. The here proposed research will continue in this
              direction but will also work to develop the direct methods for solution of
              sparse symbolic linear systems, again basing on prior work in numerical linear
              algebra.
