Title       : Free Boundary Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0098520

Award Number: 0098520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92156              (Estimated)
Investigator: Avner Friedman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We plan to study a variety of free boundary problems.  The first one deals
with
              growing polymeric crystallines.  The unknowns are temperature in the
melt and
              the growing surface.  The speed of the free boundary is a given
function of
              the temperature, and free boundary points move in such a
direction so as to
              minimize the travel time.  We wish to establish the
existence of the solution
              and to determine the shape of the free boundary.
The second problem deals with
              non-Newtonian jets.  We want to approach it
via nonlinear perturbation of the
              linearized case, a case we have recently
studied.  The next problem is to
              develop a general bifurcation theory for
free boundary problems.  Here we
              expect to be guided by recent work that
we have done dealing with special
              models that arise in mathematical
biology.  In order to determine the
              stability of the bifurcation, we shall
first study the asymptotic behavior of
              solutions of free boundary
problems, including the Hele-Shaw problem and the
              evolution of viscous
drops.  Subsequently we shall consider the more
              complicated problems that
arise in mathematical biology, such as the evolution
              of tumors and of
protocells.  Finally, we shall study the evolution of cracks
              in elastic
media.  We expect to utilize formulas that we have derived for
              the
evolution of the stress intensity factors.

Free boundary problems deal
              with solving partial differential equations in
a domain, a part of whose
              boundary is unknown in advance; that portion of
the boundary is called a free
              boundary.  In addition to the usually
prescribed initial and boundary
              conditions, an additional condition is
imposed at the free boundary, and one
              seeks to determine both the free
boundary and the solution to the differential
              equations.  A seemingly
small change in the conditions imposed at the free
              boundary often result
in, technically, an entirely different problem.  Special
              examples have
historically guided research in this field; some of the most
              commonly
known examples are flow of liquid in contact with air, air streams
              behind
an aircraft, solidification of steel, and melting of solid. 
              Special
examples motivated by physical models continue to be a driving force
              in
the development of the field.  The present proposal focuses on
              several
different problems dealing with questions such as crystallization
              of
polymers, jet flows for non-Newtonian fluid (e.g. inkjets), bifurcation
              of
free boundary problems arising in biology, nonlinear stability,
              and
propagation of cracks in elastic media.  In all these problems, the
              goal
is to prove that there is a mathematical solution to the
              scientific
problem and to determine properties of the free boundary.


