Title       : Dissertation Research: The Origins of Polyploid Eragrostis tef (Poaceae):
               Phylogeny, Genetic Diversity, and Infraspecific Phylogeography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a0098509

Award Number: 0098509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Doyle jjd5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amanda Ingram  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0098509
Doyle and Ingram
	Tef (Eragrostis tef) is an annual cereal crop grown
              primarily in Ethiopia whose evolutionary origins within the grass genus
              Eragrostis are unknown.  The proposed research by graduate student Amanda
              Ingram with guidance from adviser Dr. Jeff Doyle at Cornell University has the
              primary goal of investigating the evolutionary relationships among previously
              proposed progenitors of tef to identify extant representatives of the crop's
              progenitors and to elucidate relationships within this large and poorly
              investigated genus of grasses. They will be using DNA sequence data from a
              variety of loci, including low-copy nuclear genes and a chloroplast locus, as
              sources of characters for the comparative genetic analyses of the likely
              diploid progenitor taxa and of numerous accessions of polyploid tef (which
              combines whole sets of chromosomes from different parents).  The data from the
              nuclear genes will help identify both progenitor species, while the chloroplast
              loci will help identify the maternal progenitor of tef.   Additional taxa will
              also be included in the analysis of these data to begin generating hypotheses
              of relationships among major lineages in this grass genus, which currently has
              350 named species. Another component of this project will be investigating the
              morphological changes  involved in the domestication of tef through comparisons
              with its wild progenitors.  These studies will be useful in helping identify
              target genes for future investigations into the genetic changes involved in the
              domestication process.  Genetic diversity within tef and its wild relatives
              will also be examined through the use of highly variable molecular markers. 
              These data will also be helpful in determining the genealogical structure of
              various tef cultivars, and this may helpidentify the center of domestication
              and diversity of this important crop, including genetic diversity of possible
              value in future breeding work. 


