Title       : Quadratic Array Spatial Solitons: New Phenomena in Nonlinear and Soliton Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0098647

Award Number: 0098647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209999             (Estimated)
Investigator: George I. Stegeman george@mail.creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0098647
Stegeman

Spatial solitons are non-diffracting beams which can be
              self-trapped in Kerr, saturable Kerr, photorefractive and quadratically
              nonlinear media (near phase-matching for parametric mixing). Quadratic solitons
              are based on the second order nonlinearity X (2) and in the simplest case
              consist of a fundamental and a harmonic field which are mutually self-trapped
              as the y propagate. Previous experiments have dealt with solitons guided in
              homogeneous media, either in bulk or in waveguides. Recently Falk Lederer's
              group at Frederich Schiller University in Jena predicted that quadratic
              solitons can also be guided by arrays of closely spaced, parallel channel
              waveguides in Quasi-Phase-Matched (QPM) LiNbO3 at power levels of a few watts.
              These array solitons are guided by virtue of strongcoupling both between
              fundamental and harmonic fields, and between adjacent channels in the array.
              Their first observation, characterization and interactions between them are the
              thrust of the program proposed here. This research is expected to lead to the
              first bservations of novel solitons, position dependent soliton interactions
              and new guiding phenomena in array structures. This should also lead to new
              knowledge that can be generalized to the field of nonlinear discrete systems,
              an area not readily accessible by experiment to date.

The PI is an integral
              and formal part of a European Community (EC) program to study novel
              applications of QPM LiNbO3. The European collaborators include Falk Lederer, as
              well as Wolfgang Sohler whose group (Un. Paderborn) has fabricated QPM LiNbO3
              waveguides, phase-matched over 8 cms. In such samples for 20 um wide array
              spatial solitons, typically 1 cm is required for a soliton control operation or
              collision. Thus for the first time these waveguides offer the prospect of
              exciting such solitons and investigating multiple sequential soliton
              interactions. Furthermore, these samples allow soliton excitation at watt peak
              power levels, a reduction of orders of magnitude over previous cases.

In
              collaboration with the Jena and Paderborn groups, the PI proposes to generate
              such array spatial solitons in QPM LiNbO3 slab waveguides, investigate their
              properties, including collisions and electro-optic and all-optical steering
              control. The PI's European partners are already funded by ROSA, an EC program
              which unfortunately does not allow funding of the US part. Here the PI requests
              funding for the component of the program.

Although this program will be
              focused on basic science, the potential for applications will also be assessed.
              The extra degrees of freedom introduced by the array lead to a large variety of
              new stable soliton modes, many without analogs in homogenous quadratic media,
              and some which do not exist in any currently known nonlinear system. Their
              properties are in their early theoretical stages and will be investigated
              experimentally at 1550 nm wavelengths. Preliminary calculations have revealed a
              rich spectrum of interactions, including position-dependent outcomes, and they
              will be investigated experimentally. Soliton phenomena associated with gain
              (already demonstrated in erbium implanted QPM LiNbO3 at Paderborn) will also be
              investigated including focusing, deflection etc. Furthermore, scanning of the
              soliton across the array by changing its power, the channel separation, or the
              refractive index electro-optically will be studied.

