Title       : Robust Adaptive Network-Attached Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0098274

Award Number: 0098274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Remzi H. Arpaci-Dusseau remzi@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrea C. Arpaci-Dusseau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The basic elements of the storage industry are in the midst of radical
              change
with the advent of network-attached storage devices. Storage systems
              comprised
of network-attached drives provide many potential advantages over
              traditional
storage architectures, but also introduce additional challenges,
              particularly
regarding manageability.  In this proposal, the WiND project
              (Wisconsin
Network Disks) is described, which has the goal of developing the
              software
techniques required to build a truly manageable network-attached
              storage
system.

The key to manageability is adaptation.  In traditional
              systems, such
adaptation is performed by a human administrator. Future storage
              systems must
themselves adapt, and in doing so, reduce the need for
              manual
intervention. The WiND system will gracefully and efficiently adapt to
              changes
in the environment, reducing the burden of administration and
              increasing the
flexibility of storage for an eclectic range of clients.  In
              particular, WiND
will automatically handle the addition of new heterogeneous
              disks to the
system, the failure of existing disks, and changes in client
              workload. Within
this proposal, three specific sub-areas of WiND are
              developed: adaptive data
layout and access with SToRM, adaptive caching via
              Clouds, and the underlying
information substrate.


