Title       : 2001 Aspen Winter Conference on Condensed Matter Physics, "High-Temperature
               Superconductivity," Aspen, CO, January 21 - 27, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0098816

Award Number: 0098816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard Haber   (Principal Investigator current)
              Elihu Abrahams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sudip Chakravarty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aspen Center For Physics
	      700 West Gillespie Street
	      Aspen, CO  81611    970/925-2585

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is to provide support for the Aspen Center for Physics' Winter 2001
              Condensed Matter Physics Workshop.  The workshop will be devoted to the topic
              of high-temperature superconductivity.  More than a decade after its discovery,
              high-temperature superconductivity is an exciting and challenging field with
              remarkable developments on the experimental front. This Aspen Winter Conference
              will have an unusual format: formal presentations will be on experimental
              results only. A small number of rapporteur talks will analyze the issues raised
              in the context of four major basic still-unanswered questions: 1) What is the
              global phase diagram? 2) Is non-Fermi liquid behavior fundamental?  Does
              spin-charge separation and/or topological order play any role? 4) what are the
              systematics of Tc?  The latest experimental results pertinent to these issues
              will be presented and discussed at the conference. The answers to these
              questions will involve great conceptual advances in the condensed matter field
              and are likely to lead us to contemplate a shift in paradigm.  The support
              provided will enable young physicists to attend and participate in the
              workshop.  They will benefit from the opportunity to interact in a small
              setting with world experts in the field.

This award is to provide support
              for the Aspen Center for Physics' Winter 2001 Condensed Matter Physics
              Workshop.  The workshop will be devoted to the topic of high-temperature
              superconductivity.  High-temperature superconductivity occurs in a number of
              metallic materials all of whose properties are so unlike those of ordinary
              metals that a theoretical understanding of them does not yet exist. This Aspen
              Winter Conference will bring together leading workers in the field to discuss
              how the very latest experimental results impact the theoretical framework which
              must be developed. The answers to the basic questions around which the
              conference is organized will involve great conceptual advances in the field of
              condensed matter physics and are likely to lead us to contemplate a shift in
              paradigm. While the meeting will be relatively small, the attendees will
              include both senior scientists and junior ones just starting in the field.  It
              is important for the future of physics that young physicists participate in a
              major way in small conferences of this kind.  In addition these young
              scientists will benefit from the opportunity to interact in a small setting
              with international experts in the field.


