Title       : Scalable and Efficient Scheduling Techniques for Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0098149

Award Number: 0098149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chita R. Das das@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Design of high performance clusters with Quality-of-Service (QoS)guarantees is
              becoming increasingly important to support a variety of scientific and
              commercial applications. Performance of a cluster can be improved by an
              efficient scheduling mechanism. Although a few communication-guided scheduling
              algorithms
have been proposed recently for clusters, these schemes have not
              been tested on large platforms to
examine the potential
              benefits.

Therefore, the main motivation of this research is to design
              scalable and efficient scheduling algorithms for clusters. The proposed
              research addresses three related issues.  First, an in-depth evaluation of the
              existing
scheduling schemes will be done on a large cluster platform using
              real workloads before developing
new algorithms.  Second, various design
              issues in implementing these algorithms on the generic virtual interface
              architecture (VIA) will be explored. Finally, the research will examine QoS
              provisioning
mechanisms to facilitate predictable performance in
              clusters.

The success of this research is expected to have many important
              contributions in the area of cluster computing. Primarily, the practical
              scheduling algorithms developed in this research can be used on large
              platforms.  The results from the VIA and QoS research should provide novel
              solutions to satisfy different performance and QoS  requirements, and should
              foster further research in this area.
