Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Comparing Different Periodicities in Homotopy Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1994    
File        : a9401404

Award Number: 9401404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Sadofsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401404  Sadofsky       The principal investigator will examine the relationship
               between Mahowald's root invariant (formed by studying the cell  structure of
              the classifying space of the group Z/pZ), and  vn-periodicity in homotopy
              theory (which is taken here to be the  homotopy theory that can be detected
              using primary and higher  operations in the Johnson-Wilson cohomology theory
              E(n)).  In  particular, he would like to understand the analog of the Chern 
              character formed by using the map from E(n) to the inverse limit  of the Lin
              inverse system smashed with E(n)  which gives  a v(n-1)-periodic homotopy
              theory .  He will also continue  his efforts to understand the result of taking
              the inverse limit  of the Lin inverse system smashed with the Bousfield
              localization  of a space with respect to the homology theory E(n).  This latter
               inverse system seems to relate vn-periodic and  v(n-1)-periodic homotopy
              classes via an analog of the Hopf  invariant.       Topology is the study of
              "spaces" where two spaces  are considered the same if one is deformable to the
              other.   (For present purposes, a space can be thought of as a subset of  some 
              n-dimensional Euclidean space; i.e. a subset of the plane, or a  subset of
              3-dimensional Euclidean space, a subset of  4-dimensional  Euclidean space,
              etc.  Although the spaces requiring more than 3  dimensions to describe are not
              familiar from our ordinary  experience, they arise frequently in most branches
              of  mathematics,  in physics, and in engineering applications.)  Homotopy
              theory  uses  algebraic techniques to study the number and kind of "holes"  in
              these spaces (contrast, for example, the sort of hole in a  circle with the
              sort of hole in a hollow sphere).  Although this  latter information is rather
              coarse (it fails to distinguish  between some spaces that are topologically
              distinct), it still  describes much of the geometry of a space, and suffices
              for many  applications.  Furthermore, it turns out that the algebraic 
              information provided by homotopy  theory can be divided up into  what are
              called "n-periodic" types, for each non-negative integer  n.  Examining one
              n-periodic type of homotopy at a time leads to  some simplifications, and is
              more tractable than examining all  the homotopy theoretic information about a
              space at once.  This  project is concerned with understanding the interaction
              between  different n-periodic homotopy information and (n+1)-periodic  homotopy
              information.  These appear somewhat unrelated, but the  n-periodic information
              for a space restricts the possibilities  for the (n+1)-periodic information for
              the same space.  This is  ultimately a very useful relationship to understand,
              for the  0-periodic information is quite accessible, and the 1-periodic 
              information is also quite well understood, so one might hope to  use this
              relationship to describe much of the n-periodic homotopy  in terms of the
              k-periodic homotopy for k < n.  ***
