Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Wave Equations of Mathematical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1994     
File        : a9401377

Award Number: 9401377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Craig craigw@gauss.math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401377  Craig       This award support mathematical research in three areas 
              which related the theory of partial differential equations and  mathematical
              physics.  The focus is principally on conservative  evolution equations. 
              Examples include nonlinear wave equations,  Schrodinger equations, the Korteweg
              deVries equation and versions  of the Boussinesq system.  These problems can
              all be written as  Hamiltonian systems, with infinitely many degrees of
              freedom.   The analogy with dynamical systems can be pursued with the goal  of
              describing the important features of solutions and  the principal structures of
              the phase space in which they are  posed.  The projects include the
              continuation of development of  the theory of Kolmogorov, Arnold and Moser to
              systems with  infinitely many degrees of freedom, in particular, to the above 
              nonlinear equations.  The intent of this work is to understand  the stable
              motions of nonlinear wave equations, either in  neighborhoods of equilibrium
              points, or for perturbations of  completely integrable systems.  A second
              project concerns the  evolution of singularities of solutions of the
              Schrodinger  equation, in both linear and nonlinear cases.  This requires 
              microlocal analysis techniques in a novel setting in which there  is an
              interdependence of properties in the spatial and Fourier  domains.        The
              final project involves work on the free surface problem  of water wave, which
              is important in mathematical fluid dynamics  as well as partial differential
              equations.  Work will address  steady free surface problems and nonstationary
              problems, in both  two and three dimensional settings.       Partial
              differential equations form a basis for  mathematicalmodeling of the physical
              world.  The role of  mathematical analysis is not so much to create the
              equations as  it is to provide qualitative and quantitative information about 
              the solutions.  This may include answers to questions  about uniqueness,
              smoothness and growth.  In addition, analysis  often develops me thods for
              approximation of solutions and  estimates on the accuracy of these
              approximations.  ***
