Title       : Mathematical Scieces: Topics in Set-Theoretic Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9401529

Award Number: 9401529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary F. Gruenhage gruengf@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401529  Gruenhage       The principal investigator will continue his research
              on  several open questions in set-theoretic topology.  The focus will  be on
              the now classical problem of Arhangel'skii and Tall:  Are  normal locally
              compact metacompact spaces paracompact?   Because  of recent progress by the
              principal investigator, a solution to  this problem may be near.  Another set
              of problems revolves  around the failure of the Lindelof property in products,
              and  includes Michael's long-standing question concerning the  existence in ZFC
              of of a Lindelof space whose product with a  complete separable metric space is
              not Lindelof.  Yet a third set  of problems involves extensions of the PI's
              recent solutions to  problems of Watson, and Dow and Porter, on closed
              partitions of  compact Hausdorff spaces.       Set-theory and general topology
              are fundamental mathematical  disciplines which have common turn-of-the-century
              roots.  Set-  theory provides a framework upon which all of mathematics can be 
              based.  Objects of study in topology include familiar spaces such  as the plane
              and ordinary three-dimensional Euclidean space, and  their subsets, as well as
              much more abstract spaces.  Pioneering  work of Goedel and Cohen led to the
              realization that some long-  standing topological questions could not be solved
              assuming only  the standard axioms of set-theory.  It is illuminating to 
              determine whether or not topological propositions are independent  of the
              standard axioms in this sense, and if so, what further  axioms are necessary to
              settle them.  This project involves just  such questions, concerning basic
              topological properties and  constructions, including product spaces,
              partitions, and  refinements of coverings.  Questions to be studied include
              ones  which date back to the 1960's and have been worked on by many  experts
              with only partial success so far.  Significant recent  progress by the
              principal investigator indicates that a complete  solution to some of these may
              now be at hand.  The new tech niques  involved in their solution are likely to
              be applicable to a wide  variety of other problems.  ***
