Title       : Mathematical Sciences: On Nonlinear Elliptic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1996  
File        : a9401815

Award Number: 9401815
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yanyan Li yyli@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401815  Li       This award supports mathematical research on geometric 
              problems in three related areas all based on solving various  types of partial
              differential equations.  The first concerns the  problems of prescribing scalar
              curvature on the n-sphere with  certain hypothesis on the critical points.  The
              problem has been  solved in dimensions two and three, this project will
              consider,  with flatness assumptions on the critical points, the existence  of
              a prescribed curvature(s) for a given infinitely  differentiable function.  The
              second area involves the Weyl  problem with nonnegative Gauss curvature. 
              Roughly this problem  focuses on whether or not a sphere, with a given
              Riemannian  metric an everywhere positive Gauss curvature can be  isometrically
              embedded in three-dimensional Euclidean space with  the standard flat metric. 
              While this problem has been solved,  only partial results exist for the case
              where the curvature is  only nonnegative.  To find necessary and sufficient
              conditions  for smooth isometric embedding when the Gauss curvature is only 
              nonnegative is the goal of this effort.  Finally, work will be  done in the
              study of the compressible fluid model of uniformly  rotating white dwarf stars.
               Equilibrium solutions have been  established for small angular velocity and
              the nonexistence of  equilibrium solutions for large angular velocity has also
              been  shown.  What now must be done is to establish the existence of a  global
              branch of equilibrium solutions - which amounts to solving  a certain free
              boundary problem.       Partial differential equations form a basis for
              mathematical  modeling of the physical world.  The role of mathematical 
              analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to  provide
              qualitative and quantitative information about the  solutions.  This may
              include answers to questions about  existence, uniqueness, smoothness and
              growth.  In addition,  analysis often develops methods for approximation of
              solutions  and estimates on the accuracy of these  approximations.  ***
