Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Cohomology of Sheaves, and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1994      
File        : a9401460

Award Number: 9401460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75345              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. McConnell mmcconn@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401460  McConnell       This project involves at the outset the upgrading of a
              new  computer algebra system, Sheafhom, for research in the derived  category
              of sheaves on a topological space.  In Sheafhom the  basic items are
              finite-dimensional vector spaces, cochain  complexes, regular cell complexes,
              sheaves, and morphisms among  these objects.   There are functions like kernel,
              image,  cohomology, and tensor and wedge products.  The system works with 
              important complexes of sheaves, such as the intersection  cohomology sheaves
              and other perverse sheaves.  Second, the  project involves bringing Sheafhom to
              bear on convex polytopes  and the intersection homology of toric varieties. 
              McMullen's  conjecture characterized the f-vectors of simplicial convex 
              polytopes.  Stanley's proof of (one direction of) McMullen's  conjecture used
              the cohomology of the toric variety associated to  a simplicial polytope.  Key
              facts were that the cohomology,  modulo the Lefschetz class, is a graded ring
              generated in degree  two.  For an arbitrary rational convex polytope, one can
              ask  whether the intersection cohomology of its toric variety,  modulo the
              Lefschetz class, is a ring, and whether it is  generated in degree two.  The
              project will build on preliminary  results on these questions, and Sheafhom
              will play a part in  approaching them.       A computer algebra system is a
              program for algebraic  calculation.  Any program can add numbers, but a
              computer algebra  system combines whole formulas: the input (2x + 7) + (4x - 3)
               automatically becomes 6x + 4.  This capacity is more abstract,  hence more
              flexible.  Excellent general-purpose systems, like  Maple or Mathematica, are
              available, but of course they don't  have every function that every
              mathematician needs.  In recent  years several disciplines have acquired their
              own special-purpose  systems--Cayley/Magma for algebraists, Pari for number
              theorists,  and a dozen others.  The investigator intends to develop  Sheafhom,
              a computer algebra system for algebra ic topology.   Second, he intends to
              apply Sheafhom to study convex polytopes.   Convex polyhedra are familiar solid
              bodies like cubes, pyramids,  or hundred-faced diamonds.  A convex polytope is
              the same kind of  body in the fourth dimension or higher.  Since 1980,
              algebraic  geometry has become a major tool for studying polytopes.  This is 
              surprising, since algebraic geometry includes some of the most  abstract
              mathematics known, while polytopes, like crystals, are  very concrete objects. 
              Sheafhom will make possible some  difficult computations in algebraic topology
              and geometry that  will advance our understanding of convex polytopes.  ***
