Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems in Simulations and Applied Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1994       
File        : a9401834

Award Number: 9401834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon M. Ross smross@euler.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Ross            A basic probability identity is established and applied  to
              obtain new simulation estimators concerning (a) system  reliability, (b) a
              multi-valued system, and (c) the probability  distribution of the time until a
              given pattern occurs when data  is generated by a stationary Markov chain.  It
              has been shown  that the variance of this new estimator is often of the order 
              a-squared when the usual estimator's variance is of order a and a  is small. 
              The investigator will indicate how this estimator can  be combined with
              standard variance reduction techniques.  Additional studies of the estimator,
              as well as on variations of  it are proposed as are additional applications.
              The research also  concerns how the identity can be used to provide
              approximations  and bounds in applied probability.  General bounds as well as 
              specific applications are indicated and proposed for further  study.           
              Many problems involving chance phenomena are too  complex for one to obtain
              analytical solutions.  In such cases a  combination of a probabilistic analysis
              and a computer simulation  leading to statistical estimators of the quantities
              of interest  is often a potent method of attack.  The investigator has 
              indicated how a basic probability identity can be effectively  employed in
              obtaining efficient simulation estimators.  The  purpose of this research is to
              study its usefulness, both in the  simulation and the probabilistic analysis
              phase, in a variety of  applications.  The investigator has also indicated
              extensions of  the identity along with potential areas of applications. ***
