Title       : Arthropod Biodiversity in a Lowland Tropical Rainforest II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1997   
File        : a9401069

Award Number: 9401069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Hartshorn ghartsho@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Stone  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9197,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9401069  Stone   As the second phase of an ongoing collaborative project between
              the Organization for Tropical Studies and the Instituto Nacional de
              Biodiversidad (INBio, Costa Rica), a faunal inventory of tropical rainforest
              arthropods (mites, spiders, and insects) will be intensified and broadened at
              La Selva, a biotically rich and scientifically active biological station
              situated in the Atlantic lowlands of Costa Rica.  A full-equipped, dedicated
              arthropod laboratory, collections facility, and data management system created
              with previous NSF support in Phase 1 of the project, and the talents of the
              ALAS Parataxonomists and Biodiversity Technician, who were extensively trained
              with that support, will allow immediate and efficient use of physical and human
              resources in Phase 2.  The scope of the inventory will be expanded with the
              addition of two kinds of new focal Taxa:  (1) those within the broader Survey
              Taxa established in Phase 1, for with many collections have been made and
              specimens already prepared, and (2) new Focal Taxa not within Phase 1 Survey
              Taxa, but added to enlarge the ecological and phylogenetic scope of the
              project.  Collection and preparation of new material  in Phase 2 will shift to
              a series of concentrated efforts, by the project staff and relevant
              collaborators, for one Focal Taxon (or set of related Focal Taxa) at a time,
              using an ecologically-structured, quantified-effort collection strategy and all
              techniques appropriate for each taxon.  Twenty-five systematists P.I.'s and
              Collaborators (including 7 Collaborators from Costa Rican institutions) will
              contribute to work of the inventory in Phase 2, while enriching their own
              phylogenetic and biogeographical studies with material form La Selva. 
              Specimens will be integrated into the national biodiversity inventory already
              underway at INBio, thus placing the La Selva survey material in a larger
              geographical and systematic context, promoting further study of this material
              by INBio's growing international network of specialist s, and ensuring
              permanent accessibility of the specimens.  The project is structured to promote
              extensive avenues of collaboration between North American and Costa Rican
              scientists.  Exploration and evaluation of methods for estimating arthropod
              faunal richness and composition will continue, through the use of taxon ratios
              (both hierarchical and intergroup), species accumulation curves, and parametric
              and non-parametric analyses of abundance patterns.  The design and
              functionality of the database application successfully developed and
              implemented in Phase 1 for the project will be further refined and expanded,
              and the application will be made available to other projects, both as a source
              of experience-based ideas and as a working tool.  Taken together, these
              activities should serve to further position the project as a demonstration and
              methodological evaluation pilot for other multi-taxon biodiversity inventories,
              as well as a ground-breaking and significant inventory in its own right.
