Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Group Proposal for Research: Harmonic Analysis and
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9401579

Award Number: 9401579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elias Stein stein@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Fefferman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9401579  Stein        The work of all investigators supported by this grant 
              revolves around central issues of harmonic analysis and partial  differential
              equations with applications to mathematical physics,  geometry, fluid
              mechanics.  Investigations into areas of Fourier  analysis related to
              oscillatory integrals, the Heisenberg group,  Hardy-space theory, the theory of
              para-products and several  complex variables will be carried out.  Among the
              problems to be  investigated are the asymptotic formula for the energy of the 
              ground state of a large atom, nodal domains for eigenfunctions of  Laplacians,
              Navier-Stokes equations, Szego-limit theorems for  eigenvalues and the behavior
              of Bergman and Szego projections.        Partial differential equations form a
              basis for  mathematical modeling of the physical world.  The role of 
              mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations as  it is to
              provide qualitative and quantitative information about  the solutions.  This
              may include answers to questions about  uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In
              addition, analysis often  develops methods for approximation of solutions and
              estimates on  the accuracy of these approximations.  Harmonic analysis combines
               those elements of mathematics best exemplifying the ideas of  synthesis.  One
              seeks to decompose complex problems into  fundamental components.  These
              components are then analyzed for  their basic characteristics.  Finally, the
              solution is  reconstructed through a recombination of the components.  The 
              Fourier series and Fourier transform are examples of tools used  in this
              context; one discrete , the other representing a  continuous decomposition.
              More recently the wavelet theory added  new dimensions to some of the more
              classical approaches to  harmonic analysis.  ***
