Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in the Model Theory of p-Adic Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1994  
File        : a9401328

Award Number: 9401328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deirdre Haskell haskell@math.holycross.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holy Cross College
	      1 College Street
	      Worcester, MA  01610    508/793-2011

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401328  Haskell       The study of the real spectrum of a ring has had rich 
              consequences, including an elegant proof by C. Delzell  of a continuous
              solution to Hilbert's seventeenth problem.    The principal investigator aims
              to prove an analogous  result for the Kochen representation of an
              integral-definite  rational function.  This requires finding an appropriate
              p-adic  analogue to the real notion of a pre-ordering.  By studying the 
              universal theory of p-adic fields, the principal investigator  and her
              collaborator Luc Belair think that a successful  definition of "pre-valuation"
              can be found.  A further goal is to  study the "fine" p-adic spectrum, in which
              the structure of the  sets of nth powers is added.  The second project is also
              related  to the structure of nth power sets in a p-adic field.  The  principal
              investigator and her collaborator D. Macpherson have  recently defined the
              notion of "P-minimality" and have shown that  a field with this property must
              be p-adically closed.  Important  further questions are to show that expansions
              of p-adically  closed fields by analytic functions are P-minimal, and to study 
              the differentiability of definable functions in P-minimal  structures.      
              Model theory is concerned with the study of mathematical  objects which are
              defined by axioms.  Model-theoretic algebra  applies the theory to particular
              algebraic objects, in this case  to p-adic fields.  P-adic fields are number
              systems in which a  notion of distance exists, in a way similar to that for the
              real  number system, but in which the prime integer p plays a special  role. 
              The first problem in this research concerns a  representation of certain
              functions of p-adic fields  which reveals some of their essential properties;
              the question is  whether this representation varies in a predictable way.  The 
              second problem, also at the heart of understanding the nature of  the p-adics,
              asks whether the geometry of sets definable in the  p-adics in first order
              logic has important features in com mon  with the corresponding sets of real
              numbers.  ***
