Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mobius Structures on Low-Dimensional Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9401778

Award Number: 9401778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63621              (Estimated)
Investigator: Feng Luo fluo@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401778  Luo       The object of this research effort is to study Moebius 
              structures (conformally flat Riemannian metrics) on 3-manifolds,  and complex
              projective structures on Riemann surfaces.  In  dimension three, Kuiper's
              conjecture on the existence of Moebius  structures on a class of circle bundles
              over surfaces was shown  to be true.  The construction of these Moebius
              structures is  based on the Moebius groups generated by half-turns about three 
              circles in S3.  It is expected that more detailed study of these  groups (the
              geometry of the configuration space of three circles  in S3) will lead to a
              full generalization of Fenchel-Nielsen's  work on hyperbolic surfaces to
              Moebius structures on Seifert  3-manifolds.  It is also shown that given any
              number less than  2-pi, any closed 3-manifold has Moebius cone structure with
              cone  angle the given number.  It is expected that there is a singular 
              Riemannian metric of constant scalar curvature in the conformal  class
              represented by the Moebius structure and that the metric is  unique if the
              scalar curvature is -1.  The Hausdorff convergence  of the Riemannian metrics
              will then introduce a topology in the  space of Moebius cone structures.  Many
              conformally flat  structures on 3-manifolds will be obtained by considering the
               limit of these singular Riemannian metrics as the cone angle goes  to 2-pi. 
              In dimension two, it is shown that the monodromy  representation locally
              determines the quasi-bounded complex  projective structure on punctured
              surfaces if there are no  apparent singularities.  As a consequence, the
              Teichmueller space  Tg,n supports a natural family of symplectic structures for
              n >  0.  It is expected that these symplectic structures are dual to  the
              Fenchel-Nielson twist vectors.       The study of three-dimensional spaces,
              called manifolds, is  a natural pursuit for creatures such as ourselves who
              inhabit a  three-dimensional universe (neglecting time).  In recent years it 
              has become clear from work of Thurston and others that   understanding
              3-manifolds endowed with a locally non-Euclidean  geometry known as a
              hyperbolic structure is an important route to  the understanding of 3-manifolds
              in general.  One should look  into the multiplicity of hyperbolic structures
              that a manifold  can support and the symmetries thereof.  That is the setting
              for  this project by Feng Luo, who rings many changes on the approach.   He
              considers hyperbolic structures on surfaces, for which there  is an extensive
              classical theory in terms of functions of one  complex variable.  His discovery
              of an analog of the  two-generator groups of symmetries that arise in the case
              of  surfaces has been a very fertile source of new results, including  the
              solution of a conjecture of Kuiper.  It seems likely that  there is still much
              more to be done along these lines, that the  fruits of this point of view have
              by no means been exhausted.  ***
