Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras and Operator Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9401544

Award Number: 9401544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121620             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Larson larson@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1262      MODERN ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401544  Larson       One area of the research plan concerns prior work on 
              quasitriangularity considerations within von Neumann algebras.   Work by this
              investigator and co-workers on quasitriangularity  led to the development of a
              sub-optimization formula which has  impacted recent work by others in control
              theory with  applications to electrical and aeronautical engineering.  The 
              plan is to continue work in this direction.  A second area of the  plan
              concerns problems related to triangular and semitriangular  operators, and to
              reflexivity, that arose out of prior work by  this investigator and co-workers
              which yielded counterexamples to  open questions on these topics.  The third
              area of the plan  concerns an operator-theoretic approach to certain aspects of
               orthogonal wavelet theory obtained by interpreting orthogonal  wavelets as
              wandering vectors for a special set of unitary  operators on Hilbert space. 
              The new idea used is that the set of  all orthogonal wavelets for the usual
              dilation-translation  wavelet system (D,T) on the Hilbert space of square-
              integrable  complex functions on the real line can be parameterized in a 
              natural way by a single wavelet v together with the set of all  unitary
              operators in the local commutant of the system at x.   Analysis of this unitary
              set yields information concerning the  set W(D,T) of all orthogonal wavelets.  
                  The research plan involves three separate but related  projects.  The first
              builds onto  previous work by this  investigator in the area of operator
              algebras.  A  formula which  was derived three years ago to solve an open
              problem in pure  mathematics has recently  impacted  applications-oriented 
              research projects of several mathematicians and engineers working  incontrol
              theory. Further work in this connection is being  pursued.  The second project
              continues previous work on  properties of single operators and dual operator
              algebras.   Recent successes here include counter examples which have  impacted
              work of several other mathemati cians.  The third project  concerns wavelets. 
              Wavelet analysis has been the scene of a  sizable research drive in mathematics
              and engineering during the  past few years.  The new concept utilized in this
              project is the  idea of determining new wavelets and functional properties of 
              wavelets by analyzing structural properties of a certain  naturally related set
              of operators, using established techniques  of single operator theory and
              operator algebras.  This overall   plan accomodates the dissertation research
              of four doctoral  students.  ***
