Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamics of Multi-Fluid Flow and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9401775

Award Number: 9401775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Demetrios T. Papageorgiou depapa@aphrodite.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401775  Papageorgiou    This research considers the interfacial stability of
              multi-fluid  systems with particular emphasis placed on the theoretical 
              prediction of practical operating parameter regimes in  applications.  The
              first part is concerned with a new finding on  the stability of oscillatory
              two-phase Couette flow.   It has  been shown that periodic modulations in the
              background state can  completely stabilize interfacial modes in the long wave
              regime.   These results will be extended to all wavelengths by use of  Floquet
              theory and numerical integration of the governing system,  and with analysis
              where appropriate.  A parallel project will  address oscillatory two-phase
              core-annular flow both in the  linear and nonlinear regime by study of
              dissipative partial  differential systems and use of tools taken from dynamical
               systems theory.  Nonlinear evolution equations in both two and  three
              dimensions will be derived and solved numerically in order  to model the
              nonlinear stability of two-fluid flows in  cylindrical geometries.    There are
              numerous technological and natural processes where  instabilities in two-fluid
              flows are important and need to be  understood.  Examples include, among
              others, lubricated  pipelining for the transport of viscous crudes, extrusion 
              processes, enhanced oil recovery, coating processes, directional 
              solidification in melt-grown crystal technologies, and production  of
              photographic film.  Biological applications include the  collapse of pulmonary
              vessels in new-borne babies due to  interfacial instabilities leading to
              rapture of the fluid  covering of the tube walls.  There are a number of other
              evolving  technologies both ground-based as well as in microgravity 
              environments which require a fundamental understanding of  interfacial
              instabilities and rheology.
