Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Three Problems in Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9401580

Award Number: 9401580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Catlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401580  Catlin       This award supports mathematical research directed at 
              problems arising in the field of several complex variables.  The  work focuses
              on three problem areas.  The first concerns Stein  spaces of dimension n with
              isolated singularities.  It is  proposed to investigate whether or not any
              relatively compact  subset can be mapped biholomorphically into an affine
              algebraic  variety of the same dimension.  This is not necessarily the case  if
              the singularities are not isolated, thus the result would be  best possible in
              this sense.  The second goal of the research  concerns points of finite type on
              smoothly bounded pseudoconvex  domains.  These are points on the boundary at
              which the tangent  space acts reasonably like Euclidean space.  It is planned
              to  show that at each point a peaking function can be found.  These  are
              functions which achieve their maximum (modulus) at the given  point and nowhere
              else.  Finally, it is planned to examining  smooth pseudoconvex compact
              CR-manifolds with strictly  plurisubharmonic functions.  Then, work will be
              done to show that  the manifold can be extended to a smoothly bounded
              integrable  almost complete manifold in which the original appears as the 
              inside boundary.       Several complex variables grew from the classical theory
              of  functions at the turn of the century into a separate and profound 
              discipline of its own.  The problems of interest are  significantly different
              from those which originally motivated the  field: to find that part of the
              one-variable theory which  generalized to several.  Most of the generalizations
              turned out  to be false.  The subject now focuses on applications toward 
              understanding the geometry of higher dimensional spaces, partial  differential
              equations and certain parts of control theory.  ***
