Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Function Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9401269

Award Number: 9401269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134847             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Garnett jbg@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Garnett  9401269         The research supported by this award focuses on
              problems  arising in the mathematical theory of functions of one complex 
              variable and one-dimensional Schrodinger operators.  The work  continues
              investigations in four problem areas.  In the first,  work will be done
              investigating the density of Blaschke products  whose roots are restricted to
              interpolating sequences for the  algebra of bounded analytic functions.  It is
              expected that all  Blaschke products are uniform limits of the restricted ones 
              and that the closed convex hull of these Blaschke products is  the unit ball
              for the algebra.  A second line of  investigation concerns analytic capacity to
              help understand the  nature of sets having positive Hausdorff dimension but
              which have  zero capacity.        Work will also be done on determining for
              which powers  the derivative of a conformal mapping is integrable along 
              straight lines in simply connected domains.  Related  investigations will
              consider the same question when the integrals  are taken with respect to area
              measure.  Efforts to understand  the gap sequences (bands) in one-dimensional
              periodic Schrodinger  operators will be taken up for operators with complex
              potentials.   Recent work has shown that the spectrum can be realized in terms 
              of Riemann surfaces.  The purpose of this work is to obtain a  more intrinsic
              description of the spectrum.       Complex function theory is the study of the
              analytic and  geometric properties of differentiable functions of a  complex
              variable.  The subject has grown in time to include  ancillary lines of
              investigation such as quasiconformal  mapping, quasiregular mapping and
              potential theory.  Work in the  field is motivated by problems in geometry,
              differential  equations, fluid dynamics and control theory.  Recent work also 
              involves studies of computational conformal mapping through new  applications
              of circle packing.   ***
