Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows: Measurements and Modeling of the Atmospheric
               Chemistry of Chlorine Peroxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9401672

Award Number: 9401672
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42500              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Owen DeHaan dehaan d@cublr.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521500   Ozone & The Stratosphere                
              12        Chemistry                               
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9188,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9401672  DeHaan      This award is under the International Junior Investigator 
              and Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S.  scientists and engineers
              to conduct three to twelve months  of research abroad at research centers of
              proven excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint 
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities,  expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. David DeHaan to work with Dr. Frode Storda
              at  the Norwegian Institute for Air Research  and Dr. Claus  Jorgen Nielsen at
              the University of Oslo.    This research will focus on chlorine peroxide
              (ClOOCl), a  compound believed to be active in the destruction of ozone  in the
              polar stratosphere but never measured in situ.  Recently, it has been shown
              that chlorine peroxide will  react with holide ions on ice surfaces.  A
              flow-tube reactor  will be interfaced to spectrophotometric detectors in order 
              to quantitatively identify all ClOOCl reaction products and  study the reaction
              mechanism in detail.  A Knudsen cell  reactor will also be used to measure the
              sticking  coefficient of ClOOCl on ice surfaces.  The newly-discovered 
              reaction will be incorporated into state-of-the-art "air  parcel" atmospheric
              models.  In addition, Dr. DeHaan will  have an opportunity to participate with
              scientists from all  over Europe in the Second European Stratospheric Arctic
              and  Mid-latitude Experiment (SESAME), a field measurement  campaign studying
              the composition of stratospheric ice  particles, in situ ice-surface chemistry,
              and chlorine  partitioning. ***
