Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology and Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9401443

Award Number: 9401443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dusa McDuff dusa@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lowell E. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401443  McDuff       Dusa McDuff: The study of symplectic topology has made
              great  progress in the past decade, and is now sufficiently developed to  have
              significant impact in other fields, for example the use of  Floer homology in
              studying 3- and 4-dimensional manifolds, and,  more recently, the application
              of J-holomorphic curves in the  study of mirror symmetry and quantum
              cohomology.  In recent  years, McDuff has devoted her energies to developing
              the tools of  symplectic topology with the main aim of understanding the 
              topological structure of compact symplectic manifolds.  She  intends to
              continue working in the same general direction in the  next three years, in an
              attempt to solve some of the very  interesting problems which still remain. 
              Lowell Jones: Jones  will continue his collaborative efforts with F. T.
              Farrell,  investigating rigidity properties of the classical closed  spherical
              manifolds.  In prior work they have shown that closed  nonpositively curved
              manifolds and closed double coset manifolds  are topologically rigid, in
              dimensions > 5.  In work in progress  they show that any closed complete affine
              flat manifold is  topologically rigid, in dimensions > 5.  They have also 
              constructed many examples of strictly negatively curved closed  manifolds which
              are homeomorphic to one another but not  diffeomorphic, thus verifying that the
              class of nonpositively  curved manifolds does not enjoy smooth rigidity. 
              Whether or not  the class of closed double coset manifolds, or the class of 
              closed complete affine flat manifolds, are smoothly rigid remains  an open
              question which Jones intends to pursue.       Dusa McDuff: A symplectic
              structure is a very basic kind of  geometric structure which underlies all the
              equations of  classical and quantum physics.  In the last ten years, new tools 
              have been developed which allow mathematicians for the first time  to gain some
              understanding of the global meaning of this kind of  structure.   One focus of
              McDuff's work is the geometric  explora tion of the concept of energy.  In
              physics this is the  driving force of movement (of systems ranging from the
              planetary  system to plasmas).  The new methods of symplectic topology make  it
              possible in some cases to estimate the minimum energy required  to accomplish a
              certain movement.  This work is very basic and  should eventually have
              important implications in the study of  physical systems.  Another focus of her
              work is the attempt to  understand what a symplectic structure really is by
              investigating  the geometric properties of the spaces which are symplectic. 
              The  idea is that these spaces are the embodiment of the abstract idea  of a
              symplectic structure.  Lowell Jones: In 1829 and 1832 the  mathematicians N.
              Lobachevsky and J. Bolyai independently solved  a two thousand year old
              mathematical problem by verifying that  Euclid's fifth axiom for plane geometry
              is independent from the  first four of Euclid's axioms.  They did this by
              investigating a  new type of geometry having "negative curvature."  Today the 
              2-dimensional geometries of Lobachevsky and Bolyai are important  special cases
              of the larger class of geometric structures having  "non-positive curvature,"
              which can occur in all the higher  dimensions, and which have been the focus of
              a tremendous amount  of research over the last forty years.  An important theme
              in  this research has been that each such geometric structure has an 
              associated algebraic structure (called the "fundamental group")  which acts as
              a sort of genetic code for the underlying geometric  structure.  Although it is
              far from true that the fundamental  group always determines the underlying
              geometric structure, this  is true in some special cases.  Jones has recently
              verified that  the fundamental group always does completely determine the 
              "topological nature" of the underlying geometric structure.  To  paraphrase
              this, Jones has shown that the fundamental group  determines the rough outline
              of the underlying geometric  structure, even though it does not de termine all
              the details of  the geometric structure.  ***
