Title       : Mathematical Sciences: PDE and Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9401756

Award Number: 9401756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery D. McNeal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401756  McNeal       This award supports mathematical research on problems 
              arising in the study of the relationship between the geometry of  domains in
              complex n-dimensional space and analytic quantities  associated with these
              domains - such as the Bergman and Szego  kernels and peak functions.  Three
              particular problems will be  addressed in this project.  The first concerns the
              boundary  behavior of the Bergman kernel function and its derivatives on 
              smoothly bounded, pseudoconvex domains.  The second involves  estimates of the
              Holder norm of solutions to the  Cauchy-Riemann equations on smoothly bounded
              convex domains  and the third relates to the mapping properties of the Szego 
              projection operator on various Banach spaces.  The methods  employed will
              center on the relationship between regularity for  solutions to certain systems
              of partial differential equations  and the geometry of the boundary of the
              domain in question.  Several complex variables arose at the beginning of the
              century  as a natural outgrowth of studies of functions of one complex 
              variable.  It became clear early on that the theory  differed widely from it
              predecessor.  The underlying geometry was  far more difficult to grasp and the
              function theory had far more  affinity with partial differential operators of
              first order.  It  thus grew as a hybrid subject combining deep characteristics 
              of differential geometry and differential equations.  Many of  the fundamental
              structures were defined in the last three  decades. Current studies still
              concentrate on understanding these  basic mathematical forms.  ***
