Title       : The Identification and Characterization of Cytosolic FactorsInvolved in
               Targeting of Nuclear-Encoded Precursors to Higher Plant Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9401840

Award Number: 9401840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry D. Bruce bbruce@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9401840  Bruce, Barry, D.    This is a start-up grant for a Post Doctoral Fellow
              in  Plant Biology.  In plants and other eukaryotes, the  translation of nuclear
              encoded genes can be divided into two  diverging pathways: one, where proteins
              are translated on  ribosomes associated with the endoplasmic reticulum and are 
              destined either for the ER/Golgi complex for secretion, or  for the plasma
              membrane; and a second pathway, where  proteins are synthesized on free
              ribosomes in the cytoplasm.  In plants, proteins synthesized on free
              cytoplasmic  ribosomes can either remain in the cytoplasm, or being  imported
              into one of four different organelles: the nucleus,  the peroxisome, the
              mitochondria or the chloroplast via a  post translational pathway. This post
              translational import  requires a precursor form of the protein containing a 
              targeting sequence which directs it to a specific organelle.  It has been
              proposed that one prerequisite for the import of  these precursors is that they
              maintain an import competent  configuration.  It is commonly accepted today
              that import of  proteins into mitochondria requires that they be in a 
              destabilized conformation.  The role of protein conformation  on import into
              chloroplasts is much less certain.  The goal  of this proposal is to determine
              what defines the import  competence of chloroplast targeted precursors, and
              also what  cytosolic factors are involved in maintaining this  competence.  The
              small subunit of ribulose bisphosphate  carboxylase has been chosen as a model
              to address this  question.  The investigation will focus on purification of 
              cytosolic factors that interact with the transit peptide for  chloroplastic
              transport; on identification of trans-acting  chloroplast import factors by the
              two-hybrid cloning  technique, that allows specific protein-protein
              interactions  to be identified in vivo through the reconstitution of a 
              transport activator; and assaying in vitro the soluble  factors in increasing
              import competence of the precursor of  the sma ll subunit of ribulose
              bisphosphate carboxylase.  %%%  The PI made good progress during his post
              doctoral research  on the problems concerning protein import into organelles, 
              and obtained results which suggest that the conformational  requirements for
              chloroplast import and mitochondrial import  may be different.  The goal of
              this project is to  investigate the specific requirements for protein transport
               into chloroplasts.  This is the topic that the PI started  during his post
              doctoral research in the Keegstra  laboratory.  He will be taking the project
              with him to the  University of Tennessee at Knoxville, where he starts a 
              tenure track position in January 1994.  This start-up grant  for NSF Post
              Doctoral fellows in Plant Biology therefore  will be essential to help him
              establish his own laboratory,  and also scientific status.  ***
