Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1995   
File        : a9401252

Award Number: 9401252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Palle E. Jorgensen palle-jorgensen@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401252  Jorgensen       Professor Jorgensen will continue his research on 
              representations and harmonic analysis of algebras arising in  deformation
              theory and quantum group duality. The emphasis will  be on identifying positive
              energy representations, putting at  disposal methods from operators in Hilbert
              space. The problems  include: stability of isomorphism classes under variation
              of the  deformations and also continuity as fields of C*-algebras for 
              variations within the stability domain. He will also work on  spectral duality
              for Borel sets in n-dimensional Euclidean  space of finite measure; and, more
              generally, on duality theory  for operator algebras, e.g., for periodic
              elliptic operators.  The isomorphism invariants for spectral pairs turn out to
              be  affine fractals with self-dualiy in their harmonic analysis.  Jorgensen
              plans to study this, as self-duality appears also to be  an important tool for
              other fractal objects arising in geometric  iteration theory. The methods
              include a recently discovered  (by Jorgensen in joint work with S. Pedersen)
              duality for pairs  of representations of the Cuntz-C*-algebras. This project 
              involves multi-dimensional wavelet generators. The method of  wavelets is a new
              mathematical field which, in the past few  years, has attracted much attention
              from natural scientists,  engineers, and experts in signal processing. Among
              new  mathematical disciplines, it is unique in providing so  many immediate and
              medium-term applications in so many diverse  fields. With wavelets, one can now
              expect, for example, clearer  transmission and more bands in such down-to-earth
              applications  as cellular phones, high-definition television and  high-fidelity
              music reproduction. Wavelets appear to imitate  biological processes like the
              eye and ear in that they  concentrate on borderlines or edges. Thus they are
              potentially  the natural interface for neural nets, the brain imitators of the 
              computer world. Though wavelet theory as a scientific discipline  was "born" in
              1988, it  has its roots in the work of geophysicist  Jean Morlet, who devised
              an ad hoc wavelet-type tool to help  find underground oil deposits. The problem
              involved was a  familiar problem of inverse scattering. This is the point at 
              which Jorgensen's research in operator theory and harmonic  analysis can be
              applied.  ***
