Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Solutions for Functional DifferentialEquations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9401823

Award Number: 9401823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Nussbaum nussbaum@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401823  Nussbaum       Many natural phenomena, for example, in biology, seem
              best  described by nonlinear "functional differential equations" or  "FDE's". 
              Roughly speaking, FDE's are equations in which an  unknown function of time t,
              x(t), appears and x'(t), the  instantaneous rate of change of x(t) with time,
              depends in a  specified way not only on x(t) but also on the past history of 
              the function x. For example,in some models the rate of increase  of a
              population of a class of mature red blood cells at time t  may well depend on
              population levels of those same mature cells  six to ten days earlier. A
              rigorous mathematical theory of of  nonlinear FDE's poses serious challenges
              and various equations of  interest in applications have been neglected. We
              propose to study  some classes of examples which were, until quite recently, 
              considered intractable, but for which it now seems possible to  obtain a wide
              variety of surprisingly detailed theorems.         The starting point of this
              proposal is the study of the  equation (*), ax'(t) = f(x(t),x(t-r)), r =
              r(x(t)), where f and r  are given functions and a>0. Equation (*) and
              generalizations of  equation (*) arise in a variety of applications. In joint
              work  with John Mallet-Paret, the author has shown that, under natural 
              assumptions on f and r and for all sufficiently small a, equation  (*) has
              nonconstant periodic solutions. These periodic solutions  often seem to have
              strong global stability properties.  Furthermore, in many cases it has proved
              possible to determine  the limiting profile of shape of such periodic solutions
              as a  approaches zero. In this proposal we consider many questions  about
              equation (*), and we discuss possible extensions of results  for (*) to much
              more general classes of equations.
