Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Some Problems on the Interface Between Geometry and
               Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1994      
File        : a9401058

Award Number: 9401058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Thomas Farrell farrell@math.binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401058  Farrell       F.T. Farrell in collaboration with L.E. Jones (SUNY at 
              StonyBrook) will attempt to verify their conjectured calculation  of the
              algebraic K- and L-theories of the integral group ring of  a given group in
              terms of the K- and L-theories of the integral  group rings of a class of
              subgroups of that group.  This class  consists of all the virtually cyclic
              subgroups of the given  group.  They envision applications of this work to
              differential  geometry, in particular, to questions of rigidity.       The
              objective is to classify geometric objects by  numerical invariants.  The
              geometric objects are Riemannian  manifolds, spaces which locally resemble
              Euclidean space except  that the notion of distance may be warped, and they
              arise  naturally and ubiquitously in the mathematical formulation of  physical
              theories.  Thus, as is familiar from the general theory  of relativity, a space
              can be curved; e.g., it could be a sphere  or a torus (doughnut surface).      
               Some basic numerical invariants of such a space are its  fundamental group and
              its sectional curvatures.  For example, the  curvature of the torus changes
              continuously from point to point,  varying between positive and negative
              numbers, whereas the  curvature of the sphere of radius 1 is identically 1. 
              Farrell  and Jones have shown that two closed negatively curved Riemannian 
              manifolds with the same fundamental group invariant are  homeomorphic; i.e.,
              there is a continuous one-to-one mapping  between their points.  (The case of
              3- and 4-dimensional  manifolds is still open.)  But they gave examples where
              the  mapping can never be smooth.  A search will be made for  additional
              numerical invariants guaranteeing a smooth mapping,  which is highly
              significant for any physical applications.  ***
