Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Complex Analysis and Complex Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1996     
File        : a9401398

Award Number: 9401398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric D. Bedford bedford@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401398  Bedford       This award supports mathematical research on problems
              arising  in the theory of several complex variables.  The work will be  carried
              out in three directions.  In the first, work will be done  on applications of
              the methods of complex analysis to the dynamics  of polynomial mappings for two
              complex variables.  The mappings are  assumed to be univalent.  Central to this
              study will be the use of  pluri-potential theory analogous to the impressive
              use of potential  theory in the study of one-dimensional dynamics.  In the
              second  direction, work will continue on the classification of domains with 
              noncompact automorphism groups.  Since it is trivial to construct  nonsmooth
              domains with such automorphism groups, attention will be  restricted to domains
              with smooth boundaries.  The first two  domains addressed will be those which
              are convex and those with  real analytic boundaries.  In the third direction,
              the use of Levi  flat surfaces will be studied in connection with the corona
              theorem  for bounded analytic functions.  A central goal of the work is the 
              generalization of Wolff's d-bar approach to the corona problem on  simply
              connected domains to multiply connected domains and Riemann  surfaces.  Several
              complex variables arose at the beginning of the  century as a natural outgrowth
              of studies of functions of one  complex variable.  It became clear early on
              that the theory  differed widely from it predecessor.  The underlying geometry
              was  far more difficult to grasp and the function theory had far more  affinity
              with partial differential operators of first order.  It  thus grew as a hybrid
              subject combining deep characteristics of  differential geometry and
              differential equations.  Many of  the fundamental structures were defined in
              the last three decades.  Current studies still concentrate on understanding
              these  basic mathematical forms.  ***
