Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Oscillatory Integrals in Harmonic Analysis and Their
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1994      
File        : a9401277

Award Number: 9401277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43166              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yibiao Pan yibiao+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401277  Pan       This award supports mathematical research on problems 
              arising in the theory of harmonic analysis.  The work revolves  around ideas
              relating to oscillatory integrals and their  applications.  Oscillatory
              integrals are an essential part of  harmonic analysis.  There are two kinds. 
              The first involves a  single function acting as a generalized Fourier transform
              with  nonlinear exponent.  The second is given by an integral operator  with a
              kernel carrying oscillatory factors.  This project  involves studies of both
              kinds.   An important class of  oscillatory integrals of the second kind is the
              class oscillatory  singular integrals.  As a combination of oscillatory
              integral and  singular integral, these operators are intimately connected to 
              problems concerning the convergence of Fourier series, singular  harmonic
              analysis on the Heisenberg group and other nilpotent Lie  groups and singular
              Radon transforms.  The project involves a  systematic study of oscillatory
              integrals to examine their  boundedness properties when applied to Lebesgue
              spaces, weak  (1,1)-boundedness, boundedness on Hardy spaces, optimal decay in 
              the quadratic norm and applications to convolution with measures  supported on
              submanifolds.       Harmonic analysis combines those elements of mathematics 
              best exemplifying the ideas of synthesis.  One seeks to decompose  complex
              problems into fundamental components.  These components  are then analyzed for
              their basic characteristics.  Finally, the  solution is reconstructed through a
              recombination of the  components.  The Fourier series and Fourier transform are
               examples of tools used in this context; one discrete , the other  representing
              a continuous decomposition. More recently the theory  of oscillatory integrals
              added new dimensions to some of the more  classical approaches to harmonic
              analysis.  ***
