Title       : GEM: Model of the Low-Latitude Boundary Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1996      
File        : a9401056

Award Number: 9401056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bengt U. Sonnerup   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1323,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                It  is  proposed  to  develop  a  numerical  model  of  the  low-  latitude 
              boundary  layer  (LLBL),  located  in  the  equatorial   region  of  the 
              Earth's  magnetoshpere  adjacent  to  its  outer  boundary,  the  magnetopause,
               and  the  coupling  of  that  layer   to  the  dayside  auroral  ionosphere 
              via  field-aligned   currents.    The  model  is  intended  as  a  building 
              block  in   the  construction  of  a  global  geospace  circulation  model  
              (GGCM)  with  predictive  capability.    Two  versions  of  the   LLBL  model 
              will  be  developed.    First,  a  relatively   sophisticated  self-consistent 
              model  of  steady  plasma  flow,   magnetic  fields  and  currents  will  be 
              completed  and  its   parameters  constrained  by  comparison  with 
              observations.    In   this  model,  partial  differential  equations  are 
              solved   numerically  in  the  boundary  layer  approximation.    On  the  
              basis  of  results  and  experience  gained  from  this  model  a   simpler 
              version,  based  on  ordinary  differential  equations,   will  be  developed 
              for  use  in  parallel  with,  and  coupled   to,  existing  models,  or 
              models  under  development  as  part   of  the  GEM  program,  of  internal 
              magnetospheric  convection   on  one  side  of  the  layer  and  external 
              solar-wind  plasma   flow  on  its  other  side.    This  simpler  version  of 
              the   boundary-layer  model  will  have  as  its  basic  theoretical  
              elements:  (i)  the  equation  of  momentum  conservation  in  the   flow 
              direction  integrated  over  the  thickness  of  the   boundary  layer  and 
              (ii)  polynomial  (or  other  parametric)   representations  of  variations 
              across  the  boundary  layer,   with  free  parameters  that  will  allow  the 
              model  to   accommodate,  perhaps  iteratively,  boundary  conditions  provided
                by  an  internal  circulation  model  and  an  external  flow   model.    The
               simpler  model  which  is  expected  to  be   numerically  fast  will  be 
              benchmarked  by  comparison  w ith  the   self-consistent  boundary  layer 
              code  (which  is  computationally   too  slow  to  be  used  in  a  GGCM),  as 
              well  as  with   observed  ionospheric  and  equatorial  signatures  of  the 
              layer.
