Title       : Environmentally Benign Immobilized Organometallic Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1996  
File        : a9401572

Award Number: 9401572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Gladysz gladysz@rhenium.chem.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9187,9223,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In this Environmentally Benign Chemical Synthesis and Processing project,
              supported by the  Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program,
              academic chemist, Professor  John Gladysz of the University of Utah and
              industrial chemist, Dr. Istvan Horvath of Exxon  Corporate Research Laboratory
              will undertake the development of new solid acid catalysts.   These acid
              catalysts will be based upon protic organometallic compounds immobilized on
              solid  polymeric supports such as polystyrene and Nafion.  It is expected that
              these acids will exhibit  new modes of reactivity that will involve both the
              acidic proton and the metal center.  Success  in these endeavors could result
              in processes that produce less acidic wastes than current methods.  
              Immobilization of the organometallic acids will require the development of new
              ligands and  methods for attaching them to the polymeric supports.  Polystyrene
              will be derivatized with  fluorinated polydentate organophosphine or
              cyclopentadienyl ligands, which will be used to bind  metal hydride species. 
              Alternative systems will be based upon Nafion, which has been  derivatized at
              the sulfonamide group with donor groups such that metal hydride species can be 
              covalently bound.  New compositions will be characterized by infrared and NMR
              spectroscopies,   by measurements of Hammett acidities, and by screening for
              catalytic activity in alkylation  reactions such as those that are required for
              petroleum feedstock conversions.    The majority of known industrial chemical
              manufacturing processes involve some type of  catalysis.  A large number of
              these catalytic processes involve the use of strong acids.  Those  that employ
              soluble acids often generate large quantities of highly acidic waste that must
              be  treated to reduce its acidity prior to disposal.  New solid-phase acids
              that may replace these are  highly desirable.  This project undertakes
              fundamental studies of new materials that ultimate  provide the basis for more
              environmentally benign manufacture o f important commodity  chemicals.
