Title       : Borohydrides as Reducing Agents in the Synthesis of Inorganic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1996     
File        : a9401999

Award Number: 9401999
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arumugam Manthiram rmanth@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Manthiram  This proposal addresses the use of borohydrides as reducing agents 
              in aqueous solutions to obtain reduced transition metal oxides and 
              ceramic-metal and metal-metal nanocomposites at ambient  temperatures. It is
              proposed to synthesize several novel reduced  oxides of tungsten and molybdenum
              and vanadium by a careful control  of experimental conditions such as pH,
              concentration and nature of  the reactants, and aerobic vs anaerobic
              environment. The  borohydride reducing agents will also be used to synthesize
              at  ambient temperatures ceramic-metal and metal-metal nanocomposites  that
              exhibit interesting magnetic characteristics. The products  will be
              characterized by X-ray diffraction, thermal analysis,  chemical analysis,
              spectroscopic techniques, electron microscopy,  electrical transport, and
              magnetic measurements. The observed  properties will be correlated with crystal
              chemistry, chemical  composition and microstructure. A thorough
              characterization of the  products formed will provide an understanding of the
              chemistry  involved in the borohydride reduction-reaction process. Such an 
              understanding might provide important insights in exploiting  borohydrides for
              the synthesis of new inorganic materials. In  general, the proposed studies are
              of interest because of their  technological applications such as in magnetic
              recording. The  proposed exploratory research may lead to a kinetic
              accessibility  of new phases that may otherwise be unstable at higher 
              temperatures.   %%%  Inorganic solids are generally synthesized by reaction
              between the  components at high temperatures to overcome the diffusional 
              limitations. Such harsh reaction conditions not only result in  products with
              larger particle size and inhomogeneity, but also lead  to an inaccessibility of
              metastable phases and unusual valence  states. This proposal addresses the use
              of borohydrides as reducing  agents in aqueous solutions to obtain several
              novel reduced  transition metal oxides and ceramic-metal and metal-metal  nano
              composites at ambient temperatures.  In general, the proposed  studies are of
              interest because of their technological applications  such as in magnetic
              recording. The proposed exploratory research  may lead to a kinetic
              accessibility of new phases that may  otherwise be unstable at higher
              temperatures.
