Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hyperbolic Systems of Conservation Laws: Theory and
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9401003

Award Number: 9401003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philippe Le Floch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401003  Le Floch      This proposal is motivated by the numerical difficulties 
              arising in Computational Fluid Dynamics, and more generally in  continuum
              mechanics, when computing solutions to nonlinear  hyperbolic systems of PDE's.
              The solutions to such a system are  discontinuous, and, being not uniquely
              determined by their  initial data, are selected via the so-called entropy
              criterion.  While the entropy criterion is treated in the literature as an 
              extra condition that is checked afterwards, the P.I. developed  approaches
              where the entropy criterion plays the very central  role in analyzing the
              properties of a scheme, or in the  derivation of the scheme itself. The
              emphasis here will be on  establishing the entropy criterion and the nonlinear
              stability of  high order accurate schemes for multidimensional systems of 
              conservation laws.  This work is aimed at clarifying the role of  the so-called
              entropy criterion for the numerical approximation  of hyperbolic systems of
              conservation laws. The P.I. developed  new methods of analysis and numerical
              analysis, and established  that several numerical schemes are consistent with
              the entropy  criterion. Such a result guarantees that a method is nonlinearly 
              stable, and produces the physically meaningful discontinuous  solutions. The
              techniques also provide new insight on the schemes  used for shock wave
              calculations, and suggest possible  improvements. The focus here will be on
              developing flux-splitting  methods, second-order Godunov-type schemes, and
              truly  multidimensional schemes for systems of conservation laws. The  analysis
              will include concept such as: entropy dissipation  estimates, tracking of
              monotonicity regions, the compensated  compactness method, the measure-valued
              solutions, etc. Further  insight about the nonlinear stability will be obtained
              by  considering the issue of uniqueness and continuous dependence  with respect
              to the initial condition.
