Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mapping Class Groups and TeichmuellerSpaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1994      
File        : a9401284

Award Number: 9401284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolai V. Ivanov ivanov@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401284  Ivanov       The principal investigator, Nikolai Ivanov, intends to 
              continue his work on the mapping class groups of surfaces, braid  groups of
              surfaces, complexes of curves of surfaces, and  Teichmueller spaces.  The
              investigator intends to concentrate on  the interrelationships between these
              notions in order to shed new  light on the algebraic structure of the mapping
              class groups of  surfaces on the one hand, and the global geometry of the 
              Teichmueller spaces on the other hand.  An important guiding  principle here is
              a still fairly mysterious analogy between the  mapping class groups and
              Teichmueller spaces on the one side and  arithmetic groups and symmetric spaces
              on the other side,  established in earlier works of the principal investigator
              and  other mathematicians.  In particular, the principal investigator  intends
              to prove that braid groups of surfaces have only the  obvious automorphisms,
              and that there are no nontrivial  homomorphisms from the arithmetic groups of
              rank at least two  into mapping class groups.  The principal investigator
              intends to  continue his study of the rigidity properties of the mapping  class
              groups and Teichmueller spaces.  He also intends to give a  general explanation
              of various phenomena in the topology of  surfaces exhibiting stabilization over
              the genus, including  presentations of the mapping class groups by generators
              and  relations and the quantum field theory representations.  Finally,  the
              investigator will continue his investigation of rigidity and  stability
              phenomena in the universal Teichmueller spaces.       Mapping class groups and
              Teichmueller spaces serve as a  meeting ground for several of the main branches
              of mathematics,  including topology, complex analysis, and algebraic geometry. 
               Recently they have also proved to be important in some questions  of
              theoretical physics.  These objects in a subtle way both  resemble and differ
              from the much more well understood arithmetic  groups and symmetric spaces. 
              Various approaches to m ade this  analogy (and difference!) precise and
              explicit form the core of  the project.   While symmetric spaces form a well
              established  pool of possible spatial images investigated in mathematics (and 
              arithmetic groups to a big extent control their structure),  Teichmueller
              spaces gradually emerge as a new, richer and equally  important pattern (and
              mapping class groups are similarly  expected to control their structure).  The
              principal investigator  intends to concentate on two of the most interesting
              and striking  properties of these objects: rigidity and stability.  Because of 
              rigidity, the structure of these objects is expected to be  completely
              determined by their shape only.  Stability tells us  that when these objects
              become more and more complicated with a  natural parameter (genus) growing,
              their main characteristics  cease to change at a certain point.  The stability
              phenomena is  expected to be relevant not only to the mathematical but also to 
              the quantum physics applications of the mapping class groups and  Teichmueller
              spaces.  ***
