Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Meromorphic Solutions of DifferentialEquations and
               Spectral Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1994     
File        : a9401816

Award Number: 9401816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60040              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudi Weikard rudi@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Weikard  9401816       This award supports mathematical research on problems in
              the  theory of differential equations, especially relating to the  spectral
              theory of second order equations.  The subject has a  long, distinguished,
              history in which significant emphasis was  placed on the study of the spectrum
              of Schrodinger operators  during much of the current century.  Fundamental
              advances were  made following discoveries in the 1960's of the relationship of 
              finite gap potentials, Weierstrass elliptic functions and inverse  problems. 
              The renewed interest in finite gap potentials  was intensified when it was
              shown how potentials can have a  finite number of bands if and only if they
              satisfy some equation  in the Korteweg-deVriess hierarchy.  Until very
              recently, all  work focused on real-valued potentials.  The isospectral problem
               and Korteweg-deVriess flow arising from complex-valued initial  data was
              studied in the 1980's, marking the starting point for  this research.  A new
              approach has been opened based on a  classical theorem of Picard concerning
              differential equations  with elliptic coefficients all of whose solutions are 
              meromorphic.  This approach promises to be a powerful tool for  tackling some
              of the open problems in the field, such as  practical computation of band edges
              (by reduction to a linear  algebraic eigenvalue problem) and the classification
              of  isospectral manifolds of elliptic finite- gap potentials.   Moreover it
              sheds light on an unexpected relationship between  spectral properties in the
              algebraic as well as in the functional  analytic sense of differential
              operators and global analytic  properties of solutions of the associated
              differential equations.       Differential equations form a basis for
              mathematical  modeling of the physical world.  The role of mathematical 
              analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is to  provide
              qualitative and quantitative information about the  solutions.  This may
              include answers to questions about  uniqueness, smoothness  and growth.  In
              addition, analysis often  develops methods for approximation of solutions and
              estimates on  the accuracy of these approximations.  ***
