Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topological Applications of Algebraic Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1998      
File        : a9401533

Award Number: 9401533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paulo Lima-Filho   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9401533  Lima-Filho       The investigator will continue to explore topological 
              properties of the groups of algebraic cycles on algebraic  varieties.  He has
              found this to be a mine of applications to  topological and algebraic geometric
              problems.  Algebraic cycles  are seen as a topological group functor from the
              category of  algebraic varieties to the category of group objects in the 
              category of CW-complexes.  This functor associates principal  fibrations to
              closed inclusions, and their homotopy groups  provide a homology theory for
              algebraic varieties which he wishes  to understood more deeply.  An
              intersection theory for arbitrary  varieties will be developed, generalizing
              and simplifying an  existing theory for quasiprojective varieties.  On the
              purely  topological side, the investigator's research has created  equivariant
              infinite loop spaces using algebraic cycles, and the  generalized cohomology
              theories thus obtained have been related  with several other theories.  As an
              outcome of this interplay  between new and old theories, he has already
              answered  long-standing conjectures about the total Chern class map and is 
              presently computing several examples where algebraic geometry,  group
              representation theory, and homotopy theory come together to  illuminate the
              coefficient systems involved, the associated  transfer maps, and so forth.     
               A fundamental aspect and guiding principle in the  investigator's research is
              its unifying character, under which  diverse areas of mathematics come into
              play and yield  multifaceted applications of his algebraic techniques.  He thus
               obtains a highly desirable economy of thought, in the sense that  a concise
              and unified approach to various seemingly disparate  questions attains deep
              results about each in a short period of  time.  He starts by endowing basic
              objects in algebraic geometry,  the algebraic cycles, with a topology which
              turns out to have  remarkable properties.  He then realizes that these cycles 
              provide new invariants not only for alge braic varieties (of  fundamental
              importance to algebraic geometers), but that they  also deeply relate with
              ongoing mainstream research in stable  homotopy theory, a major topic in
              algebraic topology.  Other  natural structures arise in this setting as he
              explores  constructions involving his algebraic cycles.  The study of  cycles
              from an equivariant point of view thus also provides  insight into various
              aspects of the theory of representation of  finite groups and group cohomology,
              enhancing the usefulness of  his unified approach.  ***
