Title       : Survey of Prokaryotic Marine Plankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9401110

Award Number: 9401110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jed A. Fuhrman fuhrman@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9117,9169,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9401110  Fuhrman   Although prokaryotes are ubiquitous and immensely important
              in numerous biological processes, the diversity of naturally occurring marine
              populations is poorly known.  The reasons for this include a general lack of
              recognizable morphological differences, difficulties in culturability required
              for standard identification, and questions about proper classification.  This
              proposed renewal project will survey planktonic prokaryotes in diverse U.S. and
              remote ocean locations, classifying them by means of 16S rRNA gene sequences. 
              This approach has provided a valuable and extremely broad phylogenetic
              framework of classification, and is the only one at this time that can be done
              without culturing the organisms.  The results are in the form of readily
              distributed sequence data, and interpretation within the context of a large
              existing database is via phylogenetic analysis computer programs.  Previous
              work (in our lab and others) has successfully applied this approach to about 15
              marine samples, and  major new taxa have already been discovered (e.g. 3 major
              groups of archaebacteria, a few potentially phylum or class level eubacterial
              groups).  The novel archaebacteria dominate the deep-sea clones from the 4 deep
              Atlantic and Pacific samples examined so far, and may be the most abundant
              group of organisms on Earth.  Results suggest that it is highly likely that
              other novel major taxa, as well as additional members of better-characterized
              ones, are awaiting discovery in regions not yet studied.  This proposal is to
              extend the global coverage of these studies to surface and deep waters of South
              Australia (SE Indian Ocean), the Greenland Sea, the  North Polar Ocean, the
              Northwestern Pacific and Western Tropical Pacific (coral reef), the Arabian
              Sean (NW Indian Ocean), the Antarctic, and Gulf of Mexico, all remote from
              locations that have previously been examined by such approaches. 
              Cost-effective remote sampling will be done by colleagues already studying
              these areas for their own work.   Also proposed is repeated sampling from
              different seasons in California coastal waters, to cover temporal shifts in
              local microbial composition.  The results can be used in tests of hypotheses in
              ecology, biogeography, and phylogeny, but primarily will serve as framework for
              future such studies.
