Title       : Photocatalytic Properties of Titanium Dioxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1995  
File        : a9401562

Award Number: 9401562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron Wold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Wold  This research focusses on the investigation of the photocatalytic 
              activity of titanium and related compounds toward the degradation  of organic
              contaminants present in aqueous solutions at low  concentrations.  Previous
              studies have shown that the activity of  titanium oxide is dependent on the
              method of preparation, and  that the best samples are obtained from a volatile
              precursor.  Furthermore, the formation of active surface states can be 
              enhanced by the addition of a small quantity (~3%) of a   transition metal
              oxide containing a high formal valence state  metal, e.a. tungsten oxides or
              molybdenum oxides. This increase  in active site formation has been related to
              an increase in Lewis  acidity as evidenced by increased reactivity with 
              n-butylamine.  The proposed research will, therefore, be directed as follows:
              1)  attempts will be made to prepare titanium with a higher  photocatalytic
              activity than the best titanium oxide samples  studied to  date; 2) a second
              group of oxides will also be  prepared by the use of supercritical carbon
              dioxide and they  involve two oxides which do not form a ternary phase in bulk 
              form; and 3)the work will be extended to a family of compounds  closely related
              to rutile in which three titanium ions are  replaced by two pentavalent and one
              divalent ions.  %%%    The photocatalytic oxidation of organic compounds in an
              aqueous  solution containing a suspension of titanium(IV) oxide is a 
              comparatively new method for the removal of impurities from  water. The
              photoactivating light required is sunlight or near UV.  Many organic compounds
              have been shown to be oxidized to carbon  dioxide by this method. It has
              potential  application in the  treatment of both waste and drinking water.
              Titanium oxide thin  film coating on floating beads has potential to
              photocatalyze the  oxidation of organic compounds floating on water, such as
              those  typically resulting from an oil spill. This research focusses on  the
              investigation of the  photocatalytic activity of Titaniu m and  related
              compounds toward the degradation of organic contaminants  present in aqueous
              solutions at low concentrations.
