Title       : A Group Proposal to Improve the Existing Research Infrastructure at NYU Robotics
               Laboratory with Applications to Robotics, Manufacturing, Visualization and
               Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1991     
File        : a9022527

Award Number: 9022527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56067              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
              Zexiang Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob T. Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Perlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bhubaneswar Mishra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This equipment award, for robotics and vision equipment,                  
              supports research in rapid prototyping, visualization, automated               
              manufacturing, and dexterous manipulation.  The visualization work             
              aims to create an electronic environment for the building of                   
              objects to be manufactured.  Rapid prototyping occurs when the                 
              electronic version of the object is translated into codes and                  
              fixturing sequences that enable the object to be manufactured.                 
              When this process is fully automated and optimized, then the goal              
              of automated manufacturing has been met.  The work on dexterous                
              manipulation is tied into the manufacturing process because the                
              factory of the future will need complex robots that are able to                
              pick up and handle a variety of objects.                                       
                   This research project is one of the few projects in the United            
              States that addresses the full range of issues that need to be                 
              addressed in automated manufacturing.  The equipment will support              
              basic research on vision (robots need to see), manipulation (robots            
              need to grasp objects), machine tooling and planning from                      
              electronic media (allowing the rapid development of products), and             
              factory task optimization (allowing the inexpensive, high quality,             
              mass production of products).
