Title       : Laser Processing and Characterization of Diamond and Boron Nitride Films and
               Related Semiconductor and Superconductor Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1991      
File        : a9022674

Award Number: 9022674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagannadham Kasichainula jag_kasichainula@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant supports research by Dr. Jagannadham Kasichainula and               
              co-workers at North Carolina State University which deals with                 
              laser processing and characterization of diamond and boron nitride             
              films, and related semiconductor and superconductor structures.                
              Diamond thin films have been synthesized using plasma-assisted and             
              hot filament-assisted chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods.                 
              Laser-assisted HFCVD has been used to remove graphitic phase                   
              codeposited with diamond by etching with pulsed laser irradiation.             
              Single chamber in situ processing techniques have also been                    
              developed with which multiple layers can be deposited sequentially             
              via laser ablation.  These methods will now be applied to diamond              
              deposition on such surfaces as SiC and YBa2Cu3O7 high-Tc                       
              superconducting thin films, and to formation of laser-assisted                 
              ohmic contacts on diamond films.  These films will be                          
              characterized by ultrahigh resolution and analytical transmission              
              electron microscopy techniques.  To determine atomic structure of              
              defects and interfaces, a three-step iterative procedure will be               
              employed, involving atomic structure calculations, image                       
              simulation, and comparison between simulated and experimental                  
              images.  Samples will be extensively characterized by optical                  
              techniques such as Raman spectroscopy, and correlations between                
              microstructure, microhardness, and electrical conductivity will                
              be measured.                                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              This award is in the Electronic Materials Program of the Division              
              of Materials Research.  The research supported is directed at                  
              synthesis and characterization of thin films of diamond, boron                 
              nitride, and depositions of diamond and boron nitride on semi- and             
              superconductor surfaces.  This research is of importance because               
              the unique mechanical, electrical, optical, thermal, and chemical              
              properties of diamond and its boron nitride relative make them                 
              ideal materials for applications as diverse as wear-resistant                  
              coatings and advanced semiconductors.  For polycrystalline films,              
              key current research issues are those of microstructure control in             
              such areas as grain size and defects.  Control of these properties             
              in thin film fabrication is critical to performance.
