Title       : Robust Controller Design for Systems with Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1993       
File        : a9022766

Award Number: 9022766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305446             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manfred Morari morari M@Caltech                        818-568-8743  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research project is aimed at developing process control                    
                                                                                            
              algorithms to handle both constraints and uncertainty.                         
              Constraints affect controller design because while the dynamic                 
                                                                                             
              behavior of many processes can be accurately described by a                    
              linear model, system operation is always subject to                            
              constraints which are nonlinear elements.  The controller has                  
                                                                                             
              to be designed to handle these nonlinearities.  Such                           
              constraints may arise from actuator saturation or processing                   
                                                                                             
              limitations (certain temperatures and pressures may not be                     
              exceeded, for example).  Uncertainty is a factor because the                   
                                                                                             
              control designer never has a perfect dynamic description                       
              (model) of any real industrial process.  The system is                         
              approximated and model order and parameters always contain                     
              some error, and may even change with operating conditions.                     
                                                                                             
              The PI plans to implement two techniques for dealing with such                 
                                                                                             
              problems, Model Predictive Control (MPC) and Anti-Windup                       
              Bumpless-Transfer (AWBT).  MPC requires that the control                       
              objective is expressed in terms of a single quadratic                          
              objective function and the constraints are translated into                     
              linear inequality constraints.  AWBT controller design                         
              proceeds in two steps where first an acceptable linear robust                  
                                                                                             
              controller is designed neglecting all nonlinear loop elements                  
                                                                                             
              and objectives.  Then a compensation scheme is added which                     
              deals with the nonlinear issues such as constraints.  This                     
              research will proceed in three steps:                                          
                                                                                             
              (1) A new robust linear MPC controller will be designed.  It                   
                                                                                             
              will be implemented in a nonlinear manner through an optimizer                 
                                                                                             
              which aims at satisfying all process constraints while                         
              minimizing the deviation from linear behavior.                                 
                                                                                             
              (2) Development of an AWBT synthesis procedure that balances                   
              the                                                                            
              trade-offs between smooth switching performance, measurement                   
              noise                                                                          
              sensitivity and robustness.                                                    
                                                                                             
              (3) Development of mechanisms to translate practical                           
              objectives and constraints into an MPC or AWBT formalism in an                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              effective manner.
