Title       : Generating Graphic Sequences for the Visual Exploration of Correlation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9022845

Award Number: 9022845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Monmonier mon2ier@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Geographic information systems (GISs) have provided profound              
              advances in computational capacities to store, manipulate, and present         
              spatial data over the last few decades, and their continued development        
              in future years will continue to affect the ways that people view and          
              analyze spatial patterns and processes.  Rapidly increasing use of GISs        
              has been matched by development of increasingly detailed spatial               
              databases.  These databases contain enormous amounts of information,           
              which greatly enhances possibilities for addressing fundamental                
              scientific questions, but their size and complexity makes                      
              identification of which data are appropriate for specific analyses much        
              more difficult.  Sophisticated procedures for accessing relevant data          
              for focused inquiries are being developed, but much less attention has         
              been given to development of procedures for summary visual analysis of         
              related spatial data.  Just as many geographic patterns and processes          
              have been identified and analyzed through visual comparisons of hard-          
              copy maps, comparable means are needed for exploring "electronic               
              atlases."  This project will address the theoretical and software              
              requirements to permit orderly investigations of multi-temporal                
              spatial databases.  Using knowledge about systematic variations in             
              geographic and temporal data, the investigator will develop several            
              procedures for the automatic generation of sequences of maps,                  
              statistical diagrams, and other graphics for detecting and highlighting        
              salient spatial relationships.  Special attention will be given to             
              development of an interactive graphic interface, which will allow              
              database users to control the pace and direction of the analysis and to        
              focus on specific patterns, relationships, or places.  New procedures          
              developed during this process will be assessed during focus-group              
              discussions with academics and practitioners.                                  
                   This project should contribute to expansion of theoretical                
              frameworks dealing with the presentation and analysis of spatial data.         
              It also will contribute directly to development of software and other          
              technological advances that ultimately will enhance the research and           
              educational capabilities of a large number of scientists and                   
              practitioners who use geographic data.
