Title       : Qualitative Classification of the Behavior of Poorly ExcitedAdaptive Feedback
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1993 
File        : a9022785

Award Number: 9022785
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Richard Johnson johnson@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There are many practical engineering applications                              
              which can be described as an adaptive feedback                                 
              system.  The distinguishing feature of an adaptive                             
              feedback system is that one component in the                                   
              feedback loop has its parameters adapted according                             
              to a prescribed algorithm.  Adaptive control in                                
              manufacturing systems and adaptive echo cancellers                             
              in telephone lines are two such examples.  Adaptive                            
              feedback systems are nonlinear because the recursive                           
              parameter adaption laws are driven by signals that                             
              are functions of the past adapted parameters.  Due to                          
              this nonlinear nature, different selections of design                          
              parameters, as well as different selections of adaptive                        
              algorithms, bring about qualitatively different types of                       
              behavior.  We propose to initiate an effort to discern                         
              and classify the types of behavior from a system                               
              dynamic point of view.  The tools to be employed are                           
              primarily standard dynamics analysis techniques that                           
              we, and others, have utilized before for adaptive                              
              systems analysis.  The expected significance of a                              
              carefully composed classification is in its provision of                       
              the fundamental knowledge for the development of                               
              needed qualitative design guidelines, e.g. leakage                             
              factor selection for avoidance of bounded instabilities                        
              such as bursting.  Good design is always preceded by                           
              good understanding of the problem and its "solution"                           
              candidates.  A well-structured taxonomy is critical to                         
              well-informed design choices.  Such a                                          
              behavior/design-oriented knowledge base will be vital                          
              for the future success of emerging intelligent                                 
              controllers.  To contribute to such an expansion of                            
              adaptive feedback systems theory, we propose to                                
              clarify and propound our notion of a qualitative                               
              classification of the behavior of poorly excited                               
              adaptive feedback systems, and to develop some                                 
              prototypes for elements of this nascent taxonomy.
