Title       : Polarimetric Emission Pyrometer for Temperature Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1991  
File        : a9022109

Award Number: 9022109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shankar Krishnan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intersonics, Inc.
	      3453 Commercial Ave
	      Northbrook, IL  600621818    708/272-1772

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 1750,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During the first phase of this NSF sponsored Small Business                    
              Innovation Research project, Intersonics Inc. demonstrated the                 
              feasibility of employing a polarimetric method to measure precisely            
              the spectral emissivity and optical properties of reflecting and               
              partially specular surfaces. The measured emissivity was used to               
              correct radiometric data obtained from a conventional pyrometer                
              resulting in a non-contact true surface temperature determination              
              of radiating bodies. The phase II research to be undertaken, will              
              further asses the validity of the approach on different materials              
              and different surfaces. Two independent methods will be employed to            
              determine the true emissivity, and the results of the two                      
              approaches compared. This will provide an objective assessment of              
              the true potential of the instrument, and the limits of it's                   
              accuracy to non-contact high temperature measurements of smooth as             
              well as rough and film covered surfaces. Phase II experiments will             
              include: (i) optical properties of: smooth solid and liquid metal              
              surfaces at high temperatures; rough surfaces with varying                     
              roughness: materials with single and multi-layer dielectric films;             
              (ii) dielectric function and spectral emissivities of incandescent             
              surfaces using their self emission at non-normal angles; and (iii)             
              spectral emissivities of materials of commercial interest. It is               
              expected that this project will result in the development of an                
              instrument which will have large demand in order to achieve process            
              temperature control in numerous manufacturing operations.//
