Title       : Pilot Workshop for Engineering Deans: Introducing Ethics Into the Engineering
               Curriculum-Lubbock, TX, July 1991
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1991        
File        : a9022943

Award Number: 9022943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20239              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmy H. Smith Jimmy.Smith@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Engineering educators and specialists outside engineering                      
              education increasingly recognize that to prepare engineering                   
              students for the ethical issues they face as engineers, the                    
              undergraduate engineering program must somehow be fashioned to                 
              include the teaching of ethics.  Toward that end, it is necessary              
              to develop the materials for teaching and the background and                   
              skills of engineering faculty, and it is essential to enlist the               
              support of engineering deans who have power to affect the                      
              curriculum.  This project is directed primarily to the latter                  
              goal; the vehicle is an engineering ethics workshop prepared for               
              about twenty engineering deans in Texas.  The workshop will                    
              provide an opportunity for the deans to show their commitment and              
              to study the subject in enough detail to appreciate how                        
              teaching/learning engineering ethics is like certain traditional               
              components of engineering education (e.g. design courses) and how              
              it differs from traditional presentation of engineering technical              
              material.  The workshop will also focus on methods for conveying               
              to faculty the importance of ethics teaching and for integrating               
              engineering ethics in engineering degree programs.  Funds from                 
              NSF will be used to support the participation of outside                       
              consultants, some administrative costs, and a portion of the                   
              principal investigator's time on the project.  The Texas State                 
              Board of Registration for Professional Engineers is also                       
              contributing to funding this project.  Results of the workshop                 
              will be reported on in articles in periodicals aimed at two major              
              audiences, engineering educators and specialists outside                       
              engineering who work on ethics in engineering and related issues.              
                                                                                             
              This proposal is a modest request for support to enable leading                
              engineering educators, with engineering ethics consultants, to                 
              take up the task of enlisting engineering deans in the effort of               
              incorporating engineering ethics in engineering curricula.  The                
              principal investigator and project associates are well qualified;              
              institutional support is exceptional; the workshop plans are well              
              worked out; dissemination is likely to be broad and to reach the               
              appropriate audiences.  Support is highly recommended.
