Title       : Research in Wireless Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1991     
File        : a9022123

Award Number: 9022123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31667              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Duchamp   (Principal Investigator current)
              Calton Pu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award is for the purchase of radio modems and portable               
              computers for research into radio network (wireless) computer                  
              systems. The research will concentrate on several aspects of                   
              wireless communication including: extending the IP protocol to                 
              handle hosts that are not topologically fixed, techniques for                  
              handing off from one radio cell to another without data or                     
              communications loss, intelligent caching to reduce peak loads over             
              slow radio links, self-organizing load balancing, and distribution             
              of kernel functionality. Wireless networks provide an attractive               
              alternative to the expense of running cables between and within                
              buildings so long as high communication speeds are not required.               
              This research is intended to solve some of the problems with                   
              wireless networks and to build an experimental network at Columbia             
              University.                                                                    
                   It is very expensive to run wires or fiber optic cables                   
              between and within buildings. An alternative to cabling is to build            
              a wireless computer network much like the cellular phone network is            
              an alternative to the telephone line network. The problems with                
              building a wireless computer network are more complex than those               
              involved in building a wireless voice network. These problems                  
              include protocols to "hand off" communications when cell boundaries            
              are crossed (with voice, some noise is acceptable, with data this              
              must be minimized), load balancing methods so that slow radio links            
              don't get clogged, and distribution of operating system                        
              functionality to reduce communications. The equipment funded by                
              this grant will enable an experimental wireless computer network to            
              be built. The network will be used to experimentally validate                  
              communication protocols and to validate algorithms for load                    
              balancing and other methods needed to reduce communications on the             
              network.
