Title       : The Role of Ice in Ozone Depletion Chemistry: A Surface Second Harmonic
               Generation Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9022613

Award Number: 9022613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice M. Hicks hicksj@gusun.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recently, chlorocompound/ice and nitrocompound/ice reactions              
              have been proposed as key heterogeneous steps in the process                   
              leading to destruction of Antarctic stratospheric ozone.  In order             
              to understand the role of the ice during the process, there is a               
              need for new laboratory techniques that (1) yield accurate                     
              molecular-level data on ice surfaces and associated adspecies and              
              (2) allow in situ on-surface monitoring of chemistry on ice                    
              crystals.  Whereas most surface science techniques are not suitable            
              for high vapor pressure insulating substrates, the new surface                 
              sensitive laser technique, second harmonic generation (SHG), has               
              great potential for probing chemistry of this kind.  SHG signals               
              produced by a tunable, sub-picosecond laser directly yield highly              
              accurate data such as sticking coefficients electronic spectra and             
              orientations of molecules comprising a single monolayer on an                  
              insulating surface.                                                            
                   SHG will be utilized for the first time on ice surfaces, to               
              isolate and examine key steps in the stratospheric ozone depletion             
              chemistry:  adsorption, reaction and desorption processes of                   
              compounds such as CIONO2 and N2O5.  In order to simulate                       
              stratospheric ice, a single crystal ice sample is housed in a                  
              temperature and pressure controlled chamber.  An important aspect              
              of the study is a novel method for studying the effects of ice                 
              composition (HCl and HNO3 content) on the reactions.                           
                   The objectives are to (1) accurately quantify reaction                    
              parameters at various temperatures from data taken directly at the             
              ice surface and (2) understand the mechanisms of the surface                   
              reactions.
