Title       : Cellular Responses to Superoxide-Mediated Stress in N. crassa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1992     
File        : a9022177

Award Number: 9022177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128597             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald O. Natvig dnatvig@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the present study is to investigate the nature and                 
              magnitude of the genetic response to superoxide-,mediated stress               
              in the fungus Neurospora crassa.  The emphasis of the study will               
              be on genes for superoxide dismutase and anonymous genes that are              
              induced in response to superoxide generating agents.  Specific                 
              goals are to:(1) Continue analysis of the function and regulation              
              of the gene for N. crassa cytosolic CuAn superoxide dismutase                  
              (sod-1), which we have recently cloned and sequenced.  Recently                
              constructed sod-1 mutants will be studied to determine the                     
              importance of CuZn SOD for the aerobic growth and reproduction of              
              N. crassa .  Regulation studies will examine the extent to which               
              this gene and the gene (s)  for MnSOD (see below) are induced in               
              response to conditions of oxidative stress.  In addition, in                   
              vitro and in vivo studies will investigate the significance of                 
              sequences hypothesized to be important for sod-1 expression. (2)               
              Construct sublcones of the recombinant plasmid carrying the gene               
              for N. crassa MnSOD (currently identified as a 6 Kbp HindIII                   
              fragment in a 40 kbp cosmid clone) and create and characterize                 
              mutations in this gene using RIP-mediated disruption.  These                   
              mutant strains, when considered along with sod-1 mutants, will                 
              permit genetic and physiological studies of the importance,                    
              function and evolution of superoxide dismutases.  (3) Perform                  
              preliminary experiments toward assessing whether there exists a                
              global superoxide (Sox) response in ascomycetous fungi, similar                
              to that recently proposed for E. coli.  We will employ                         
              physiological studies of induced resistance to superoxide stress               
              and genetic studies of anonymous superoxide-induced genes in N.                
              crassa., identified by differential screening with labeled cDNAs.
