Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Electron Correlation Effects and Dielectric
               Functions of High-Tc Superconducting Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9022338

Award Number: 9022338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11538              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin L. Cohen cohen@jungle.berkely.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5942      KOREA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1761,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Marvin L. Cohen,                    
              Professor of  Physics, University of California, Berkeley, to                  
              pursue with Dr. Jisoon Ihm, Professor of Physics, Seoul                        
              National University, and Dr. Kee Joo Chang, Professor of                       
              Physics, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology                    
              (KAIST), for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative                   
              research on the electronic properties of high temperature                      
              superconductors.  New theoretical approaches recently have                     
              been developed to examine how electrons interact in solids.                    
              These approaches  will be applied to study electron-electron                   
              interactions and superconductivity, in general, with specific                  
              applications to the high transition temperature superconducting                
              oxides.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The field of high temperature superconductivity recently has                   
              attracted much attention with the discovery of high temperature                
              superconductivity in oxides.  Although many mechanisms have                    
              been suggested to explain this phenomenon, at present there                    
              is no consensus regarding its basic cause.   The three                         
              collaborators will use a new approach to study these systems,                  
              with a dielectric function scheme for interactions between                     
              electrons and  phonons and between electrons and collective                    
              electronic excitations.  Each of the three scientists                          
              involved in this project has worked in this  field of                          
              research both independently and in collaboration with the PI.                  
              The U.S. and Korean collaborators are highly respected                         
              scientists who not only have extensive individual research                     
              records but also a record of  successful collaboration in the                  
              field of the proposal.  This project is relevant to the                        
              objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program                       
              which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.                  
              and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of                    
              scientific information,  ideas, skills, and techniques and                     
              through collaboration on problems of  mutual benefit.  Korean                  
              participation in the project is supported by the  Korea                        
              Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).  The PI's primary                  
              research costs are supported under NSF Grant No. DMR-8818404,                  
              to which the present project adds an international cooperative                 
              dimension.
