Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Manifolds, Stratified Spaces, and Controlled Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1991      
File        : a9022179

Award Number: 9022179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Bruce Hughes hughes@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is concerned with applications of controlled                 
              topology to the theory of manifolds and stratified spaces.  Of                 
              particular significance is a program for discovering the geometric             
              structure of stratified spaces.  The problem is to understand the              
              neighborhood of the singular set.  It is conjectured that such a               
              neighborhood has "teardrop structure."  A positive solution to this            
              conjecture would enable one to extend to stratified spaces many                
              fundamental results previously known only for manifolds or for                 
              especially rigid stratifications.  Other applications include                  
              generalized Novikov conjectures, groups acting topologically on                
              manifolds, and the improvement of maps between manifolds.  The                 
              central tool to be used in this research is the theory of manifold             
              approximate fibrations, previously classified by the principal                 
              investigator and his collaborators.  One aspect of this project is             
              to extend that work to the stratified setting.                                 
                   Manifolds are the main object of study in topology.  They are             
              the spaces which are locally euclidean spaces.  The ultimate goal              
              is to classify manifolds and their symmetries.  Controlled topology            
              has become the most powerful new technique in the study of high-               
              dimensional manifolds since the development of surgery theory.                 
              Even more dramatically, controlled topology is showing its full                
              force in the study of manifolds with singularities.  These                     
              stratified spaces include polyhedra, complex algebraic varieties,              
              orbit spaces of group actions on manifolds, and certain limits of              
              Riemannian manifolds.
