Title       : Optimization and Feedback Control in Sheet Metal Forming - the Intelligent
               Stamping Die
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1994  
File        : a9022550

Award Number: 9022550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. (Cheena) Srinivasan                  
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $604185             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus J. Weinmann kjweinma@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reza Kashani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Adbi S. Majlessi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barney E. Klamecki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subbiah Ramalingam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,
Abstract    :
                   The purpose of this project is to develop a laboratory-                   
              scale, prototype intelligent sheet metal stamping die.  The                    
              motivation for this effort is the need to reduce part failures                 
              during drawing and improve final product quality.  Failure occurs              
              typically by either tearing or wrinkling of the sheet.  Conditions             
              leading to part failure include either excessive or insufficient               
              restraining force in the blank holder region.  The intelligent die             
              is intended to sense these conditions, and to take corrective                  
              action.  Such action would consist of altering the level of the                
              restraining force by adjustment of the drawbead penetration and/or             
              the blank holder pressure.  The creation of a real-time process                
              control system for the intelligent stamping die involves several               
              issues:  Detailed, quantitative descriptions of the local                      
              tool-sheet interface forces acting in the relevant regions of                  
              tool-workpiece contact must be produced; the deformation of the                
              unsupported sheet between the punch and die shoulder must be sensed            
              and characterized; the deformation of the sheet by punch, die                  
              shoulder, and drawbead must be described.                                      
                   The failure of sheet metal forming processes industry is                  
              somewhat unpredictable, with many adjustments by technicians                   
              required before acceptable parts are produced.  The project                    
              promises to automate this adjustment process and allow the die                 
              configuration to be varied while the part is being formed.
