Title       : Internal Migration and Other Applications of Residual-Based Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1991     
File        : a9022200

Award Number: 9022200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Frees jfrees@bus.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   An analytic method frequently used in geography and many other            
              scientific disciplines is to calculate the statistical expression of           
              an "expected" relationship and then to compare measurements of actual          
              observations with values that would be expected if the statistical             
              expression was accurate.  Differences between the real and expected            
              values are termed residuals; through analysis of the pattern of                
              residuals, investigators often can detect other systematic regularities        
              in the relationships among different variables.  This project will             
              explore new methods of measuring and analyzing the regularities in             
              residuals, focusing on different types of systematic variation that            
              commonly occur in data gathered at different time periods for different        
              geographic locations or for other observational units.  Techniques have        
              been developed for dealing with heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation,        
              two situations in which normal statistical assumptions related to the          
              independence of observations and their variances are violated.                 
              Relatively little attention has been given to a third form of                  
              systematic variability, contemporaneous correlation, which measures            
              how observations for specific observational units vary together over           
              time.  The investigator will focus his attention in this project on the        
              refinement of statistics for measuring cross-sectional                         
              heteroscedasticity, longitudinal autocorrelation, and contemporaneous          
              correlation.  Development of these statistics will focus on their              
              application for two lines of inquiry:  (1) empirical modelling of              
              interstate migration rates, and (2) estimation of future expected              
              warranty claims based on actuarial approaches.                                 
                   This project will advance statistical methods for the analysis of         
              data relating three or more dimensions, especially longitudinal spatial        
              data.  It will result in new measures for evaluating patterns of               
              residuals, measures that will be useful for retroactive modelling and          
              for forecasting.  Although primarily methodological in emphasis, the           
              project also will generate new insights into specific types of                 
              inquiries.  It will provide a means for relating gravity models and            
              Markovian models in migration studies, and it will enhance the utility         
              of cross-sectional data in the determination of warranty contracts.
