Title       : Analysis and Control of Discrete Event Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1992    
File        : a9022634

Award Number: 9022634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Ramadge ramadge@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to continue the                                   
              development of a mathematical theory for the analysis                          
              and control of discrete event systems (DESs).  DESs                            
              arise in a variety of areas of practical application,                          
              including, for example, multi-robot systems,                                   
              manufacturing systems, data bases, distributed                                 
              computing, distributed and hierarchical optimization,                          
              queuing systems, mixed variable control systems, and                           
              the higher level intelligent control of complex                                
              processes.  A number of proposals have been made for                           
              modeling and studying the various aspects of DESs of                           
              interest.  The recent work on the control of logical                           
              DESs has contributed to our understanding of some of                           
              the fundamental issues involved in the analysis of                             
              DESs.  Other approaches, particularly perturbation                             
              methods and likelihood ratio methods have had                                  
              considerable impact on the analysis, simulation and                            
              optimization of stochastic DES models.  The main                               
              thrust of the proposed research is to extend these two                         
              approaches by addressing issues such as real-time                              
              constraints, algorithmic complexity, aggregated models,                        
              mixed variable systems, and stochastic optimization                            
              using perturbation analysis and likelihood ratio                               
              derivative estimates.  The relationship between current                        
              models will also be investigated with the aim of                               
              unifying the tools available for the study of discrete-                        
              event systems.
