Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1993      
File        : a9022530

Award Number: 9022530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Vijay Kumar Kumar@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sumit Roy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard P. Paul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoping Yun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research involves the acquisition and use of a Whole Arm             
              Manipulator (WAM).  The instrument will be used in three research              
              areas:  (a) WAM use in teleprogramming with feedback, (b) robotic              
              exploration of environments, and (c) dynamic control of multiple               
              robotic agents for manipulation of objects.  The WAM is a                      
              distributed control, four degree-of-freedom robot arm that is                  
              unique in that it has been specifically designed for whole arm                 
              manipulation.  Distributed control and effectors allow the arm to              
              be used in applications for which earlier hand/arm combinations                
              were ineffective.                                                              
                   State-of-the-art research in robotics requires the acquisition            
              of the latest equipment to test new control and planning                       
              algorithms. Early work with robot arms involved arms that were                 
              connected to robot hands in which the sensors and controls resided.            
              This research was necessary to investigate gripping algorithms and             
              feedback control algorithms.  However, in order to investigate more            
              extensive use of robots, these algorithms need to be integrated                
              with the movement of the arm itself.  The Whole Arm Manipulator                
              funded by this grant allows for that integration.  The development             
              of good algorithms for the arm manipulation is crucial for the                 
              advancement of the use of robots in U.S. industry.
