Title       : Structure and Function of S-Laminin, A Synaptic Form of Laminin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1993     
File        : a9022382

Award Number: 9022382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlene Chiu achiu@smtplink.coh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1188      SYNAPTIC MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The mature nervous system functions, in part, because precise                  
              connections are made and maintained between appropriate groups of              
              nerve cells.  The formation of these specialized sites of                      
              connectivity, known as synapses, occurs during development,                    
              however only a small amount of information is known about the                  
              mechanisms that influence this critical process.  This                         
              investigation will focus on the neuromuscular junction, a model                
              synapse between motor nerve cells and muscle cells.  The                       
              formation of the neuromuscular synapse appears to be regulated by              
              specialized molecules within the extracellular matrix.  Laminin,               
              a well characterized matrix molecule, is present in all                        
              extracellular matrices and is a potent promoter of neurite                     
              outgrowth.  In contrast, S-laminin, known as synaptic laminin, is              
              a homolog of laminin which is localized within the neuromuscular               
              synaptic cleft and appears to exhibit selective adhesiveness for               
              motor neurons.  Instead of promoting growth, S-laminin acts to                 
              terminate axonal growth and initiate synapse formation.  The long              
              term goal of this research project is to understand the molecular              
              mechanisms that contribute to the formation and maintenance of                 
              neuromuscular synapses.  The immediate goal is to determine the                
              function, structure, and association of S-laminin with other                   
              components in the synaptic extracellular matrix.  Experiments,                 
              utilizing a Schwannoma cell line, will be performed to purify and              
              biochemically characterize this molecule.  This specific cell                  
              line produces and releases large amounts of this rare antigen in               
              the form of a soluble complex with other matrix compounds.                     
              Results from this study will facilitate future studies on the                  
              role of this synaptic molecule in the formation of the                         
              neuromuscular junction.
