Title       : Perception of Binaural and Complex Sounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9022080

Award Number: 9022080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Stern rms@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Hearing can provide remarkably good information on where a                     
              sound is in space.  Interaural cues about location of a sound                  
              source include the difference in intensity of the sound at the                 
              two ears, and the delay time between the arrival of the sound at               
              one ear compared to the other.  Input from both ears is important              
              for localizing complex as well as relatively simple sounds, but                
              we do not yet understand how the brain manages this binaural                   
              processing.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This project continues a computational modelling approach to                   
              how the mammalian auditory system compares and analyzes sounds                 
              presented to the two ears.  A unified theory is being developed                
              to describe and predict binaural phenomena in terms of how the                 
              peripheral auditory system responds physiologically to various                 
              stimuli.  The present work will develop appropriate extensions of              
              models to a number of important classes of phenomena for which                 
              theoretical predictions are not yet adequate, including                        
              perception of short duration stimuli, relation of position                     
              perception to frequency, and application to sounds that are                    
              amplitude-modulated (AM) or contain high-frequency noise.  An                  
              important part of the work is collaboration with a group getting               
              experimental data on binaural listening, to provide empirical                  
              tests of the model predictions.  The results from                              
              this unique approach will be important to a fundamental issue                  
              of auditory science and perception, and also are likely to lead                
              to applications in designing sensory aids, in designing                        
              displays to simulate spatial phenomena, and in developing                      
              systems for enhancing understanding of speech in noisy                         
              environments.
