Title       : FAW: Experimental and Computational Studies of Word Phonology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9022484

Award Number: 9022484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet B. Pierrehumbert jbp@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1311,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Janet Pierrehumbert will use a grant from the NSF Faculty                  
              Awards for Women Program to pursue her research at the critical                
              interface between phonetics and phonology, between the physical                
              properties of speech sounds and their abstract mental                          
              representations.  The immediate focus of her research will be on               
              the phonetics of words as they are produced in sentences, with                 
              special attention to the constraints on syllable adjacency and                 
              the interaction of sentence-level intonational contours with word              
              structure and phonetics.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Previous research (to which Dr. Pierrehumbert has made important               
              contributions) has given us a fairly firm understanding of the                 
              phonetic and phonological characteristics of syllables, and of                 
              sentence-level prosodic contours.  The word level is where these               
              two systems interact, and here we have only sketchy, tantalizing               
              evidence so far of the constraints and patterns which apply.  The              
              research plan is to determine those constraints empirically, and               
              then develop a theoretical model of the phonetics and phonology                
              of word-formation in English.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The model promises to advance our understanding of the                         
              relationship between phonetics and phonology, one of the most                  
              fundamental issues in linguistic science.  It will also have                   
              potential applications in such technologies as speech recognition              
              and speech synthesis.                                                          
                                                                                             
              In addition to furthering Dr. Pierrehumbert's important research               
              program, this award will also enhance graduate education at her                
              university, by enabling her to employ graduate students as                     
              research assistants on her project, and to purchase specialized                
              equipment and software to keep her lab up to date with the newest              
              developments in technology.
