Title       : FAW: Thermal Biology of Reptiles: Constraints on Viviparity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1998       
File        : a9022425

Award Number: 9022425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin M. Andrews randrews@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,1123,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                      Viviparity has an intriguing interface with reptilian thermal          
              biology.  Reptiles behaviorally regulate their body temperature.               
              Thus, developing embryos of oviparous species are subject to the               
              same body temperature as their mother only until oviposition, while            
              developing embryos of viviparous species are subject to mother's               
              body temperature throughout development.  Because thermal                      
              requirements of females and embryos are not identical, interests               
              of mothers and offspring may be in conflict.  The resolution of                
              this conflict is an important component in the evolution of                    
              viviparity and of present day interactions between mothers of                  
              viviparous species and their developing embryos.  The proposed                 
              research is directed towards two major questions.                              
                      Has the evolution of viviparity been constrained by                    
              conservative thermal tolerances of embryos?  Viviparity has evolved            
              from oviparity in almost 100 lineages of snakes and lizards, and               
              it is favored in cool climates where increased egg retention                   
              requires more favorable thermal environment for embryonic                      
              development than nests.   However, an evolutionary shift from                  
              oviparity to viviparity is possible only if embryonic development              
              is not compromised by the environment imposed by the pregnant                  
              female.  The investigator will evaluate temperature tolerances of              
              embryos of oviparous lizards from linages where it has not.  The               
              hypothesis to be tested is that viviparity is more likely to evolve            
              in lineages where thermal requirements of females and thermal                  
              tolerances of their embryos are similar than in lineages where they            
              differ.                                                                        
                      Is the thermoregulation by pregnant females of viviparous              
              species constrained by thermal tolerances of embryos?  Temperatures            
              selected by pregnant females of viviparous lizards differ from                 
              those selected by non.pregnant females.  Are shifts in body                    
              temperatures associated with pregnancy related to adult body                   
              temperatures per se?  This research will evaluate diel temperature             
              profiles of viviparous lizards when pregnant and not pregnant.  The            
              hypothesis to be tested is that species that exhibit relatively                
              high body temperatures when active alter their thermal behavior                
              more when pregnant than closely related species that exhibit                   
              relatively low body temperatures.  Rejection of this hypothesis for            
              all or some lineages would suggest thermal tolerances of embryos               
              are more labile than laboratory studies predict or that thermal                
              tolerances of embryos evolve rapidly.
