Title       : The Grounding of the Bahia Paraiso: A Continuing Study of the Environmental Fate
               of an Antarctic Oil Spill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9022346

Award Number: 9022346
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $468051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahlon C. Kennicutt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susanne S. McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The grounding of the Argentine ship Bahia Paraiso near the United              
              States Palmer Station highlighted the need, and potential, for                 
              resolving hydrocarbon contamination due to acute releases,                     
              chronic exposure and global transport.  This study will                        
              investigate the distribution, sources, and fate of hydrocarbons                
              along the Antarctic Peninsula.  Hydrocarbons are ubiquitous                    
              components of marine and terrestrial systems and represent inputs              
              from biological processes, local contamination, atmospheric                    
              transport, recycled continental material and digenesis.  The                   
              biogeochemical cycle of hydrocarbons encompasses a variety of                  
              interaction which impart characteristic compositions that are                  
              useful as tracers of complex processes.  Detailed analysis of                  
              hydrocarbons and their alteration products will be used to                     
              document the relative importance of various inputs as well as                  
              provide insight into the processes that determine pollutant                    
              distributions.  Cores taken close to scientific stations will be               
              used to document the onset, composition, and magnitude of                      
              hydrocarbon pollution caused by man's presence on the Antarctic                
              Peninsula.  This historical perspective will be provided by the                
              analysis of core samples dated by tracer methods.  Shallow                     
              sediments collected near Palmer Station will be analyzed as well               
              as surficial sediments from remote areas.  Data collected will be              
              used to assess the importance of present day atmospheric                       
              transport of combustion product hydrocarbons.  The relative                    
              importance of localized anthropogenic, global anthropogenic and                
              natural combustion hydrocarbons is expected to be resolved.
