Title       : Misfit Dislocation Nucleation Kinetics Studied by Magnetic Properties in
               Epitaxial Ni/Cu Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1994  
File        : a9022572

Award Number: 9022572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. O'Handley bobohand@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl V. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Misfit dislocations are thermodynamically stable in epitaxial films            
              above a critical thickness, which depends mainly on the misfit                 
              magnitude between the film and substrate.  The formation of                    
              dislocations does not occur immediately when the critical thickness            
              is exceeded since kinetic factors are involved which are not                   
              adequately understood.  This grant examines the role of misfit                 
              dislocations and strain in affecting behavior of magnetic films.               
              The kinetics of dislocation nucleation in epitaxial thin films is              
              pursued with an aim towards developing an in-situ method for                   
              monitoring misfit dislocation formation.  The Magneto-optic Kerr               
              (MOKE) effect is employed as a probe that is sensitive to the                  
              presence of small strains in magnetic films.  This is used to                  
              characterize misfit strains and dislocations on epitaxial                      
              nickel/copper films.  Other techniques employed are electron                   
              microscopy and secondary electron spin polarization analysis to                
              determine the kinetics of dislocation formation.                               
              %%%                                                                            
              The homogeneous strain of lattice mismatch and the highly non-                 
              uniform strains around dislocations have dramatic effects on                   
              magnetic properties.  This research is directed towards developing             
              a better understanding of the formation of misfit dislocations and             
              their effects on magnetic films.  An in-situ monitoring technique              
              during film growth could result from the research.
