Title       : Observational Tests of the Hypothesis That Interstellar HI "Cloud" Structure is
               Produced by Geometric Projection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1994     
File        : a9022002

Award Number: 9022002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerrit L. Verschuur   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Hydrogen fills the interstellar medium of our Galaxy.  While some              
              of this hydrogen is hot, and completely ionized, radio observations            
              at a wavelength of 21~cm find a sky filled with signals from cold              
              ,neutral hydrogen. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research award             
              will allow Dr. Verschuur to observe interstellar neutral hydrogen              
              at high spatial resolution. Using the Zeeman effect, he will                   
              easure the magnetic fields in regions of enhanced 21~cm emission.              
              He expects to see the magnetic field reverse sign in a manner                  
              consistent with the idea that the emission derives from a ``tube"              
              of hydrogen that has coupled to a strong magnetic field.                       
                                                                                             
              Dr. Verschuur understands the problems with interpreting a signal              
              projected from a three-dimensional volume onto a two-dimensional               
              surface. He feels that the signals that have led to a description              
              of interstellar hydrogen as ``clouds," suggesting a roundish,                  
              3-dimensional structure, have been incorrectly interpreted and that            
              these signals instead originate from a linear structure twisting               
              in the magnetic field of the Galaxy. These observations will,                  
              first, provide more values for the magnetic field strength and its             
              variation in the Galaxy.  Most importantly, they will lead to an               
              improved understanding of the morphology of hydrogen in the                    
              interstellar medium.
