Title       : U.S.-Germany Collaborative Research on the Biochemistry of Water Stress in
               Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1991    
File        : a9022737

Award Number: 9022737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8450               (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm Potts geordie@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5936      GERMANY (F.R.G.)
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Dr. Malcolm Potts of Virginia Polytechnic                  
              Institute and State University for a research visit to work                    
              with Dr. Siegfried Scherer of the Institute of Plant                           
              Biochemistry and Physiology of the University of Konstanz,                     
              Germany.  They are collaborating in an effort to elucidate                     
              the molecular mechanisms for desiccation tolerance in                          
              cyanobacteria.  The specific goals of their current work are                   
              to characterize the recently isolated 'wsp' gene, to understand                
              how transcription of 'wsp' is regulated by water stress, and                   
              to obtain milligram amounts of the water stress protein (Wsp)                  
              produced by the 'wsp' gene for future structural analysis.                     
              Dr. Scherer has excellent facilities for the growth of                         
              cyanobacteria in culture and for protein purification and                      
              characterization.  He has made substantial contributions to                    
              the understanding of photosynthesis, respiration and electron                  
              transport in cyanobacteria.  Dr. Potts has focused more on                     
              the physiology, biochemistry and genetics of water stress                      
              tolerance.  Recently, Dr. Potts has developed the necessary                    
              techniques to understand aspects of the molecular biology of                   
              Nostoc commune.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Water availability limits the distribution and the activities                  
              of all living cells.  It is of particular importance to the                    
              future of managed agriculture.  Despite the considerable                       
              biochemical restraints imposed by a cell-water deficit,                        
              certain cells have the capacity to retain both structural and                  
              functional integrity after exposure to repeated cycles of                      
              acute water stress.  Cells of the desiccation-tolerant                         
              photosynthetic procaryote Nostoc commune, a cyanobacterium,                    
              accumulate massive amounts of a soluble protein when they are                  
              exposed to repeated cycles of drying and rewetting.  This                      
              water stress protein (Wsp) has been isolated, purified, and                    
              partially characterized at the biochemical level.  Recently,                   
              the gene responsible for encoding this protein has been                        
              isolated.  This is the subject of the proposed collaborative                   
              research.
