Title       : Collaborative Research: Optimal Consumption and Portfolio Policies when
               Preferences Exhibit the Properties of Local Substitution and Habit Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1992       
File        : a9022937

Award Number: 9022937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chi-fu Huang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The relationship between aggregate consumption, productivity of                
              capital, and levels of stock and bond market prices is a                       
              fundamental issue in macroeconomics and finance.  From  a                      
              macroeconomic policy perspective, an adequate understanding of the             
              interactions between real market activities and financial market               
              changes is necessary for formulating policies with direct impact               
              on the financial markets.  In addition, a reasonable theory of the             
              relationship between savings/consumption and changes in levels of              
              prices of financial assets can help policy makers interpret the                
              signals that the financial markets continuously send about the                 
              future course of economic activities.  The contribution of this                
              project comes in developing a new theory for the study of financial            
              asset prices that provides a more realistic representation of                  
              intertemporal consumption preferences than the classical additive              
              utility model.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This project studies the microeconomic implications of a model of              
              choice under uncertainty in continuous time.  The agents in this               
              model treat consumption at nearby dates as almost perfect                      
              substitutes except possibly at information surprises.  All the                 
              time-additive as well as almost all the non-time additive utility              
              functions used in the literature fail to satisfy this local                    
              substitution property.  The project also investigates models of                
              habit formation while retaining the local substitutability of                  
              consumption.
