Title       : Genetic Analysis of Sexual Dimorphism in the Toothed Earwig Spongovostox
               apicedentatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1990    
File        : a9022012

Award Number: 9022012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen J. Moore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The PI proposes to examine the ultimate causes of                         
              variability in the forceps of S.apicedentatus by estimating the                
              potential for a further evolutionary response and clarifying                   
              evolutionary constraints on the evolution of earwig.  This will                
              be accomplished by combining a partitioning and quantification of              
              selection with a quantitative genetic analyses of forceps                      
              morphology.  Computerized image analysis will be used to relate                
              the morphological variability in forceps to success in intra and               
              intersexual interactions.  This provides a measure of relative                 
              fitness.  Quantitative genetic analysis that estimate                          
              heritabilities and genetic correlations will indicate potential                
              genetic influences and constraints on variability.  The genetic                
              analysis yields a measure of the potential for response to                     
              selection.  Combining the analysis of selection with the                       
              estimated response to selection will provide a detailed                        
              description of the evolution of forceps in S. apicedentatus.                   
              This, this study will provide a detailed analysis of the                       
              evolution of a sexually dimorphic structure.                                   
                   In addition to this laboratory study, the PI will continue                
              to collect preliminary field observations on the use of forceps                
              by S. apicedentatus in the Sonoran desert of Arizona.  Thus, the               
              laboratory observations can be compared to a more natural                      
              situation.  In addition, the field work will also generate                     
              preliminary data for future comparative analyses of variability                
              between populations and species, and information useful in                     
              designing future field studies of other species of earwigs.
