Title       : Ada Quality Toolset
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1991 
File        : a9022324

Award Number: 9022324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : November 1,  1991    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Dowson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Software Design Analysis
	      PO Box 3521
	      Boulder, CO  80303    303/499-4782

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research will address some key technical problems that will need          
              to be resolved before proceeding with full-scale commercial                    
              development of a comprehensive and flexible set of Ada program                 
              quality-enhancing tools, the Ada Quality Toolset (AQT).  These tools           
              will support Ada program developers by checking, and where                     
              appropriate, enforcing, a set of Ada programming style guidelines.             
                                                                                             
              A Phase I research project has demonstrated the feasibility of                 
              supporting a wide range of guidelines, and has defined usage modes,            
              user interfaces and outline architecture for a toolset.  The Phase II          
              research will focus on three main areas:                                       
                                                                                             
                    o   Design of toolset components and processing functions, with          
                        exploratory prototyping to resolve difficult technical               
                        issues where appropriate and necessary.                              
                                                                                             
                    o   Prototype implementation of a toolset with sufficient                
                        fuctionality to demonstrate that a full commercial toolset           
                        can be implemented, and to allow evaluation of usability and         
                        utility.                                                             
                                                                                             
                    o   Experimental evaluation of the usability and utility of the          
                        prototype toolset.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Design and implemenation of a prototype toolset will require the               
              solution to a number of technical problems.  If these problems can be          
              solved, and the prototype toolset proves to be both usable and useful,         
              the feasibility and desirability of proceeding with full scale                 
              commerical development of AQT will be fully demonstrated.
