Title       : US-Belgium Cooperative Research: Nuclear Astrophysics with Radioactive and
               Isomeric Beams and Targets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 1,  1993    
File        : a9022907

Award Number: 9022907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Rodney   (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Lambert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 5947      BELGIUM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1234,5947,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support continued collaborative research in                    
              nuclear astrophysics between US and Belgian physicists.  The                   
              US group is under the direction of Dr. William Rodney,                         
              Georgetown University. The Belgian collaborator is Dr. J.                      
              Vervier, Institute for Nuclear Physics, Louvain.  The                          
              objective of this project is to carry out a program of                         
              experiments using radioactive beams to measure cross-sections                  
              important to understanding nucleosynthesis.                                    
                                                                                             
              In novae, supernovae, X-ray bursters and possibly in the                       
              early universe, the temperature and density were such that                     
              the lifetimes of some radioactive (and isomeric) nuclides                      
              were comparable to the burning times for their destruction by                  
              proton or alpha particle induced nuclear reactions.  In                        
              these instances, these reactions must be taken into account                    
              in developing models for stellar evolution and nucleosynthesis.                
              Thus, the potential for the use of radioactive targets and/or                  
              beams is receiving increasing attention in the nuclear                         
              physics community.  In this project, proposed experiments                      
              represent a major step in the direction of providing the                       
              needed cross-section information.  The Louvain-la-Neuve                        
              coupled cyclotron facility will be able to produce the                         
              required beam intensity to carry out the experiments.  There                   
              are no existing US facilities capable of such radioactive                      
              beam measurements.  The research will benefit from Dr.                         
              Rodney's expertise in nuclear astrophysics and the background                  
              of his research group in active nuclear experimentation.  The                  
              results of this research will contribute to our understanding                  
              of stellar evolution and nucleosynthesis in stars.
