Title       : Craft Production and Sociopolitical Hierarchy in Southern Mesoamerica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1991  
File        : a9022247

Award Number: 9022247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34077              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward M. Schortman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Urban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      
	      Gambier, OH  43022    614/427-2244

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation (NSF) support, Drs. Edward                    
              Schortman, Patricia Urban and their colleagues have conducted                  
              archaeological survey and excavation in the Naco Valley in                     
              Honduras.  This work has revealed the presence of a complex                    
              prehistoric polity which flourished during the first millennium                
              A.D.  The central site of La Sierra contains large numbers of                  
              both monumental platforms as well as smaller constructions.  The               
              surrounding region also has many of sites, all significantly                   
              smaller than La Sierra itself.  This suggests that La Sierra                   
              represents the capital of a state level polity which encompasses               
              the entire Naco valley and possibly extends beyond these                       
              physiographic limits.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Continuing NSF support will permit the team to analyze the wide                
              range of materials recovered.  The goal is to examine the floral               
              and faunal remains, the ceramic and other cultural objects as                  
              well as other skeletal material to gain insight into the                       
              political mechanisms which permitted stratification and                        
              centralization to develop.  The investigators believe that the                 
              economic system was controlled by the elite and organized in such              
              a way to maintain this domination.  This, it appears, extended                 
              both to local craft production as well as importation of                       
              specialized commodities.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The research is important for several reasons.  First, it will                 
              increase our understanding of how complex societies develop, are               
              maintained and eventually collapse.  The project will also                     
              provide data from a relatively unknown area and these will be of               
              interest to a large number of archaeologists.  Finally, because                
              the research is based at an undergraduate institution and                      
              students will be taken into the field, it will provide a                       
              firsthand introduction to how science is conducted and hopefully               
              encourage these individuals to pursue careers in this area.
