Title       : Local Food Systems: Policies and Values Influencing Their Potential
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1991  
File        : a9022243

Award Number: 9022243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69605              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Dahlberg ken.dahlberg@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Though discussion about sustainable yield and production systems               
              in agriculture has intensified in recent years, very little                    
              attention has focused on urban food systems.  The proposed                     
              research on the practices of selected cities across the U.S. thus              
              addresses a pressing social problem and a neglected area of                    
              research.  The research will provide a description of local food               
              production, availability, and disposal as they are influenced by               
              organizations, municipal policies, and values.  In addition, the               
              research will include a review of options to make local food                   
              systems more sustainable.  Alternatives will be examined to                    
              determine their organizational and policy requirements,                        
              underlying value assumptions, and ecological soundness.  Finally,              
              the investigator will produce a profile useful for policy                      
              analysis and a module for teaching which describes different food              
              system policies, impacts, values, and choices.  The project is                 
              structured to provide the investigator regular consultation with               
              selected Advisors representing areas of expertise pertinent to                 
              the investigation.  This project is distinctive in seeking to                  
              supply a knowledge base about production practices, values, and                
              options and also to generate products for policy use and for                   
              teaching.  Emanating from prior work by the investigator and                   
              pulling together threads of related work from other fields, the                
              study promises to further the wide-ranging reflection on                       
              sustainability now underway in agriculture, urban/community, and               
              ethics studies. Results will be widely disseminated in                         
              appropriate journals and periodicals and professional meetings.                
                                                                                             
              This proposal is a modest request for support to enable a very                 
              well qualified investigator with a very good track record to                   
              investigate urban food sytems and sustainability options bringing              
              out issues of policy and values.  The institutional support is                 
              very good; the research design and plan for the educational                    
              module are well developed; dissemination is likely to be broad                 
              and to reach a wide range of audiences.  Support is highly                     
              recommended.
