Title       : A Laboratory for Computer Vision and Image Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1991     
File        : a9022445

Award Number: 9022445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25667              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashok K. Samal samal@cse.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Prabir Bhattacharya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Reichenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This instrumentation award is for equipment to start a laboratory              
              in computer vision and image processing.  The research projects                
              include projects on face recognition, image algebra, and digital               
              image processing for end-to-end systems.  The face recognition                 
              problem involves studying issues in detection, identification,                 
              classification, and analysis of human faces.  The image algebra                
              research aims to develop the necessary efficient implementations of            
              algebraic operations necessary to perform common image processing              
              tasks such as magnification, shrinking, and connected component                
              labeling.  The digital processing in end-to-end systems consists of            
              the necessary algorithms to obtain high quality images in the                  
              presence of noise form components such as lens and transmission                
              lines.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              Research in vision encompasses a broad array of tasks.  This                   
              research project addresses three such tasks; face recognition,                 
              image algebra, and digital image processing in end-to-end systems.             
              Face recognition is an important problem with security                         
              applications.  It is a task that humans are particularly good at               
              and yet has proven very hard to computerize.  Work in image algebra            
              is useful in defining operations common to visual processing tasks.            
              Such tasks include the magnification, rotation, and labeling of                
              image regions.  The implementations of these operations should be              
              as efficient as possible.  The processing of images using digital              
              techniques involves the use of many devices that may introduce                 
              noise or be subject to measurement errors.  These include the                  
              device that measures the intensity and color of the image, any                 
              lenses involved in the capture of the image, and transmission                  
              lines.  Each of these can be treated separately, but the proper                
              treatment is to consider the system as a whole as a means to obtain            
              the highest quality images.
