Title       : Multifunctional Elements Involved in Silencing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1997  
File        : a9022591

Award Number: 9022591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew R. Buchman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to define the roles of separate                   
              components of the yeast transcriptional silencer at HMR E. Two                 
              components of the silencer at HMR E are binding sites for                      
              proteins that act else where as gene activators.  A third                      
              components exhibits properties of an origin of DNA replication.                
              This research will address the issue of how these components                   
              combine to create a silencer by answering the following question.              
              Are gene activator function and DNA replication directly involved              
              in silencing, or are these properties of the parts of the                      
              silencer incidental to its function as a whole? The approach                   
              taken in this proposal is aimed at systematically identifying the              
              minimum constituents needed to generate a silencing effect on                  
              test minichromosomes defining the interactions of these                        
              constituents using primarily genetic techniques.  The experiments              
              described here will help characterize classes of protein and                   
              protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions generally employed                
              to create compound regulatory elements.  Due to the nature of the              
              structure of the silencer the proposed experiments will not only               
              yield information on mechanisms of transcriptional repression and              
              hierarchies of chromosome organization, but will also open new                 
              avenues for addressing the function of gene activators and                     
              origins of DNA replication.  Investigations of these issues in                 
              yeast will have general applicability and will accelerate the                  
              analysis of these same problems in higher eukaryotes
