Title       : Color Video Digitizing and Display System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1991     
File        : a9022516

Award Number: 9022516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cherniavsky                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell M. Mersereau   (Principal Investigator current)
              S. J. McGrath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald W. Schafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award is for the purchase of equipment to upgrade a vision                
              laboratory to enable the laboratory to perform research in a number            
              of new areas.  The research that this equipment supports includes              
              research in low bit-rate coding of color signals, knowledge-based              
              video feature extraction, adaptive video coding using non-uniform              
              sampling, information preserving video coders, and high speed                  
              architectures for seismic image interpretation.                                
                                                                                             
              In recent years there has been unprecedented progress in the                   
              development of cost effective video systems that can provide a                 
              variety of visual communication services:  video conferencing,                 
              video telephones, facsimile transmission, high definition                      
              television,etc. One of the driving forces for these innovations has            
              been the development of powerful signal processing algorithms and              
              fast$and inexpensive hardware optimized for them.  It is still a               
              technical challenge, however, to design these systems to operate               
              economically at video rates.  Seismic signal processing involves               
              signals with lower bandwidth than video signals, but many of the               
              issues are similar.  In particular, both must work with signals                
              containing millions of samples and both must use innovative                    
              algorithms and multiprocessor implementations to operate                       
              efficiently.  The Digital Signal Processing Laboratory at Georgia              
              Tech has been involved in research in digital signal processing and            
              its applications in speech processing, image processing, and                   
              efficient digital architectures for nearly twenty years.  All of               
              the projects supported by this award are concerned with the                    
              development of algorithms and architectures to operate economically            
              on a large number of signals.
