Title       : RPG: Geochemical Constraints on Trace Element Mobility During Early Diagenesis
               of Estuarine Sediments, Newark, New York Harbor Areas, New Jersey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1997    
File        : a9706570

Award Number: 9706570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria C. Hover vhover@andromeda.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706570  Hover     There is considerable evidence that toxic metals carried to
              estuarine marine environments as part of the suspended river load, are commonly
              associated with authigenic sulfide minerals which form soon after deposition. 
              Toxic trace metals, particularly transition metals and metalloids, form
              insoluble sulfides and may be absorbed or coprecipitated with Fe sulfides and
              pyrite during early diagenesis near the sediment-water interface.  The ultimate
              bioavailability of such toxic metals inestuarine sediments, and the extent to
              which they coprecipitate with or are absorbed on to authigenic pyrite, is
              controlled by a complex interplay between biologic, chemical, and physical
              factors that can alter the speciation of toxic metals in response to rapidly
              changing pH and redox conditions in the sediments.  Land use surrounding the
              NewYork/New Jersey Harbor Estuary system makes the Harbor particularly
              susceptible to toxic metal contamination.  The Harbor is surrounded by a
              population of over 20 million people and has been the sight of concentrated
              refining and manufacturing industries for over a century.  It is also one of
              the most heavily utilized sea ports along the east coast.  Studies of surface
              sediments in the NY/NJ Harbor system have documented that over 75% of the area
              has concentrations of at least one of the anthropogenically-derived, toxic
              trace metals above concentration levels at which adverse biological effects
              have been observed in  benthic macrofauna..  The presence of significant
              concentrations of anthropogenically derived toxic metals in the NY/NJ Harbor
              make the area an ideal natural laboratory in which to study the interactions
              between contaminated metal bearing sediments and associated pore-fluids during
              early diagenesis near the sediment water interface under changing pH and redox
              conditions.  The objectives of this research are to apply an integrated
              approach to the characterization of contaminated estuarine sediments to more
              specifically determine the mineralogical s inks for toxic metal contaminants. 
              The detailed determination of sediment pore water geochemistry including major,
              minor and trace element constituents, will be combined with the detailed
              characterization of bulk sediments and clay size-fractions, using X-ray
              diffraction methods and high resolution environmental scanning electron
              microscopy (ESEM) and scanning transmission and analytical electron microscopy
              (STEM/AEM) techniques.  Pore water and trace element data will be evaluated to
              determine the extent of freshwater mixing, and the degree of anthropogenic
              toxic metal contribution to the sediment.  These results will be combined with
              the detailed textural and compositional data obtained by ESEM and STEM/AEM
              analyses to better constrain pore water trace-metal sulfide geochemical
              relationships and to determine specific mineralogical sinks for metal
              contaminants.  The analyses of sediment and pore water geochemistry in
              contaminated sediments represents a new line of investigation in the
              Rutgers/Newark Department of Geological Sciences.  The development of
              analytical techniques and the collaborative relationships developed with nearby
              institutions such as the New Jersey Institute of Technology, Department of
              Civil and Environmental Engineering and the Institute of Marine and Coastal
              Science Rutgers/Cook Campus, will facilitate the development of a strong
              multidisciplinary analytical and research program.  The results of the study
              will be of a strong multidisciplinary analytical and research program.  The
              results of the study will be of importance to agencies concerned with the
              management of contaminated coastal sediments.
