Title       : Kakeya Maximal Operators and Oscillatory Integrals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9706764

Award Number: 9706764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67040              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Garnett jbg@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terence Tao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT       Tao will study geometrical analysis conjectures and results,  
              and relate them to oscillatory integral statements such as  the restriction
              conjecture.  A typical example of the former is the  Kakeya conjecture, that a
              set which contains a line segment in every   direction in R^n must have
              dimension n.  A typical example of the   latter is the generalized Strichartz
              estimate for various PDE (the   wave equation, the Schrodinger equation, etc.).
               It has been known   since the 1970s that there is an intimate relationship
              between the   two types of statements, but no systematic approach exists, and
              the   few concrete connections that are known are not very satisfactory.    We
              hope to collect, simplify, unify, and extend previous results in   this
              direction. Tao will also attack some of these conjectures (notably   the Kakeya
              conjecture) directly, using some new and promising   techniques; for example,
              Tao will exploit the affine invariance of   the Kakeya conjecture.    One of
              the aims of this work is to deepen our understanding   of oscillatory
              integrals, which are a type of mathematical expression   which occur in many
              places in physics (optics, quantum mechanics,   acoustics, and any other field
              of physics dealing with waves), as well   as having theoretical importance in
              other fields of mathematics.    Understanding these integrals, and in
              particular knowing how large   they can get, may ultimately lead to new designs
              for physical   applications (e.g. tennis rackets that maximize the area of the 
               "sweet spot", or curved reflectors that have a large number of focus   points
              for a wide range of frequencies), or at least place theoretical   limits on
              such designs.  There are also numerical applications when   modeling certain
              physical systems (e.g. the seismic behavior of the   Earth); if one knows that
              a certain oscillatory integral will never   become very "large" in a certain
              technical sense, then this will   provide a theoretical guarantee to the
              accuracy of the computer   sim ulation of the physical system. Tao will study
              these   oscillatory integrals with the aid of geometry; a connection between  
              these two fields of mathematics is known (being somewhat similar to   the
              relationship between geometrical optics and the wave theory of   light), but is
              not understood completely.  If this connection is   developed thoroughly
              enough, we may be able to reduce difficult   questions in oscillatory integrals
              to simpler problems in geometry,   or at least use geometrical techniques to
              obtain partial progress on   the oscillatory integral problems.
