Title       : Model-Based Signal Processing for Digital Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9706372

Award Number: 9706372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Fitz fitz@ee.eng.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A demodulation paradigm using model-based symbol-by-symbol maximum a posteriori
              (MAP) algorithms for digital communication signals has recently been developed
              by the PIs. In parallel, an experimental physical layer wireless modem has been
              developed that implements many advanced algorithms  from communication theory.
              This project uses these past developments to produce high quality research to: 
                -> Develop new algorithms for important wireless data communication
              applications;    -> Produce techniques to analyze the performance and stability
              of these algorithms,;    ->  Deploy and experiment with new algorithms on
              realistic wireless channels to verify the theory and to formulate more accurate
              analytical signal models.      Symbol-by-symbol MAP demodulation is important
              in a wide variety of digital communication applications. Turbo codes have
              recently sparked significant interest due to their near capacity performance
              and their relatively simple demodulation architecture. MAP decoding is very
              important in Turbo decoding  and the project will explore methods to reduce
              complexity of standard Turbo decoding in a principled fashion and explore
              noniterative techniques for Turbo decoding based on approximations to optimal
              MAP decoding. Additionally MAP demodulation is very important in interleaved
              coded systems commonly  used in wireless communications. This project explores
              soft output algorithms for use in time-varying frequency flat and frequency
              selective fading channels. In particular, we are exploring high performance 
              demodulators for time-division multiple-access applications like IS-136 and for
              digital television. In high capacity applications, interference suppression has
              greatly increased in significance. This project will extend the model-based MAP
              paradigm to develop high performance demodulators for signals in the presence
              of co-channel interference using both a conventional single antenna modem and
              ''space-time'' modem architectures. Another unique feature of our project is
              that we consi der soft output demodulation/decoding in an integrated framework
              with receiver front-end design (e.g.,  equalization, synchronization). Such an
              approach is essential for operating at the low SNR's necessary to take
              advantage of powerful codes (e.g., Turbo codes).    A further unique aspect of
              this project is that we intend to study the resulting algorithms in a much
              greater depth than is traditionally attempted. This project will apply
              sophisticated analytical techniques to  analyze the performance and stability
              of many of the proposed algorithms. This analysis will provide a greater
              insight into the performance of these algorithms than can be achieved via
              simulation study alone. We also intend to implement and field test many of the
              proposed algorithms. We currently have a working wireless modem and new
              algorithms can be added by a simple change of software. This combination of
              algorithm development, algorithm analysis, and algorithm implementation will
              lead to significant new insight into communication theory especially in the
              wireless area. This combined approach will also provide a more well-rounded
              educational experience for the student participants.
