Title       : Ergodic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9706829

Award Number: 9706829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Rudolph djr@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract   Rudolph    Over the coming three years Rudolph proposes to focus
              efforts in three directions. Having proved the multi-term return-times theorem
              by way of multi-fold genericity of sequences for measures, he now proposes to
              consider multiple recurrence results. Having just completed with Janet Kammeyer
              a multi-year project to lay the foundations of restricted orbit equivalence for
              discrete amenable groups, he proposes to apply this machinery to classical and
              novel problems. In particular, the application of restricted orbit equivalence
              methods to Vershik's theory of reverse filtrations has been extremely fruitful
              and will be continued.  Finally, he proposes efforts on constructive problems,
              in particular exotic   Markov randomfields and smooth examples related to the
              classical T,T-inverse map.    Most if not all interesting phenomena have some
              random character.  Ergodic theory, as envisioned in this project, is the
              attempt to ferret out the nature and origin of this randomness in phenomena
              modeled abstractly as probabilistic processes.  This is done by examining the
              behavior of the process over ever larger blocks of time and attempting to
              analyze or recode the information gained.  The principle investigator has
              developed an approach to this analysis that considers controlled distortions of
              time in the process to attempt to modify it to some simpler form.  The degree
              or manner of distortion one allows will determine what properties of the
              process are preserved or lost.  This allows one to focus on some particular
              properties to save allowing others to be eliminated.  One particularly
              interesting case of this is when randomness appears spatially in a crystal or
              tiling and "time" is two or three dimensional.  The crystal structure or tile
              shapes will determine what "distortions" are allowed. This "time distortion"
              approach, called "restricted orbit equivalence" has already shown itself
              well-suited to understanding   a wide variety of properties of random processes
              and appears applicable to  many others.  Pursuing these possibilities is the
              main focus of this project.
