Title       : Nonsymmetric, Noncommutative, Non-Lipschitz Problems for Scale Invariant
               Elliptic Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9706648

Award Number: 9706648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98389              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Verchota gverchot@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706648    Verchota    The Principle Investigator wishes to study solutions to
              scale  invariant elliptic equations in Euclidean spaces under modification of 
              certain frequently assumed hypotheses, with the goal of better  understanding
              the role they play. Hence, symmetry for systems of  equations,
              non-commutativity or nonvariational formulation for higher  order operators
              with bounded coefficients, or boundary values on  non-Lipschitz boundaries will
              be considered. Harmonic analysis  techniques, singular integrals over Lipschitz
              and non-Lipschitz  boundaries, and modern elliptic Partial Differential
              Equation theory  will be used.     Though the proposal stays within the
              theoretic framework of elliptic  PDE, the subject matter is related to
              applications in engineering,  numerical analysis, and applied mathematics.
              Special cases of the  equations considered have been used for some time to
              model, for  example, the distribution of electrical charges, distribution of 
              temperatures in a solid body, or the displacements an elastic body can  undergo
              under stresses imposed on its outside surface or boundary. The  emphasis here
              and recently on scale invariance allows for bodies that  have arbitrary numbers
              of corners and edges (something that occurs  naturally in many materials, e.g.
              in crystals). This is because the  measure of angles remains the same whether
              the angles are viewed  through a microscope or through the wrong end of a
              telescope, i.e.  these very elementary quantities are scale invariant. In
              contrast, our  idea of how smooth the surface of some material might be changes
               dramatically upon magnification, i.e. change of scale. By grounding  our
              theory in quantities more elementary than those which describe  smoothness and
              obtaining various results and estimates on the  quantities modeled
              (temperature, etc.) we obtain a theory that can be  applied both to bodies with
              rough boundaries or to bodies with smooth  boundaries. The proposal can be seen
              as a search for other more  elementary quantities  leading to further
              generalizations or  applications.
