Title       : Analysis of Plant DNA Preservation in Woodrat Middens From the Late Pleistocene
               to the Present
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9706183

Award Number: 9706183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120090             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward M. Golenberg egolenb@biology.biosci.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706183  Golenberg    During the Quaternary, the Earth underwent the last major
              environmental changes, which were manifested by dramatic swings in atmospheric
              chemistry and climate.  These environmental changes coincide with massive
              shifts in species and community distributions, which inevitably are associated
              with population fragmentation, ecotype evolution and formation of sibling
              species.  Yet the morphological evidence of patterns of Quaternary evolution
              remains sparse.  Genetic analyses which could document the patterns of
              evolution have been negligible despite the wealth of well preserved plant and
              animal tissue in packrat middens.  These dry depositions are ideal for the
              preservation of DNA, allowing one to estimate species ranges, ecotonal
              boundaries, hybrid zones; and migrational histories with high spatio-temporal
              resolution.  The delayed progress in DNA analyses of this material is the
              reluctance to support problem driven research utilizing ancient DNA analysis
              when the reliability, repeatability, and taxonomic and chronological range of
              DNA preservation is not well established.  To determine the contributions of
              taxonomic breadth, length of time, and geographical/environmental restrictions
              to long term DNA preservation, material from five plant taxa (Pinus spp.,
              Juniperus spp., Artemisia spp., Atriplex spp., and Yucca spp.) will be sampled
              over increasing age increments from fresh and recently preserved to material
              retrieved from woodrat middens from 90 up to +38,000 years old.  To complete
              this aim, our objectives are:    (  To extract DNA from dated vegetative
              material (leaf, needle, scales, and stems) from a wide geographically and
              chronological range,    (  To amplify, sequence, and analyze gene sequences
              from the chloroplast regions rbcL, trnL to trnF intergenic region, and the
              nuclear ITS regions of the ribosomal repeats,    (  To assess rates of
              successful retrieval as functions of taxon, age, age and tissue type.    Prior
              results from independent laboratories have demonstrate d that DNA can be
              extracted from packrat midden material.  Our own preliminary results show that
              DNA regions that are diagnostic to the subspecies level can be retrieved.  The
              ultimate long range goal of our research is to exploit the large amounts of
              subfossil material to combine, morphological, physiological, biogeographical
              studies with the underlying genetic dynamics of the populations as they evolved
              and migrated during the Quaternary.  This goal will be the first merger of
              population genetic and paleontological studies, and may serve as tests to our
              understanding of the relevance of microevolution to macroevolution. 
              Additionally, in terms of practical implications of the long term goals,
              defining the evolutionary processes behind these historical occurrences is
              manifestly relevant towards understanding and predicting modern biospheric
              responses to natural and anthropogenic climatological changes.
