Title       : Approximation of the Global Attractors of Evolution Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9706903

Award Number: 9706903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174145             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Jolly msjolly@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ciprian I. Foias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706903   M. Jolly            Abstract    This project concerns the long time
              behavior of certain dissipative  physical systems.  One major component seeks
              to locate global  attractors by interpolatory means rather than by direct
              numerical  solution of initial value problems.  It would extend our previous
              work  which used a Taylor expansion in complexified time at a single point in 
              phase space.  The new approach will use several points, typically those  on
              solutions provided either by independent computations or from  experimental
              data.  The main mathematical tool in this effort will be  Nevalinna-Pick
              interpolation.  The systems on which this will be tested  include the 2-D
              Navier-Stokes (NS), Kuramoto-Sivashinsky (KS) Lorenz  equations as well as
              simple geostrophic models.  Another major  component is to compute invariant
              manifolds to arbitrary accuracy.  We  will use the visualization of 2-D
              (un)stable manifolds to help  understand the geometric mechanisms behind
              certain global bifurcations  in 3-D phase space.  This involves computing a
              major portion of global  manifolds.  Other applications require only that the
              manifold be  computed along particular trajectories.  In one case a center
              manifold  will be treated in this way to compute bounded solutions to an
              elliptic  partial differential equation (PDE) in an infinite cylinder.  In 
              another, the dimension of phase space for the KS equation will be  effectively
              reduced to three dimensions by restricting the flow to an  inertial manifold of
              that dimension.  Such a reduction will allow us to  study global bifurcations
              as described above.  The algorithms developed  to compute these manifolds will
              also be applied to the sets  (conjectured to be manifolds) of a prescribed
              exponential growth rate  backward in time for the NS equation.  In fact we will
              construct such  sets as stable "manifolds" for an inverted form of the NS
              equation in  which infinity and the origin of phase space are swapped.  These
              sets  play a role in the interpolatory approach  to locating global 
              attractors, and thus bring our research full circle.    The main purpose of
              this work is to develop reliable methods to  determine whether certain dynamic
              behavior in physical systems is  permanent, or merely temporary.  The ultimate
              application will be to  climatology.  Since the earth's weather system has been
              evolving for  millions of years, one would expect that unless sudden external
              events  take place, the patterns we are living through now will more or less 
              continue for a reasonable period of time. This is not about accurate  long time
              forecasting, rather it is about confirming basic assumptions  regarding the
              mathematical models used in making those predictions.  The scientific community
              makes a tremendous effort in deriving  appropriate mathematical equations, and
              discretizing them so they can  be solved on a computer, all to produce a
              function of time, which  should describe some aspect of the weather.  We all
              know how often this  computed function of time deviates from the actual weather
              after a  relatively short time period.  The major source of this error is not 
              clear.  Is it in the model itself?  Is it from the numerical  approximation in
              the computer solution?  Or is it that both the model  and the approximation are
              valid, but the actual solution is very  sensitive to small changes in the
              initial data, and we simply need to  tighten the tolerance of error in that
              data and in the algorithm used  at each time step.  Our work is directed at
              distinguishing between the  first two cases and the third.  Indeed we seek to
              validate the  model-algorithm pair which produces the forecast, as producing a 
              pattern which is of a permanent nature, even if it is not the  particular
              pattern we are experiencing after several days time.  The  failure of such a
              test will indicate that either the model and/or the  method of solution are
              faulty.  This approach can be applied to other  physical problems.  Indeed the
              initial testing of the methods will be  done on systems less invol ved than
              that of the weather, but which are  nevertheless of current scientific
              interest.  In particular we consider  fundamental models of combustion, fluid
              flow, and turbulence.
