Title       : Design-Oriented Analysis and Practical Applications of Log-Domain Filtering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9706558

Award Number: 9706558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Eisenstadt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Even in today's increasingly digital world, analog continuous time circuits are 
              needed in many applications.  Current approaches to analog processing are
              running  up against fundamental limitations.  Log-domain filtering is a
              relatively new  approach that offers wide dynamic range and excellent
              high-frequency response  using simple, low-voltage circuits.  Log-domain
              filters exploit the translinear  current-voltage characteristics of bipolar
              transistors or weak-inversion MOSFETS  to achieve overall linearity.  The basic
              signal processing elements can be quite  simple in form and their
              high-frequency performance can be excellent while  distortion can be low
              because most of the transistor non-linearities are  cancelled within the
              circuit.    This research has three major thrusts:  The first thrust is toward
              fundamental,  design-oriented analysis of log-domain circuits.  Design
              methodologies and  fundamental understanding of the limitations of log-domain
              filters are in an  early stage.  Fundamental analyses allow development of
              figures of merit for  evaluating and comparing log-domain circuits. The second
              thrust focuses on  developing new log-domain circuit topologies.  Based on an
              understanding of  fundamental limitations, new circuits are being designed to
              improve performance.   The third thrust is toward applications of log-domain
              circuits.  Integrated  circuits are being built and tested to demonstrate the
              usefulness of log-domain  circuits in practical applications.  Initial focus is
              on two application areas:  low-voltage wireless communications, to exploit the
              performance potential of log-  domain circuits and adaptive and biologically
              inspired circuits, to build on  their fundamental simplicity.
