Title       : Dissertation Research: Gross Morphology and Bone Density Patterns in the Knees
               of Catarrhine Primates with Differing Locomotor Behaviors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9706991

Award Number: 9706991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11701              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack T. Stern   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project examines differences in the bone density patterns at the knee joint
              in monkeys, apes, and humans with the goal of correlating such differences with
              locomotion and hindlimb anatomy.  It is predicted that primates living in
              different habitats (trees-dwelling vs. ground-dwelling), or adapted to
              different locomotor modes (e.g., four-legged vs. two-legged), will subject
              their knees to different loading patterns.  It has been previously determined
              that patterns of bone density on a joint surface, based on grey scale patterns
              in CT scans, are correlated with patterns of loading at that joint.  This
              technique will be used to create bone density contour maps of the upper portion
              of the tibia (shin bone) in an attempt to gain insight into different loading
              patterns of the primate knee.  Once correlations between locomotor behavior,
              knee anatomy, and CT density patterns are discovered, they will enable the
              reconstruction of extinct locomotor behaviors. By examining humans and their
              closest relatives, this research can also benefit studies on the origin of
              modern pathologies of the human knee and their potential corrections. Lastly,
              the methods used here can be adapted for conducting similar studies on a
              variety of joint surfaces in the primate skeleton, thereby expanding our
              knowledge of the effects of locomotion on the force distribution in joints.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
