Title       : Self-Affine Tiles, Wavelets and Other Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9706793

Award Number: 9706793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yang Wang wang@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               ABSTRACT DMS-9706793    Wang       Wang proposes research in self-affine tiles
              and tiling by   inflation, dilation equations in several variables, and certain
                problems concerning mathematical quasicrystals. Two scale dilation  
              equations arise in a wide variety of applications, including   orthonormal
              wavelet bases and subdivision schemes for computer   generation of curves and
              surfaces. Self-affine tiles are closely  related to two scale dilation
              equations in the sense that the  characteristic function of any self-affine
              tile satisfies a two scale  dilation equation. While the study of two scale
              dilation equations in   higher  dimensions has always attracted attention, the
              study of   selfaffine tiling has gained considerable momentum recently due to  
              its applications in constructing orthonormal wavelets and the growing  
              interests in aperiodic tiling and quasicrystals. Wang intends to study   non
              separable wavelet bases in higher dimensions, self-affine tiles,   and
              mathematical quasicrystals.    Orthonormal wavelets in dimension two or more
              are extremely   important for numerous applications, especially in signal
              processing   and image compression.  In the later case, for instance, a wavelet
                transform is applied to a  given image and compression is then carried  on
              the transform. The  wavelet used will be two dimensional, as an   image. Up to
              now, we have not had a good method  to construct these   wavelet other than by
              multiplying  two one dimensional wavelets.  These wavelets lead to subtle 
              artifacts in the decompressed   images such as jagged diagonal lines and slight
              blackness. It is   believed that those artifacts can be reduced by using
              genuinely two   dimensional wavelets. Wang has outlined certain approach which
              may   potentially lead to the construction of this kind of wavelet.  Recently
              Schechtman and others have formed metal alloys that have  aperiodic atomic
              structures, generating great interests among   chemists, physicists, and
              mathematicians in the study of   quasicrystal . Wang proposes to study this
              quasicrystals from the   mathematical point of view.
