Title       : Teichmuller Theory and Quadratic Differentials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9706769

Award Number: 9706769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51770              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikola Lakic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  ABSTRACT      Lakic         This project addresses problems concerning
              metric and   analytic properties of infinite dimensional Teichmuller spaces.   
              Properties of some recently introduced new Teichmuller spaces   will be
              explored.  These new spaces appear to have interesting   applications to the
              study of complex dynamics.  Three closely related   areas will be considered in
              this project.  The first concerns the   classical Teichmuller theory, and it is
              based on classifying the   automorphisms of infinite dimensional Teichmuller
              spaces and on   studying uniquely extremal Beltrami coefficients.  The second
              area   focuses on two recently introduced Teichmuller spaces, the Teichmuller  
              space with asymptotic conformal equivalence and the Teichmuller space   of a
              closed set in the plane. Finally, some applications will be   considered. A
              special emphasis  will be placed on studying the   invariant line fields on a
              Julia set, and on exploring the smoothness   properties of the mapping by
              heights for quadratic differentials in   the disk.       Recently, scientists
              have been able to apply several new   analytic and geometric methods to a
              number of important  nonlinear   problems in dynamics, ranging from physics and
              chemistry to ecology   and economics. In particular, the methods of Teichmuller
              theory have   contributed to the depth and scopes of research in complex
              dynamics   and renormalization. A special emphasis will be placed on studying  
              the Julia set, that appears in the iteration theory of holomorphic   functions
              that gave birth to the Mandelbrot set and to fractals.
