Title       : Reduced-Rank Adaptive Filtering for Spread Spectrum Communications, Array
               Processing and Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9706215

Award Number: 9706215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Gagliardi bobgags@solar.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Irving S. Reed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research develops new fast adaptive filtering algorithms and structures, 
              which are characterized by a low computational complexity, and is applying them
               to a broad class of applications, including modern communications systems and 
              advanced sensor array processing.  For the communications application, this
              study  demonstrates that such adaptive signal processing can effectively
              mitigate  interference in satellite and terrestrial CDMA spread spectrum
              wireless  communications as well as provide cross-talk cancellation in dense
              WDM fiberoptic  links.  The benefits of this new technology include power
              savings and increased  data throughput, leading to newer generations of
              receiver processing hardware  that are being developed from this study.  In the
              sensor array processing  application, it is demonstrated that low-complexity,
              reduced-dimension adaptive  CFAR detectors are capable of outperforming all
              existing detectors for modern  radar systems.  The technology developed from
              this research permits space-time  adaptive processing on platforms which are
              limited in terms of size, weight and  power; such as airborne and space-segment
              surveillance systems.    The key underlying innovation in all of these
              applications is the use of  transform domain adaptive signal processing
              utilizing the cross-spectral metric  and low-complexity filtering structures. 
              This metric permits a lower-order  adaptive filter to converge to a solution
              which is either identical or very close  to the optimal solution.  Since this
              filter has a smaller number of adaptive  weights, it converges faster and
              requires a lower computational complexity.  This  new technology represents a
              generalization of multiresolution and time-frequency  basis representations. 
              The full-dimensional transform domain representation  (realized using a
              filterbank, DFT/DCT, or wavelet) is then compressed to keep  only the most
              important information as selected by the cross-spectral metric.
