Title       : Dissertation Research: Morphological Diversification and Phylogentic Systematics
               of the Plant Genus Weinmannia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9706948

Award Number: 9706948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Schaal schaal@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul E. Berry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9706948  Schaal   Graduate student Jason Bradford, under the direction of
              advisors Dr. Barbara Schaal at Washington University and Dr. Paul Berry at the
              Missouri Botanical Garden, is studying morphological evolution of the complex
              inflorescence structures in the tropical tree genus Weinmannia, of the
              Cunoniaceae family. Extensive field collecting has been done in parts of South
              America and in Madagascar, and additional collecting targets regions of high
              species diversity in Australasia. A major focus of the research is DNA
              sequencing of a nuclear ribosomal RNA gene, to generate data appropriate for
              constructing a phylogenetic framework of the genus from mutational differences
              among the species. About one-third of the estimated 150 species in the genus
              are to be analyzed for DNA variation. Studies of the position and complexity of
              the branched flowering axes, the inflorescences, will then be conducted, to
              distinguish structures that are likely the result of shared ancestry from those
              arising as convergent adaptations in different lineages.   In a project focused
              on tropical woody plants, and bringing both molecular and morphological
              approaches to taxonomic study, Mr. Bradford will add field collecting in poorly
              researched areas of Melanesia and Polynesia to sample Weinmannia diversity
              across its southern-hemisphere range. The molecular phylogenetic data will
              augment general studies of dicot phylogeny ongoing in several laboratories in
              the world. The morphological analyses contribute to renewed study of modular
              growth patterns in flowering plants, where differences in timing (heterochrony)
              and in positioning (heterotopy) characterize vegetative and reproductive axes
              in related species.
