Title       : Interior Point Methods for NLP Problems in Process Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9706950

Award Number: 9706950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorenz T. Biegler lb01@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reha H. Tutuncu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9216,9263,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9706950    Biegler    This proposal deals with the development and application
              of  interior-point methods (IPMs) to nonlinear programming (NLP) problems. 
              Particular attention will be devoted to large-scale and structured  quadratic
              programming problems that are encountered as subproblems in  the solution of
              NLPs coming from chemical process engineering.  The  proposed research will
              focus on exploiting the structure of various  classes of process engineering
              problems through efficient decomposition  methods in large-scale linear
              algebra.  In addition, principal  investigators will develop and refine an
              interior-point strategy that  has close parallels with successive quadratic
              programming (SQP)  algorithms and address some open questions related to the
              efficient use  of warm-starts in IPMs.  Finally, these algorithms will be
              implemented  to demonstrate their performance on large-scale problems in
              process  engineering.    Increased international competition along with
              environmental  constraints and resource limitations require much more
              sophisticated  design and manufacturing strategies for chemical process
              industries.  Over the past decade these needs have started to be addressed by 
              efficient optimization strategies. Nevertheless, the size and  complexity of
              these problems (with sizes approaching a million  variables) impose a heavy
              burden on current optimization algorithms.  The proposed research will allow
              the solution of much larger  optimization problems faced by this industry.
              Through the development  and application of interior point methods for
              nonlinear programming, we  will be able to develop tailored solution strategies
              for the  optimization of large-scale steady state and dynamic process models. 
              This will lead to consideration of much larger and more difficult  process
              engineering models, as well as the integration of multiple  processes. The
              result will lead to chemical processes that are  environmentally benign, very
              efficient in the conversion of raw  materials to products and hi ghly
              competitive in today's marketplace.
