Title       : Dynamics of Nonlinear Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9706050

Award Number: 9706050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56499              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Mallet-Paret jmp@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Mallet-Paret    Mallet-Paret will study fundamental qualitative
              properties of various classes of nonlinear dynamical systems, as they arise
              from differential equations. Among the systems to be considered are those from
              ordinary and partial differential equations, systems of lattice differential
              equations (that is, spatially discrete systems), differential delay equations,
              and nonlinear maps on cones.  Issues such as existence of equilibria and their
              stability, pattern formation, spatial chaos, and traveling waves, will be
              examined for these equations.  In addition to established techniques (both
              theoretical and numerical) from differential equations and dynamical systems, a
              significant portion of the proposed research involves the development and
              implementation of new tools and techniques with which to study these systems.
              Among the techniques to be employed are those involving singular perturbations,
              invariant manifolds, and topological methods (Morse decompositions, fixed  
              point theorems, degree theory).    Mallet-Paret is developing new mathematical
              techniques for analyzing and understanding differential equations which arise
              as models in various areas of science.  A wide range of scientific areas is
              represented, including biology, chemistry, electrical circuit theory, image
              processing, and material science. While this is a very broad scope of inquiry,
              the specific problems to be studied exhibit features in common -- spontaneous
              formation of patterns, self-sustained oscillations, regulation by internal
              feedback (often with time delays) -- which can be analyzed with some of the
              basic tools of dynamical systems theory.  It is expected that the resulting the
              mathematical advances arising from these studies will increase the knowledge
              of, and will provide insight into, both the abstract theory of dynamical
              systems, and the scientific areas of inquiry.
