Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Unitary Representations and Zuckerman Modules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9706922

Award Number: 9706922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76336              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susana A. Salamanca-Riba ssalaman@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Salamanca-Riba    During the duration of this grant Dr. Salamanca-Riba
              intends to investigate some extensions to her proof of the following conjecture
              of Vogan and Zuckerman on the representation theory of Lie groups:  'An
              irreducible unitary Harish-Chandra module of a group G whose infinitesimal
              character satisfies some regularity assumption is isomorphic to a Zuckerman
              functor module derived from a one dimensional unitary representation of a
              subgroup of G'.  Relaxing this regularity assumption to include all genuine
              unitary representations of the metaplectic group, the PI plans to use the
              Adams-Barbasch dual pair correspondence of these representations to realize
              them as Zuckerman modules that are induced from some other representations easy
              to describe.  The PI also has a program already in progress in collaboration
              with David Vogan.  The problem they want to solve is the following conjecture: 
              There is a bijection between the set of unitary representations of G whose
              lowest K type is associated to a fixed parameter and the set of unitary
              representations of a certain subgroup associated to the same parameter and
              whose K types are in turn associated to that same parameter.  A fourth problem
              she wants to study is those unitary representations of a Lie group G which are
              predicted by the orbit method.  These representations, when restricted to the
              maximal compact subgroup K are multiplicity free and are related to
              multiplicity free representations on the ring of regular functions of a
              nilpotent orbit.    Lie groups have connections in many areas of pure and
              applied Mathematics like Differential Equations, Harmonic Analysis, Topology,
              Geometry, Ergodic Theory; and in other areas of Science and Engineering as
              well, like Materials Science, Quantum Field Theory, Particle Physics, Control
              Theory and Robotics.  For example, the PI has become interested in the
              applications of Lie Theory to the field of Geometric Control Theory.  She is
              now exploring some mechanical systems that are interesting  for applications in
              several very different areas, such as robotic assisted surgery, waste
              management and spacecraft control.  These systems seem to have some common
              grounds that allow engineers to be able to control the systems and could
              possibly be explained with Lie Theory.  She is also interested in exploring
              these questions a bit further to see if they lead to interesting mathematical
              questions and if the answers to those questions lead to practical applications
              in industry.
