Title       : I. Stability of Waves in Viscous Conservation Laws. II. Phase Transitions and
               Minimal Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1999   
File        : a9706842

Award Number: 9706842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80644              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Zumbrun kzumbrun@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9107990     Zumbrun    Kevin Zumbrun proposes several projects originating  
              from fluid dynamics.  These concern structure and   stability of interfacial
              solutions arising in singular   limit problems, specifically SHOCK WAVES and
              PHASE   BOUNDARIES.  Stability is a central topic in shock   wave theory,
              connected with such issues as physical   admissibility of hyperbolic waves,
              convergence of   difference schemes, and the inviscid limit problem.    Zumbrun
              proposes to study a variety of related questions,   from stability of 
              multidimensional viscous shock waves   in compressible Navier-Stokes equations
              to physical   significance of oscillatory shock layers in a nonlocal,  
              dispersive sedimentation model. The planned methods of   analysis include,
              among others,  pointwise, Green's   function techniques which have proved to be
              useful in   other situations of delicate stability, spectral analysis   using
              matrix perturbation theory, and Evans function   techniques borrowed from the
              study of reaction diffusion   fronts.  Likewise, structure of phase boundaries
              is a   central topic in the study of phase transitions.  In the   limit of zero
              transition layer thickness, Cahn-Hilliard   models for phase transition reduce
              to idealized minimal   surface problems, and the phase boundaries to minimal  
              surfaces.  This link is a rich source of intuition,   suggesting new problems
              in both the geometry and pde   setting.  Zumbrun proposes several of these for
              study,   most notably the regularity of "Neumann" solutions   for the minimal
              surface problem.  The planned method   of analysis is by a combination of pde
              and geometric   measure theory techniques.    The behavior and structure of
              interfaces is a topic  of basic physical interest, as the organizing principle 
               for a variety of effects seen in nature.  For example,   soap bubbles are well
              known to form minimum interfacial   energy structures identified by the
              property that they   have minimal surface area.  These are also STABLE under  
              small perturbations , by the principle that systems move   always toward
              lower-energy states, in this case back toward  the minimal energy
              configuration.  At the same time, the    large-scale distribution of matter in
              the visible universe   seems to have a similar structure, with vast voids
              surrounded   by  thin layers of galaxies. Apparently, we live on an  
              interface--evidently, also, the minimization of quite   different energies can
              lead to similar structure through a   common mathematical mechanism.  The
              examples given above  are just two  instances of the interfaces known as  PHASE
                BOUNDARIES.   Other important interfaces are SHOCK WAVES,   or moving
              boundaries separating substances of very different   properties (most usually,
              a "front" separating air of very   different temperature or pressure).  Like
              phase boundaries,   these are ubiquitous in nature, from sonic booms to "waves"
                of concentration in a chemical reaction.  Again, it is   stability or
              instability that determines whether a particular  shock structure will persist
              or break up.   The mathematics   governing stability of  interfaces is rather
              subtle and is   by no means completely understood.  Indeed, the projects  
              proposed by Zumbrun concern basic theoretical questions   that must be answered
              before we can confidently pursue   practical applications such as computer
              modeling of these   phenomena in the variety of settings to which they pertain.
