Title       : Dynamic Control and Parametric Resonance in Hydrodynamic Systems: A Theoretical,
               Computational, and Experimental Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9706951

Award Number: 9706951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan M. Lopez   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jie Shen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,9161,9263,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706961   Lopez and Shen      This project is to study dynamic control and
              parametric excitations in  hydrodynamic systems and to examine the interplay
              between parametric  resonance and stabilization/destabilization of 
              transitions/bifurcations, through an integrated program of analysis, 
              computation and experiment. Two basic flow sets, namely the  Taylor-Couette
              flow and vortex breakdown flow, have been chosen in  order to develop a general
              understanding of the complex hydrodynamics  and control strategies. These
              generic flows are attractive because the  degree of complexity can be precisely
              controlled by relatively simple  changes in the flow state or boundary
              conditions, and at the same time  they possess rich dynamics which are
              representative of a wide class of  general hydrodynamic systems that may
              respond to dynamic control in a  complex manner. In particular, these classes
              of flows may respond  resonantly to the parametric excitation of the applied
              control. An  investigation of the behavior of these generic flows will help to
              form  a better understanding of more general time-dependent hydrodynamic 
              systems. The interplay between dynamic control mechanisms and  parametric
              resonance will be investigated using (linear) Floquet theory  as a first step
              in understanding the dynamics at the point of  transition or bifurcation. Flows
              beyond the validity of the Floquet  analysis will be studied using three
              different nonlinear computational  approaches, each with distinct advantages
              and limitations. Their  combined implementation is capable of resolving a wide
              range of  problems and addressing distinct issues within each problem. The 
              results from the experiment will be used to refine the analysis and  control
              implementation.    This research will not only result in a deeper understanding
              of the  complex spatio-temporal dynamics of hydrodynamic systems, but will also
               make a significant practical impact. For example, in the aerodynamics 
              industry, the control strategies will aid in drag reduction a nd reduced 
              fatigue due to aero-acoustic structural resonances; in fact, parametric 
              excitation in the form of span-wise oscillations of the boundary has  recently
              been demonstrated experimentally to reduce drag in turbulent  boundary layers
              by researchers at the University of Texas and others.  In the materials and
              chemical processing industries, many of the  manufacturing processes rely on an
              effective control of transitions and  instabilities. The new fundamental and
              practical insights on control  dynamics of complex systems anticipated from
              this research can provide  U.S. industry with a competitive edge.
