Title       : Analytic Problems in Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9706507

Award Number: 9706507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98535              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Yang pyang@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706507    Yang    Yang proposes to study three problems in an analytic approach
              to conformal  geometry. The first problem is the variational problem: to
              minimize the square  integral of the Weyl tensor of a four dimensional
              manifold. The optimal   conformal class which achieves the extremal will have a
              canonical metric  which is often Einstein, conformally flat, or half
              conformally flat. The second  problem is to find apriori estimates for
              solutions of the prescribed scalar  curvature problem on spheres of dimension
              greater than three. It is expected  that there will be a new phenomenon to be
              understood which does not arise  in the case for spheres of lower dimensions.
              The general goal is to find   general conditions for the solvability of the
              Nirenberg problem in  these dimensions.  The third problem is to investigate
              regularity property of   critical maps of conformally invariant energy
              functionals. For biharmonic  maps in four dimension, such regularity result
              will permit the construction  of biharmonic maps of four dimension which
              represent an arbitrary homotopy  class.  Yang has already made good progress on
              this problem.    The project represents an analytic approach to the study of
              four dimensional  spacetime which may or may not model the actual physical
              spacetime in which  we live. The idea is to study various global quantities
              attached to each  spacetime that reflect the local geometric structure. We then
              look for  the spacetime that optimizes these global properties. The ones that
              do   often have nice properties and may allow one to eventually classify  the
              set of all possible spcetimes. The three projects outlined above  are technical
              aspects that need to be developed to carry out such   a program.
