Title       : Hydrogeologic Characterization of the Sand Hill Fault Zone, Albuquerque Basin,
               New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2000   
File        : a9706482

Award Number: 9706482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurel B. Goodwin lgoodwin@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter S. Mozley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allan L. Gutjahr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Haneberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9706482  Goodwin    Faults can act as either conduits or barriers to groundwater
              flow, and their permeability can change over time as a result of diagenesis and
              deformation in the fault zone.  We propose to investigate the influence of
              faults on fluid flow by conducting an integrated geologic/hydrologic
              investigation of the spatial distribution of fault-zone permeability in poorly
              consolidated sediments.  all previous studies of fault-zone permeability  have
              focused on rocks, yet many important aquifers in the United States consist of
              poorly consolidated sediments.    Our characterization of hydrogeologic units
              in fault zones in sedimentary aquifers will be based on detailed study of an
              exhumed normal fault cutting poorly consolidated Cenozoic sediments.  The Sand
              Hill fault is exceptionally well exposed, providing extensive vertical and
              lateral sections for study of the geometry and continuity of structures and
              diagenetic features within the fault zone.  The fault zone is distinguished by
              preferential cementation with respect to adjacent sediments, and includes
              elongate oriented zones of cement that record the orientation of groundwater
              flow at the time of precipitation.  Preliminary studies of fault-zone
              structures and cement distribution indicate that fault-zone permeability
              characteristics vary in a predictable manner.  We have constructed a conceptual
              model in which the width and permeability structure of the fault zone vary both
              laterally and vertically depending on the sediments juxtaposed by the fault. 
              This variation is represented by two end members: (1) Where fine-grained, low
              permeability units such as silts and clays are juxtaposed by the fault, the
              zone of deformation is narrow and weakly cemented.  (2) Where relatively
              coarse-grained, initially moderate to high permeability units such as coarse
              sands are juxtaposed by the fault, the zone of deformation is wide and
              moderately to strongly cemented.    Detailed geologic mapping and petrographic
              studies of deformation features within  the fault zone, cementation patterns
              both within and outside the fault zone, and stratigraphic variability of
              sediments will be used to refine this preliminary conceptual model of
              fault-zone hydrogeology.  As a beginning point for understanding the influence
              of cementation on fluid flow, we will consider both uncemented and cemented
              states.  The permeability variations of uncemented fault-zone hydrogeologic
              units and lithostratigraphic units cut by the fault will be determined using a
              combination of gas minipermeameters and falling head permeability measurements.
               The pre-cementation permeability will be estimated by dissolving cements and
              determining the permeability of repacked sediments as well as applying
              empirical formulae correlating grain size with permeability.  One fundamental
              challenge in this study is to use the centimeter-scale permeability values to
              describe larger scale permeability characteristic of the sediments.  Our
              approach to this problem will be to used the permeability data to characterize
              meter-scale hydrogelogic units.  The larger-scale (i.e., deca to hectometer
              scale) hydrogeologic units can be considered as discrete structures and
              characterized by geological mapping and distribution of meter-scale
              measurements within the units.  The conceptural model and quantitative
              measurements will then be used with classical geostatistical continuum methods
              based on variograms and cross-variograms as well as discrete statistical
              approaches to characterize the spatial distribution of hydrogeologic units and
              petrophysical properties within the Sand Hill fault zone, and to relate these
              to the spatial distribution and petrophysical properties of lithostratigraphic
              units juxtaposed by the fault.    The comprehensive nature of this project
              makes it imperative that collaboration occur at all stages.  Statistical design
              will be incorporated with data collection and initial analyses will be used to
              guide measurement strategies at the later stages.
