Title       : (SGER) Small Grant for Exploratory Research on Mixed Matrix Reactively
               Intercalated Composite Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9706621

Award Number: 9706621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: ELDRED H CHIMOWITZ                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Koros wjk@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                            Abstract    Proposal  No:   9706621  Proposal Type:  SGER 
              Principal Investigator:  William J. Koros  Affiliation:   University of Texas
              at Austin      This grant is awarded through the Separations and Purification
              Program sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport and Separations Program of
              the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.  The principal investigator is Dr.
              William Koros of the University of Texas at Austin.  The objective of the
              proposal is to develop composite membranes containing a molecular sieving
              material ( zeolites) embedded in polymeric media.  While zeolites have the
              shape and size selectivity potential to separate gases, they are inorganic
              materials and hard to fabricate into flexible membranes.  Incorporating them
              into polymeric materials allows fabrication of various membrane configurations
              including the hollow-fiber configuration the PI proposes to use.  However, a
              new problem comes in, as defects and voids between the zeolite crystallites and
              the polymer matrix lead to species bypass of the selective medium.  The PI
              proposes to repair these membranes by caulking these voids by carrying out a
              post membrane fabrication treatment, where a monomer is allowed to diffuse into
              the voids and then a polymer is generated to seal the voids.  It is
              hypothesized that once these voids are caulked, the only route for gas
              transport is through the zeolite channels, thereby imposing the required
              selectivity.    The project entails high risk, but the potential benefits are
              tremendous.  Composite membranes containing zeolites have tremendous potential
              in gas separations.  There is a need for flexible zeolite based membranes.  The
              PI's work on incorporating zeolites in polymer matrices and modifying the
              membrane so that transport occurs only in the zeolite micropores is interesting
              both from a scientific and an industrial perspective.  The question of membrane
              optimization through post-treatment is an important one.
