Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Virtual Proving Ground
               Simulation: Mechanical and Electromechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9706083

Award Number: 9706083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raul G. Longoria r.longoria@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Weldon  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  EEC-9706083  Weldon    The long time and high costs of developing new
              vehicles and equipment for future products are becoming prohibitive.  Companies
              and the Government are increasingly turning to simulation to determine the
              effectiveness of the design of new products.  Research to develop a virtual
              proving ground will provide the data necessary for product testing without
              producing expensive prototypes.  The University of Iowa and the University of
              Texas at Austin have joined together to form an Industry/University Cooperative
              Research Center (I/UCRC) for Virtual Proving Ground Simulation:  Mechanical and
              Electromechanical Systems.  About a dozen companies and Federal agencies have
              committed to become members of the Center.  The Center meets all requirements
              of the Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers Program.    The
              multi-university Center brings together unique capabilities of research teams
              from three universities (two of which will receive NSF I/UCRC funds) to address
              research areas that none of the  schools could address alone.  The Center will
              utilize expertise and facilities for vehicle system simulation developed at the
              University of Iowa as part of a prior NSF I/UCRC in Simulation and Design
              Optimization of Mechanical Systems.  These capabilities, with the new addition
              of the University of Iowa's National Advanced Driving Simulator (NADS) for the
              driver-in-the-loop real-time simulation, combined with expertise at the
              University of Texas at Austin in electromechanical system simulation and design
              and expertise at Auburn University in vehicle-terrain simulation, will allow
              the proposed Center to do virtual proving ground simulation.  Virtual proving
              ground simulation incorporates the dynamics of the interaction between a
              vehicle and the surface on which it moves.      The research program consists
              of core research projects funded from center membership fees, and pilot
              projects funded by both member companies and Federal agencies.  The proposed
              core research projects  are:    Vehicle and Equipment Virtual Proving Ground
              Modeling and Simulation,  Virtual Proving Ground Modeling,  Dynamic System
              Simulation,  Tire/Track-Soil Interaction Modeling (Auburn University), 
              Numerical Methods for Virtual Proving Ground Simulation,  Electromechanical
              System Modeling,  Power System Simulation in a Virtual Proving Ground
              Environment,  Simulation-Based Design of Power Systems, and  Power System
              Simulation-Based Testing and Evaluation.    The bulk of the funding for the
              universities to work on pilot projects will come from the Department of Defense
              and other Federal agencies.  These projects are within the fundamental goals
              and objectives of the Center's research program.  They greatly expand the
              Center's research base and effectively guide the direction of the research to
              meet industrial needs.  The proposed pilot projects are:    Simulation-Based
              Design of Hybrid-Electric Vehicles,  Agricultural Equipment Virtual Proving
              Ground,  Construction Equipment Virtual Proving Ground,  Military Vehicle
              Virtual Proving Ground,  Rocket System Virtual Proving Ground, 
              Simulation-Based Design of Advanced Electromechanical Devices, and 
              Simulation-Based Testing and Evaluation of Critical Power System Components.   
              The DoD and other Federal agencies will support pilot projects with funds as
              they become available during the five year period.
