Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Holocene Evolution of the Ganges-Brahmaputra Delta:
               Implications of Floodplain/Delta Plain Development for Deltaic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9706274

Award Number: 9706274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Kuehl kuehl@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7334

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706274  Kuehl    Funds are requested for a two-year collaborative study to
              examine the Holocene evolution of the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta.  The
              Ganges-Brahmaputra (G-B) river system carries a billion tonnes of sediment
              annually, yet the fate of this material past the upstream gauging stations, as
              in most of the world's rivers, is not known.  This study will test the
              hypothesis that at least half of the rivers' sediment load is being sequestered
              in the floodplain and delta plain, resulting in an evolution and facies
              architecture significantly different from classic deltaic models.  Such
              magnitude of sediment sequestering, in the Ganges Brahmaputra as well as in
              other river systems, has important implications for our understanding of the
              global flux of riverine particulates to the world ocean.  The specific
              objectives of this study are to:  1) Construct a sediment budget for the
              Holocene floodplain/delta plain: 2) Detail the stratigraphic architecture and
              history of infilling for the Sylhet, a large tectonic basin located along the
              previous course of the Brahmaputra: 3) Characterize the nature and magnitude of
              recent floodplain sedimentation in other portions of the Bengal Basin,
              including small sub-basins, and bil (wetland) areas; 4) Determine the
              stratigraphic architecture and magnitude of delta plain sedimentation, focusing
              on the tidal distributary channels of the Ganges; and 5) Link results from 1-4
              above with our previous offshore studies to develop a holistic conceptual model
              for G-B delta evolution during the Late Holocene.  Deep borings (~100 m) and
              cores will be collected from the floodplain and the delta plain during the dry
              season in order to construct the sediment budget and to constrain seismic
              observations.  Water-based, high-resolution seismic-reflection studies would be
              conducted in the Sylhet Basin during the summer monsoon, when the basin is
              deeply flooded, in order to detail the stratigraphy of the Late Holocene basin
              fill.  Geochronological and sedimentological studies of cor es collected from
              the floodplain and delta plain will enable us to determine the sediment process
              rates and stratigraphic architecture of extant sedimentary environments for the
              G-B system.  The completion of the above tasks will enable us to construct a
              conceptual model of deltaic evolution which will represent an important
              end-member for deltaic styles, one for which floodplain/delta plain sediment
              sequestering likely plays a major role.  In addition to the aforementioned
              geological and global implications, the understanding of recent deltaic
              evolution attained during this study would contribute to a rational strategy
              for development of one of the most densely populated, low-lying areas of the
              world
