Title       : CREST: Center for Systems Science Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a9706268

Award Number: 9706268
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4528000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leehyun Keel keel@gauss.tsuniv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee State University
	      3500 John A. Merritt Blvd.
	      Nashville, TN  372091500    615/320-3131

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The inter- and multi-disciplinary Center for Systems Science Research (CSSR) at
              Tennessee State   University has as its primary objective to establish a
              permanent research base which produces quality,   publishable research,
              enhances the participation and substantially involves minority students and
              faculty   in all Center components, and through a regional resource center,
              strengthens science and engineering   awareness at HBCU's in Tennessee and
              Kentucky.  The CSSR is broad in scope and contains four   engineering/science
              components which seek to apply various forms of mathematical models to
              understand   the behavior of complex physical systems.  These components will
              investigate:  (1) a new approach to   optimal and robust control, (2) the
              modeling of complex astrophysical systems, (3) the behavior of large-  scale
              dynamic systems under stochastic structural perturbations, and (4) the modeling
              of multiphase   complex flows.  The first component intends to develop a
              practical design-oriented approach to system   control wherein low order and
              fixed structure controllers can be designed to incorporate modern ideas of  
              robustness and optimality.  Extensively utilizing the capabilities of the TSU
              automated observatory, the   astrophysics component will model the luminosity
              changes of Sun-like stars with magnetic activity, search   for extra-solar
              planets, refine the model of evolution of cool stars, model the surface
              structure of stars, and   investigate a wide range of stellar eruptions.  The
              third research component will expand studies of linear   and nonlinear systems
              of integro-differential and partial differential equations under the influence
              of both   internal and environmental randomly varying perturbations and will
              formulate, develop, and analyze both   probabilistic, analytic, and numerical
              methods for the study of such systems.  The fourth engineering   components
              aims at modeling multiphase complex flows with phase changes and specifically
              focuses on   three-dimensional convective sol idification and melting of
              dispersed or packed solid particles.
