Title       : New Mathematics and Innovative Numerical Methods for the Valuation of Options
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9706985

Award Number: 9706985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Junping Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Ewing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Rundell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706985  Junping Wang    Five important aspects on the valuation of options will
              be addressed.  First, we propose a new mathematical formulation for the free
              boundary value problem.  Second, we investigate the uniqueness and existence of
              the solution.  Third, we use finite element methods to compute the option price
              based on our proposed formulas.  Fourth, we provide iterative schemes to
              effectively solve the system of nonlinear algebraic equations arising from the
              finite element method.  Fifth, we will develop a code package that is
              computationally efficient and robust.  The proposed new mathematics features a
              weak variational approach to the time value of the option by using a Hilbert
              space method.  The weak form for the valuation of options opens a door to the
              use of finite element methods together with grid local refinement in the
              approximation of the option pricing function and the free boundary by efficient
              numerical techniques such as domain decomposition and multigrid methods.  In
              particular, this approach provides a very promising future for the computation
              of financial products involving multi-assets and securities, as the
              computational domain will be of multi-dimension in those applications.   
              Financial derivatives are a major and fast growing area in modern financial
              markets.  For example, according to the Swaps Monitor, the size of swaps alone,
              a particular kind of derivatives, was approximately $9 trillion in 1993,almost
              the size of the annual gross national income of the United States.  The
              valuation of these derivatives is practically useful, important, and
              mathematically challenging.  Advanced techniques in mathematics have been
              playing an important role in the understanding and valuation of various
              derivative securities ever since the first trading of these financial products.
               With increasing complexity of new and exotic financial products, the demand
              for new and efficient techniques in mathematics and computation becomes greater
              type derivatives, but also has far-reaching im pact on derivative valuations in
              general.  The methods can be extended to currency options, interest rate
              options and exotic options such as Asian options and lookback options which
              have added difficulties due to the path-dependence of the payoff function. In
              particular, the methods can yield the value of various bonds based on the new
              and empirically relevant interest rate diffusions, resulting in the value of
              swaps and various mortgage-backed securities.
