Title       : Development of An Integrated Proximity Effect Correction Scheme
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9706944

Award Number: 9706944
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158366             (Estimated)
Investigator: Soo-Young Lee sylee@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706944  Lee  Proximity effect refers to blurring of the written pattern due to
              electron scattering in E-beam lithography and diffraction of light in optical
              lithography.  As the minimum feature size in a circuit pattern is continuously
              reduced as an effort to increase circuit density, the proximity effect has
              become a serious problem.  Without an efficient proximity effect correction
              method, the density (capacity) of a circuit pattern that can be fabricated will
              be significantly limited.  In the future, proximity effect correction is
              expected to be an essential step for nano-fabrication in E-beam and optical
              lithography.  Most of the previous schemes proposed for proximity effect
              correction are either not general enough for realistic circuits or too
              time-consuming to be used for large circuit patterns.  The main objective of
              this research project is to develop an integrated proximity effect correction
              scheme which can overcome the drawbacks of the previous schemes in order to
              meet the future need.  As the first step toward this goal, a hierarchical
              rule-based approach, named PYRAMID, to proximity effect correction in E-beam
              lithography was proposed earlier.  Its first implementation, PYRAMID 1.0,
              designed for homogeneous substrates has been completed.  PYRAMID 1.0 has been
              via computer simulation and experimentally demonstrated to be able to correct
              high-density circuit patterns with the minimum feature size down to 0.1 (m
              successfully in terms of CD control and correction speed.  In this project,
              PYRAMID is to be extended for non-homogeneous and/or nonplanar substrates,
              optical proximity correction, mask-making application, hybrid (shape and dose)
              modification for better CD control, non-rectangular primitives, and ultra large
              scale patterns.  Also, distributed implementation of PYRAMID software is
              proposed to utilize the computing power of a network of workstations which are
              readily available these days.  ***
