Title       : Partial Differential Equations and Real Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1999  
File        : a9706497

Award Number: 9706497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70407              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cristian E. Gutierrez gutier@math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706497    Gutierrez    The problems in this project concentrate on the study 
              of the behavior of solutions of degenerate  elliptic and parabolic equations in
              non-divergence  form with non-smooth coefficients. Such  coefficients may
              either vanish, be infinite, or both.  A primary goal is to study the validity
              of the Harnack  principle for nonnegative solutions and estimates of  the
              second derivatives of solutions. Though the theory for  divergence form
              equations with measurable coefficients  has been the focus of research during
              recent years,  the corresponding theory for non-divergence form  equations is
              much less developed. Non-divergence  equations are natural in Probability,
              Control Theory, and Finance.  The results known in this direction concern 
              either smooth coefficients or the strictly elliptic case,  but the methods
              developed for those cases do not  apply to the problems proposed.  In some
              cases the geometry needed to  study the linear equation is given by the
              Monge-Ampere equation,  a fully nonlinear partial differential equation.  This
              approach requires the study of the shape and invariance  properties of the
              level sets of solutions to the Monge-Ampere  equation, and further work will
              continue along these lines.  The basis and methodology that will be used to
              solve this  set of problems are via the maximum principle, localization,  and
              nonlinear variants of the Calderon-Zygmund decomposition.    This mathematical
              research is in the field of  partial differential equations, linear and
              nonlinear.  These equations are the principal classical tool  of the
              applications of mathematics to the physical world.  The project has a strong
              connection with Harmonic Analysis  in Euclidean space, a subject that has
              flourished during the  second half of the twentieth century and that has become
               an indispensable tool to provide qualitative and quantitative  information
              about the solutions of partial differential equations.  Some equations
              considered in the project are used in  models of atmospheric a nd oceanic flows
              and in the description  of the diffusion of a gas in a porous medium.
