Title       : On the Global Regularity Properties of Nonlinear Wave Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9706754

Award Number: 9706754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergiu Klainerman seri@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706754    Klainerman      One of the central issues in the theory of nonlinear 
              Partial Differential Equations of evolution     is that of  regularity or
              break-down  of solutions. The best known problems of this type, in fluid
              mechanics,   concern the regularity of the  three dimensional  Euler and  
              Navier-Stokes equations. Another well known problem is   that of finding a
              correct concept of global   generalized solutions, including shock
              discontinuities,  to compressible Euler equations.  Similar questions arise
              also in General Relativity. The   problem of regularity has been formulated, by
              Penrose,   under the code name of "Cosmic Censorship". It states,  roughly,
              that the stable solutions of the  Einstein Field Equations should exclude
              "naked   singularities", i.e. singularities not hidden by black holes.    Most
              of these problems are today out of reach. My objective is  to help develop
              tools for attacking these fundamental problems    by concentrating my attention
              on the simplified   situation of the Yang-Mills and Wave Maps field equations.
              As  is known, the Yang-Mills equations are at the heart of our  most successful
              particle physics theory, the so called standard  model. The Wave Maps equations
              appear naturally when we look  for special solutions of the Einstein equations.
                     The question of break-down of solutions to the Euler and Navier-Stokes 
              equations governing  the behavior of  fluids and  gases  and of the Einstein
              field equations of General Relativity is of  fundamental significance.  In the
              case of the former,  this problem is intimately tied to the highly unstable
              behavior  of fluids and has bearing on the practical problems of taming  
              turbulence and predicting the weather. In the case of General  Relativity, the
              problem has deep significance to our understanding  of the Universe, since
              black holes and singularities are the  most important, and least understood,
              predictions of General   Relativity.  While from a physical point of view these
               theories seem very different,  mathematically they bear a lot of 
              similarities. Due to the non-linear character of these problems,  they have
              led, throughout this century, to the development  of new qualitative techniques
              in which mathematicians have  played a leading role. Some of these techniques
              are now  routinely used in practice. The final goals remain  distant, and the
              investigator would consider this    proposal a ringing success if it can help
              make a dint on  these difficult problems.
