Title       : Geophysical Surveys of an Emerging Polity on the Euphrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1997      
File        : a9706385

Award Number: 9706385
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22232              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas McClellan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Euphrates Archaeology Inc
	      PO Box 1688
	      Bucksport, ME  04416    207/469-0067

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Tell Banat settlement complex is located on the left bank of the Euphrates
              river in Syria and will soon be inundated by the flood waters of a recently
              constructed dam. The site dates to the first half of the third millennium BC
              and has been the focus of excavation by Dr. McClellan and his team for five
              field seasons. Over the course of this work the team has discovered two
              `monuments`- features which are extremely rare in the Near east. The first is a
              single man-made mound approximately 20 meters high and conical in shape. Its
              corrugated surface has a step-like appearance. The top of a second structure
              was found in the middle of the site beneath an extensive public complex. While
              the purpose of these monuments is still unclear it is likely that they operated
              as high places or loci for cultic activities, similar to later temples in
              Mesopotamia or as grave markers. It is quite likely that they served the
              function of dolmen or burial mound and that further excavation will reveal
              interior burial chambers of megalithic construction. With NSF support Dr.
              McClellan and collaborators will conduct a geophysical survey in an attempt to
              locate such underground structures. Both conductivity and magnetometer surveys
              will be conducted. The prime goal is to locate underground earthen and stone
              features and the two techniques compliment each other. Conductivity survey is
              particularly good at locating contrasts between different soil types and some
              structures are constructed of materials significantly different from the
              surrounding earth. Magnetic survey is excellent for locating fired earth
              features such as ceramic kilns or rooms which have been destroyed by fire.
              Given the imminent destruction of the site such survey is necessary to focus
              the limited time left for excavation.  The underlying goal of the project is to
              gain insight into the processes which gave rise to civilization in the Near
              East. Archaeological evidence has indicated that both settled agriculturists
              and nomadic or semi-nomadic pastoralists were present throughout this period.
              Because settled peoples usually leave more permanent and visible remains
              prehistorians have focused primarily on their role in the civilization process
              and  pastoralists have been generally ignored. Evidence indicates that Tell
              Banat was primarily a pastoral site and the monuments may in fact reflect the
              same process evidenced in agricultural regions. McMlellan postulates that the
              dynamic which led to civilization in the Near East is more complicated than
              most archaeologists realize and that the pastoralist input has been
              underestimated. The information collected at Tell Banat is directly relevant to
              this question.  This research is important because it will increase our
              understanding of how complex civilizations arise. It will rescue from imminent
              destruction important archaeological information.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
