Title       : Topics in Degenerate and/or Singular Evolution and Applied Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9706388

Award Number: 9706388
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuele DiBenedetto   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706388     DiBenedetto    The main issues of this investigation concern the
              local   and global structure of solutions of some classes of    degenerate
              and/or singular evolution equations, including   those (Buckley--Leverett
              system) bearing  lower order terms   with critical (Hadamard) growth
              conditions.  Special issues include   the local regularity of the solutions,
              intrinsic   Harnack estimates, the boundary behavior, and Quasi--Minima   in
              the Calculus of Variations. For evolution equations   bearing logarithmic
              singularities the solvability of   the Cauchy problem will be studied. In
              space-dimensions   higher than two, this hinges upon  a preliminary description
                of the asymptotic behavior permitted by the possible solutions,   as well as
              the solvability of the corresponding elliptic   equation. This is a severely
              ill-posed problem, as, for   example, compactly supported data do not generate
              a solution.   Solvability depends on the possibility of generating   uniform
              lower bounds for approximating solutions at one   single point. Then the global
              Harnack estimate we have developed   would yield a lower bound in the whole
              space. The main difficulty   in this process is that there is not a natural  
              topology by which to approximate the data.      The flow of two immiscible
              fluids in a porous medium   (Buckley--Leverett model)  is modeled by evolutions
              equations   bearing singular terms. One asks whether, despite the jump in  
              internal energy, the saturation remains continuous. This would   amount to say
              that the interface of contact of the two fluids   occurs in such a way that the
              mass is locally conserved.   A class of singular equations arises in the slow
              evolution   of thin colloidal films spread over a flat surface. The
              singularities   are logarithmic and are due to the van der Waals forces.   As
              the film spreads, it may undergo a spontaneous rupture. Since   the film is
              applied as a coating to protect metal surfaces, one is   interested in the
              evolution of such a process and possibly    in some sort of understanding of
              the phenomenon of rupture.  The solvability of these equations, their
              structure, and possibly   an understanding of the rupture phenomenon will be
              investigated.
