Title       : Tensor Categories and Subfactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1997        
File        : a9706839

Award Number: 9706839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Wenzl wenzl@brauer.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Abstract  Wenzl    A general procedure has recently been  found to supply
              fusion categories constructed from quantum groups with a C* structure. It is
              planned to continue this study in order to make some of the proofs more
              self-contained, and to include some additional cases not covered so far in the
              non-simply laced case. More importantly, it is expected that the understanding 
               of the C* structure in the quantum group context would also be useful to get a
              conceptual understanding of the asymptotic inclusions derived from these
              categories. Besides its relevance for classification of subfactors, it would
              potentially also be useful for getting  a better understanding of the algebra
              behind the Reshetikhin-Turaev-Witten type invariants of 3-manifolds connected
              with such categories. In related research, Wenzl's graduate student Orellana is
              studying Markov traces of Hecke algebras of type B.   For Hecke algebras of
              type A, such a study led to the construction of subfactors closely related to
              quantum groups of type A.  For type B, the situation is quite different. But
              preliminary results nevertheless suggest that one can also obtain subfactors
              from Hecke   algebras of type B.    The original motivation for Wenzl's
              research was the construction of examples of subfactors of a certain algebra,
              the so-called hyperfinite von Neumann factor of type II_1. By now, a lot of
              examples of subfactors are known, and a complete explicit classification seems
              to be out of reach. Wenzl's research  focuses on certain classes of examples
              with connections to other areas of mathematics and physics. The examples he
              constructed  are closely connected to the representation theory of quantum
              groups and Kac-Moody algebras, which in turn figure prominently in models in
              theoretical physics referred to as conformal field theory. The subfactors which
              would arise from his graduate student's work would be connected to Hecke
              algebras of type B and knot theory in a torus. Such   examples have the
              advantage that one can use addition al information for their study. In the
              other direction, we expect that operator algebra techniques can provide new
              insights to the related areas, such as it has already happened in e.g. knot
              theory, study of 3-manifolds or representation theory. This could be understood
              as part of von Neumann's program of using operator algebras as  a tool for
              representation theory and quantum physics.
