Title       : Next-generation algorithms for network layout
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1997 
File        : a9706029

Award Number: 9706029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259825             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Bienstock dano@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Nearly every single major telecommunications concern in the   United States, as
              well as many abroad, has a group responsible  for network layout algorithms. 
              This is a growing trend,   spurred by the large investments needed to upgrade
              and expand  networks, especially in the case of ATM technology --a single  
              large switch can cost millions of dollars. Typically, work   focuses on
              individual problems as they arise, and the   resulting algorithms (whether
              completely heuristic or based on  thoroughly grounded techniques) heavily
              depend on many   particular details of the problem at hand.  A similar approach
               is used by researchers at universities.  Other than completely  general
              optimization techniques --such as general purpose   integer programming codes
              or heuristics such as simulated   annealing-- which usually do not prove
              satisfactory, no   successful common approach exists.      However, network
              layout problems of all flavors do share many   common components. Our views on
              this matter were spurred by   our experience with practical ATM layout
              problems.  In ATM   network layout several interrelated subproblems arise. 
              There   is a transmission system subproblem: on every link enough   capacity
              must be installed to carry the traffic routed on it.  There is a similar switch
              sizing subproblem (except that   capacity is installed at nodes, not links). 
              There may be a   further subproblem concerning allocation of terminations at  
              switches, again of a similar nature.  Finally, different types  of routings may
              be allowed, for example, requiring   survivability.  An algorithm for a complex
              problem of this type  may therefore need to handle each subproblem well (in
              case   that subproblem is cost-dominant in a particular application)   but
              would also need to integrate the different components into  a coherent single
              unit (for example, the edge transmission   system subproblem will interact with
              the switch sizing  subproblem).    Network design problems can be classifed as
              mixed-integer   programs: the y involve variables that must take integral  
              values (e.g. the number of transmission systems to install in   a particular
              link) and also continuous variables (mainly   traffic routing decisions, which
              are effectively modeled   without requiring integrality). From a computational
              viewpoint   these problems are typically very difficult.  Purely heuristic 
              algorithms are notoriously unreliable in terms of the quality   of the
              solutions they provide.  At the other end difficult   network design problems
              routinely trounce high-performance   general-purpose integer programming
              algorithms.  See  problems "dano3mip" and "danoint" of the MIPLIB family 
              (http://www.caam.rice.edu/~bixby/miplib/miplib.html) and other  problems in the
              PI's previous work.    A final argument in favor of a general-purpose network
              design   algorithm, concerns one way in which network design is used   in
              practice.  No network planner will commit to an expenditure  of several million
              dollars on the basis of a single run of an   optimization algorithm, no matter
              how good a track record   this algorithm has.  Typically, an algorithm would be
              used in   the context of a study where a design tool is run repeatedly.  Here
              it is crucial to get fast, good-quality estimates.     The research supported
              by this award focuses in developing a   generic network design tool. We plan to
              develop several   fairly independent components of such a tool, principally:   
              * Fast, approximate algorithms for continuous linear programs   arising in
              network layout problems, in particular,   parallelizable versions thereof for a
              shared-memory   environment.  * General "cutting-plane" techniques for the
              mixed-integer   programs we are interested in, and  * Fast rounding heuristics
              to quickly obtain good feasible  solutions.
