Title       : Applications of Variational Level Set Methods to Some Multiphase Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9706566

Award Number: 9706566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65606              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong-Kai Zhao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9148,9216,9263,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9706566  Hongkai Zhao      The study and numerical computation of free boundary
              or interface   problems are quite challenging (especially in three dimensions)
              when   either there are topological changes in the free boundaries or there  
              are more than two phases that share a common boundary (triple junction).   This
              project will use the variational level set approach, which can   handle these
              difficulties easily and naturally to some extent, to model   several multiphase
              problems such as the configurations of clustered soap   bubbles, the formation
              of droplets on the ceiling or at the end of a  nozzle and their topological
              transitions. The effects of surface tension,   bulk energy and external forces
              will be included in the variational   formulation. Using appropriate abstract
              'surface' energy, applications   to some optimal graph partitioning problems
              will also be made. At the   same time, robust and efficient numerical schemes
              will be developed for   numerical computation in 2D and 3D for these problems. 
                  Surface energy plays an important role in many physical phenomena due  to
              the micro-structure of molecules, such as soap bubbles, thin films,   droplets
              formation, wetting and dewetting process, etc. They are also   related to
              minimal surface problems in mathematical literature. It is   well known that
              among all possible configurations of closed surfaces  which enclose a fixed
              volume, the sphere has the minimal surface area.  This explain why soap bubbles
              or oranges are rounded. The understanding   of the surface effects, its
              interactions with other physical effects   and numerical simulation of these
              free boundary problems in quite   complicated physical settings are the
              motivations for this project.   It will provide extremely useful information
              and tools for many practical  applications such as optimal shape design,
              etching and deposition in   microchip fabrication, plating and manufacturing of
              ink jet printer.  It can also be used in some optimization problems when the
              surface   energy  is properly interpreted, such as the optimal domain
              decomposition  cut for efficient parallel computing, landscape dividing or
              metal cuttings.
