Title       : Transport of MPEG-2 Video Traffic Over ATM Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9706625

Award Number: 9706625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233385             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman D. Hughes hughes@cps.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9136,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this research is to investigate resource   management and
              traffic-related issues that will enable efficient transport  of compressed
              video streams over an ATM network.  These issues include the  determination of
              network resources to be allocated for a given traffic  stream,  the
              prioritization of compressed video streams, the design and management of 
              scheduling techniques that the network can implement to provide differential 
              service to various priority levels, and the effect of resource sharing on the 
              effective bandwidth and buffer size allocated to a stream.  In order to study 
              the aforementioned issues, an accurate characterization of compressed video 
              traffic is required.  Accordingly, we will first capture, digitize, and  
              compress (via compression standards) several video streams (e.g., movies), 
              whereby the picture dynamics (in terms of scene changes, panning, zooming) 
              varies from one movie to another.  These captured traces will be used to  
              develop traffic models for single and aggregate (statistically multiplexed) 
              compressed video streams.  The traffic models developed will extend beyond  the
              entry node of an ATM network to include compressed  streams at intermediate  
              nodes inside the ATM network.  Performance studies (queueing-based) will be 
              done of interfering traffic mixed with compressed streams (MPEG-2).  The ATM  
              testbed at Michigan State University will be used for the proposed research. 
              Refer to our URL address (http://www.cps.msu.edu//~hughes/mpeg-2.html) for 
              additional information about this project.
