Title       : Analysis of Defect Measures and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9706862

Award Number: 9706862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62321              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fang-Hua Lin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706862    Lin    The main theme of this proposal is the rigorous mathematical 
              theory of defects in condensed matter physics. Of special interest are  
              defects in liquid crystals and vortices (filaments) in superconductors. One 
              describes the geometrical properties, topological structures, and  dynamical
              behavior of these defects by analyzing the so-called defect  measures. It is a
              rather formidable task. For liquid crystals one has to  study first a certain
              nonlinear coupling of equations of Navier-Stokes type  with those of
              evolutionary approximate harmonic map systems. For  superconductivity, one
              studies then the flow of Yang-Mills with certain  nonlinear effects
              (Eliashberg-Gorkov equations). The next key issues  are understanding the
              development of singularities of solutions, such as  energy concentrations,
              sharp interfaces, and bubbling phenomena. In  particular, one must examine
              singularities in the flow of harmonic and  approximate harmonic maps and the
              dynamics of vortices and filaments in  Ginzburg-Landau equations. This study
              should also  give insight into other problems that arise in classical fluid
              dynamics.         Various natural phenomena can be described by solutions of
              certain  partial differential equations. Often singular behavior of solutions
              reveal  not only facets but also essential characteristics of the problems they
               describe. The latter is very important for technological and industrial 
              applications. For example, the type II superconductors (high-temperature 
              super-conductors) are characterized by the existence of a certain lattice
              structure  of vortices and filaments. To  control the dynamics of these 
              vortices and  filaments is one of the central issues for the applicability of
              these   high-tech materials. It is, therefore, a very basic problem of
              continuing  interest. Despite many serious efforts, very few mathematical
              methods exist  so far to tackle such problems. The present proposal presents  a
              new and novel theoretical approach which has already been shown, by  
              preliminary analysis, to be useful for a class of problems arising in  material
              science. Modern technology needs high performance, high energy  efficiency, and
              high accuracy. Both liquid crystals and superconductors are  in such a
              category. This study will yield new and insightful qualitative  and
              quantitative information regarding these fascinating materials, in  addition to
              having its own intrinsic mathematical importance and interest.
