Title       : Fitness and Function of Oxygen Saturation Genotypes in Tibet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a9706980

Award Number: 9706980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia M. Beall cmb2@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Blangero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol M. Worthman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Human populations inhabit a broad range of environments.  Certainly one of the
              most challenging of these environments is the high altitude region of the
              world's highest mountain ranges. It has been of considerable scientific
              interest to determine if populations long residing at these high altitudes have
              accommodated the stress of reduced oxygen pressure biologically during their
              sojourn in these regions.  While many previous studies have evaluated the
              biological variation and adaptation of populations living at high altitude, the
              question of whether these groups are characterizied by genetic adaptations to
              the stresses of altitude has proven difficult to resolve.  Recent research
              indicates that among the Tibetan population of the Autonomous Region of China
              residing in villages above 4,000m, a single major gene may act to enhance
              oxygen saturation of arterial hemoglobin in carriers.  Moreover, preliminary
              data also suggest that individuals possessing this gene not only exhibit
              greater oxygen saturation of blood, but are characterized by greater
              reproductive fitness. This research project is aimed at testing the hypothesis
              that Tibetan women from high altitude populations who possess at least one copy
              of the putative high oxygen saturation gene also exhibit higher reproductive
              rates than those who do not.  The project will also test the hypothesis of
              better adaptive integration of oxygen transport, immune and endocrine system
              function in Tibetan populations living at different high altitude elevations.  
               This research expands the focus on oxygen transport at high altitude to
              measure the consequences of genetically influenced variation in physiological
              response to lowered oxygen pressure in terms of demographic and biological
              outcomes.  It will provide the first detailed profile of the immune, endocrine,
              and cardiorespiratory systems and their integration from adolescence through
              old age among people living under hypoxic stress.  The proposed research also
              broadens the study of human genetic adaptation by using formal analytic models
              for quantitative adaptive traits.  The application of statistical genetic
              analytical techniques analyzes a hypothetically adaptive trait by decomposing
              its underlying genetic determinants and formally testing its association with
              fitness and function.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
