Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Commutant Lifting Methods in Operator Theory and Robust
               Control Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9706838

Award Number: 9706838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60242              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caixing Gu cgu@calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Gu    The proposed work is in two directions.  The first direction
              lies at  the interface of   operator theory and system and control theory. The
              purpose of this part of the project is    to extend to a more general class of
              operators the commutant lifting theory along with  its connection with
              interpolation problems, Hankel and Toeplitz operators and robust control
              theory.  The project will also include implementable algorithms for the
              computation of the norms  of the type operators which appear in the solutions
              of interpolation problems and robust control problems by using commutant
              lifting methods. The qualitative and quantitative results for those operators
              are relevant to the design of controllers which stabilize the systems with
              parameter or modeling uncertainty while at the same time meet certain
              performance specifications. Specifically, the investigator will continue his
              study of a general operator extension problem which includes the causal
              commutant lifting approach for nonlinear systems. He will  develop algorithms
              for the mixed sensitivity minimization problem of a class of multivariable
              distributed systems which is one of the fundamental problems in robust control
              theory. Another direction is related to the study of commutators of Toeplitz
              operators on certain important spaces of   analytic functions including
              vector-valued Hardy spaces of the unit disk and Hardy spaces of the polydisk.
              These commutators have their origin in mathematical physics and non-commutative
              analysis.  The research in this direction should be of interest to mathematical
              analysts as well as to scientists in many fields of applied sciences.
