Title       : Representations of the Polydisc Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1998       
File        : a9706837

Award Number: 9706837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53316              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah H. Ferguson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Ferguson     The proposed research is to study representations of the
              polydisc algebra on Hilbert space using cohomological tools together with
              techniques from operator theory and  operator algebras. Problems in dilation
              theory, as well as, joint similarity problems for commuting N-tuples of
              operators, can be formulated and studied in the general framework of bounded
              cohomology.  The cohomological groups can be realized concretely as quotients
              of bounded operators and thus   these groups, as well as, the techniques used
              to compute them, should be of interest to both operator theorists and operator
              algebraists.    A significant portion of the cohomology theory developed for
              Banach modules is not, in general, applicable in the study of Hilbert modules
              over operator algebras.  Consequently, there are no standard techniques one can
              use to compute cohomology groups.  The methods employed so far involve
              homological algebra together with operator theoretic techniques, two seemingly
              disparate areas of mathematics.  Consequently, computations   of these groups
              leads to new insight and new techniques in operator theory.  Also important is
              that certain problems in operator theory when formulated in the general context
              of bounded cohomology become more transparent and  simple algebraic computation
              often leads to a significant reduction in the problem.  For this reason alone, 
               bounded cohomolgy for Hilbert modules will likely become a powerful tool for
              those working  in operator theory.
