Title       : The Evolution of Life-History and Development in Echinoids: A Test for the Role
               of Environmental Factors and Macroevolutionary Correlates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a9706579

Award Number: 9706579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174584             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Emlet   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706579  Emlet    Life-history and development of marine invertebrates are
              closely linked - species that make many small eggs produce feeding larvae and
              those that make few(er), large(r) eggs produce either pelagic, nonfeeding or
              brooded offspring.  These traits are thought to reflect ecological and
              environmental factors.  Though life-history/developmental patterns are will
              described for many extant taxa and to some degree correspond to latitudinal and
              thus climatological conditions, the reasons for (or consequences of ) these
              patterns are poorly understood.  For instance, several studies on fossil
              gastropod mollusks have reported correlations between life-history/development
              and speciation rates and geographical range, but reasons for shift in
              development remain obscure.  The present proposal will investigate a clade
              (Class: Echinoidea, Phylum: Echinodermata) with a good fossil record which has
              evolved non-planktotrophy (=nonfeeding larvae or brooding) in many independent
              lineages.  The study will examine where, when and under what environmental
              conditions different life-history/developmental patterns occurred in the
              Tertiary (last 65 Ma).    The objectives of this proposal are to: 1) Construct
              morphological and molecular phylogenies for temnopleuroid echinoids in order to
              resolve the numbers of times that nonfeeding development has evolved in this
              order.  2) Examine whether life-history/developmental mode affects speciation
              rate or geographic range of sea urchins.  3) Explore the environmental
              conditions under which life-history/developmental modes shift to few large eggs
              and non-planktotrophic development.    A morphological character set consisting
              of some 60+ characters will be collected from some 30-40 living and fossil
              genera or subgenera.  Visits to major museums collections in Australia, Europe
              and India will be undertaken to study fossil and Recent types and to collect
              the character set.  The phylogenetic analysis of the temnopleuroids will use
              standard numerical cladistics, e.g. the s oftware program PAUP will be used to
              construct maximally parsimonious trees that will be subsequently explored for
              phylogenetic structure and robustness.    For the molecular phylogeny, partial
              sequences of 28S rRNA and mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I (COI) genes will
              be collected from ~ 15 genera and subgenera of temnopleurid and integrated with
              a molecular database already constructed for echinoids.  DNA will be extracted
              and amplified with PCR, and gene fragments will be sequenced in an automated
              sequencer.  Following sequence alignment, phylogenetic trees will be
              constructed using both parsimony (PAUP) and maximum-likelihood (PHYLIP).  Using
              a total evidence approach, morphological and molecular data will be combined in
              order to estimate the best phylogenetic tree for the group using the
              methodologies outlined above.  Developmental data for fossil and Recent taxa
              will be mapped onto the tree(s) to determine the number of times and locations
              where non-planktotrophy evolved.    The patterns of development among
              temnopleuroids and other fossil taxa with known phylogenies will be explored to
              determine whether or not life-history/developmental mode affects speciation
              rate or geographic range of sea urchins as has been shown for some gastropod
              molluscs.  Finally the environmental conditions under which
              life-history/developmental modes shift will also be examined quantitatively and
              statistically.    The proposed research will be the first detailed study of the
              evolution of life history (and developmental mode) for a group with a good
              fossil record specifically set within a truly rigorous phylogenetic framework. 
              Consequently, this study will provide a temporal and spatial evolutionary
              history of developmental patterns that have remained largely speculative
              because they are based on patterns of Recent taxa or on theory.  This study
              should also improve understanding of how global change can drive significant
              alterations in the developmental patterns of echinoids (and marine
              invertebrates in genera l).  The work will also result in a secure phylogeny
              for a major group of echinoids, which can subsequently be used to explore
              further patterns of evolution through time.
