Title       : Lebesgue Space Estimates for Solutions to Hyperbolic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9706840

Award Number: 9706840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65484              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Michael Beals beals@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706840    Beals    The investigation involves the study of certain properties
              of  solutions to strictly hyperbolic partial differential equations  ("waves").
               New qize and smoothness estimates in the linear case will  be derived, in
              order to analyze the properties of solutions to  nonlinear problems.  Estimates
              of time decay for appropriate measures  of the size of a solution will be
              obtained.  Results for the classical  wave equation on a spatial domain which
              is exterior to a convex  obstacle will be extended to handle more general
              natural conditions at  the boundary of the obstacle.  The key estimates
              correspond to finding  the best possible time decay subject to the weakest size
              and  smoothness restrictions on the data.  More general obstacles, for  which
              certain types of decay estimates are known but for which  explicit
              representations of approximations to solutions are absent,  will also be
              treated.  Analogous full-space problems (no obstacles)  will be analyzed.  The
              primary questions in these cases involve higher  order equations or systems,
              and the effects of interactions with  changes in the properties of the medium
              in which the waves are  propagating.  Nonsmooth perturbations in the medium are
              one source of  problems, including questions about the minimal regularity
              needed for  the perturbing potential.  Propagation in inhomogeneous media (for 
              example, nonconstant wave speeds) where bounds involving explicit time 
              estimates are relatively sparse, will also be considered.  (The  classical
              bounds involve those which measure size in terms of the  classical energy,
              which will not typically exhibit decay in time.)  The optimal time estimates
              under the best possible conditions on the  size of the data measured in terms
              of other natural spaces will be  considered, in model problems and in general. 
                Waves have been studied classically in terms of a size quantity like  energy,
              which is typically conserved or behaves in a fashion which is  easy to
              understand.  In order to go beyond the simpl est mathematical  approximations
              to understand the small- and large-scale properties of  true physical waves,
              other means of measuring the wave size must be  used.  Only the simplest model
              problems have been fully understood in  this context in the past - those for
              which the large-scale behavior is  merely a simple magnification of the
              small-scale behavior (such as  unperturbed waves in free space).  In true
              physical problems, waves  encounter obstacles and are reflected or absorbed;
              they travel in  media which are not uniform; they interact with themselves and
              with  the media in which they propagate.  The size behavior of such waves,  and
              in particular the decay of their amplitudes in time, will be  analyzed, in
              order to understand what information can be deduced about  the wave source from
              measurements of such size quantities made far  away (or long after the wave is
              generated).
