Title       : Supramolecular Chemistry with Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a9706909

Award Number: 9706909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry W. Gibson hwgibson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,9178,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9706909  Gibson  A roxatane consists of a cyclic molecule physically threaded 
              onto a linear molecule with no covalent bonds between the  cyclic and the
              linear species; a catenane consists of  interlocked cyclic molecules.  The
              concepts of  supramolecular chemistry will be employed to synthesize new 
              polymeric roxatanes and catenanes.  Microcalorimetry will  provide fundamental
              data on the threading of cyclic  molecules by linear species with respect to
              factors such as  the nature of the two components (size, rigidity,  structure),
              the solvent and temperature.  Building on this  thermodynamic data base for
              small molecules, these building  blocks will be used to produce new polymeric
              materials.  Three prototypical supramolecular systems that possess high 
              association constants will be utilized to construct entirely  new
              polyrotaxanes, including main chain and graft systems.  A new class of
              hyperbranched and dendritic macromolecules  whose structural integrity is based
              on rotaxane repeat units  will be synthesized from psuedorotaxanes (without
              stoppers)  having AB2 functionalities; the repeat units will consist of  a
              linear species with macrocyclic end groups, the linear  portion being threaded
              through the macrocycle of another  unit.  Another new class of macromolecules,
              slip link  polymers, consisting of a rotaxane repeat unit in a linear 
              structure will be prepared by polymerization of standard BB  monomers with
              novel pseudorotaxane, AA topological monomers  in which one functionality
              resides on the linear guest  portion and one on the cyclic or host portion and
              the linear  portion bears a bulky blocking group; such materials are  expected
              to show novel behavior under longitudinal tension  and compression because of
              the compliance of the rotaxane  structure.  Since the complexation processes
              can reversed  under suitable conditions the properties (light absorption, 
              viscosity, solid state structure, solubility, mechanical  properties, etc.) of
              these systems are expected to be  sensitive the thei r environments, e.g.,
              temperature,  solvent, redox conditions, the presence or absence of metal  ions
              or the acidity of the medium.  Finally the oldest  method of rotaxane and
              catenane formation, the so-called  chemical conversion method, will be applied
              for the first  time to prepare polyrotaxanes and polycatenanes.  This  method
              involves reaction of molecules that possess linear  components threaded
              intramolecularly through a macrocycle  attached via a "temporary bond". 
              Polymerization via  terminal functionalities on the linear thread will yield 
              polyrotaxanes after the temporary bond is broken.  On the  other hand,
              cyclization of the self threaded system will be  employed to make a series of
              functionalized  2 catenanes of  the AA, AB, and AB2 types, which will be
              polymerized to form  a variety of new linear, hyperbranched and dendritic  poly
              2 catenanes.  %%%  The principles of supramolecular chemistry will be applied 
              to the construction of several new families of polymeric  materials which
              contain units that are mechanically rather  than chemically linked together. 
              Because of their novel  topological structures the physical properties of these
              new  materials are expected to be unusually responsive to their  environments
              and external stimuli.  Thus these systems offer  entirely new design principles
              for controlling physical and  chemical properties that could enable new
              sensors, smart or  adaptable materials and electronic devices.  ***
