Title       : New Ligands and Reaction Pathways for Metal Templated Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9706901

Award Number: 9706901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom Livinghouse livinghouse@chemistry.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
              Directorate, Professor Tom Livinghouse, of the Department of Chemistry   and
              Biochemistry of Montana State University, is studying new ligands and  
              reaction pathways for metal-templated synthesis.  Professor Livinghouse  
              explores the photopromoted Pauson-Khand reaction, with particular   emphasis
              given to the elucidation of those factors which contribute to   ligand control
              of the relative and absolute stereochemical outcome of   ring formation.  He is
              also developing catalytic uses of cobalt complexes   for the stereocontrolled
              synthesis of methano PGI1 and megellaneone.    Synthesis of new C-chiral
              diphosphines containing conformational   restriction elements as well as an
              array of structurally differentiated   P-chiral diphosphines is followed by
              evaluation of these prospective   controller ligands in asymmetric bond forming
              reactions.  The design and   synthesis of a new class of enantiomerically pure
              C2-symmetric   bis(cyclopentadiene) controller ligands for early d-block metals
              is also   under investigation.  Many of the organic molecules demonstrated or
              expected to display   important physiological activity have the unique property
              of having   different chemical properties from their mirror images.  Although  
              compounds of this sort can not infrequently be obtained by separation  
              techniques, many such processes are inefficient in terms of time and   their
              reliance on the use of additional quantities of chemical reagents   and
              solvents.  As a result, development of methods for the control of the  
              three-dimensional structure (stereochemistry) of organic molecules   remains an
              important goal.  Professor Tom Livinghouse, of the Department   of Chemistry
              and Biochemistry of Montana State University, is developing   such methods with
              the support of the Organic Synthesis Program and the   Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical   Sciences
              Directorate.  His investigations focus on the design and   synthesis of new
              groups which introduce stereochemical control elements   into reactions
              mediated by various metal-containing compounds.  These   studies help to
              elucidate certain factors critical to the design of   successful catalysts for
              `asymmetric` synthesis and additionally offer   access to specific target
              molecules, including a potent inhibitor of   platelet aggregation in plasma.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
