Title       : VLSI Optimized Architectures for Wide Area ATM Switches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9706545

Award Number: 9706545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Min psm@ee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) has emerged as a leading technique for wide are
              networking.  The world's telephone companies are well on their way to total
              conversion to ATM which is expected to take about 25 years.  Utilizing a small
              53-byte cell structure, ATM enables effective communication between a large
              variety of broadband technologies that are currently evolving.    Accordingly,
              there is strong interest in formulating a switching architecture suitable for
              ATM-based wide area network, for which several studies can be found in the
              literature.  Often, these studies reported specific switching architectures
              along with performance data such as throughput and delay, but little in the way
              to indicate their effectiveness as large, wide area switches.    This project
              entails comprehensive investigation in developing a framework for wide area ATM
              switching.  Based on the extensive experiences derived from our recent
              prototyping effort for the Washington University Multi-Channel Switch (WUMCS),
              we incorporate several important technological constraints in the investigation
              of the characteristics of wide area switches, such as scalability,
              synchronization, high performance, fault tolerance, fairness, and modularity.  
               Use of Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) is necessary in order to provide
              the extremely high clocking and data transfer rates needed in wide area
              switches.  The number of integrated circuit (IC) chips in a switch translates
              directly to the cost and implementation complexity.  We attempt to minimize the
              IC count in the switch by implementing each switch module with the maximum
              possible throughput in a single IC.  Significant effort is devoted to the
              investigation of various options in the design of switch modules that result in
              the maximum possible throughput, while taking into consideration constraints
              associated with VLSI such as die size, electrical propagation delay, power
              dissipation, and pin limitation.  An important goal of the proposed work is to
              determine the VLSI chip limi ts of various switching architectures in terms of
              maximum throughput, maximum number of input/output channels, and maximum
              achievable channel speed, when implemented in a single IC.    Since any
              realistic wide area switch requires throughput that is not achievable in a
              single IC, we investigate methodologies of scaling up the switch by
              interconnecting switch modules.  We explicate the benefits to a wide area
              switch of integrating multi-channel switching which balances loads across the
              switch modules in a switch.    In the project , we develop switch architectures
              which are optimized for VLSI implementation, and conduct comprehensive
              analytical studies on their efficacy under varying traffic and network
              conditions.    In addition, there will be a significant amount of
              implementation.  The proposed implementation work will comprise of:      *
              Design and development of switch ICs  * System board construction  * Software
              controller development  * Demonstration testbed development     The first part
              of the implementation work will be the definition of the functional
              requirements for the switching system, followed by the design specifications
              for the switch ICs and the software controller.  IC design will be the first
              actual electronic design step.  We will most likely employ a  schematic capture
              process for the IC design, utilizing VHDL mostly for the functional and logical
              verification.    We will utilize a conservative CMOS technology from a
              reputable foundry.  The estimated IC size for switch  module is 150 square
              milli meters, and the IC will require about 350 pins and consume 1.5 watts.  We
              expect that the system board will be 12 inches by 16 inches in dimension,
              implement the line interface, timing, switching, and header translation
              functions for 10 giga bits per second throughput.    By the conclusion of this
              project, we expect to have created a promising methodology for guiding the
              development of wide area ATM switches.  Our overall goal is to suggest methods
              to alleviate the size and speed l imitation of current electronic switches by
              proposing scalable and simple-to-implement architectures that can support very
              high bandwidth and a variety of traffic types seen in wide area networks.   
              Given the growing deployment of ATM in local area networks and the increased
              interest in using it in wide area networks, we believe that the proposed work
              is very timely and can serve to establish a framework for future work to
              follow.    Details of this project can be found at
              http://www.rgit.edu/projects/NSF-switch.
