Title       : Electrochemical Self-Organization of Ordered Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9706873

Award Number: 9706873
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert E. Miller miller.3@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hsueh-Chia Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706873  Miller  The PI's propose to study, theoretically and experimentally,
              the self-organization process leading to the formation of two-dimensional
              periodic arrays of nanostructures (quantum dots and wires) upon electrochemical
              treatment of an aluminum-electrolyte interface with potential application to
              nanolithography.  Electropolishing aluminum in a suitable electrolyte for
              specific durations at specific voltages leads to the formation of highly
              periodic arrangements of nanostructures on the aluminum with a "pitch" or
              period of ~ 100 nm.  Anodization of the electropolished surface yields a
              non-porous alumina film that can be filled up with a material of interest to
              produce a quasiperiodic array of wires or dots embedded in alumina.  These
              nanostructures range from 5 to 50 nm.  The above techniques of nanosynthesis
              are "gentle" unlike beam lithography (e.g. x-ray, ion-beam, electronbeam) which
              cause radiation damage to nanostructures by exposing them to high energy
              patterning beams.  Additionally, these are parallel techniques unlike
              direct-write lithography since millions of wafers could be processed
              simultaneously leading to a throughput fast enough for mass production.    The
              PI's preliminary experiments indicate that the dissolution pattern and length
              scale during both electropolishing and anodization are very sensitive to
              electrolyte and aluminum impurity composition, applied voltage and the applied
              duration.  Regular and irregular ridges and dots and combinations of each can
              all appear during electropolishing.  Periodic dot and ridge arrays can hence be
              achieved under very specific but reproducible conditions.    We intend to
              decipher this field-assisted electropolishing and anodization pattern formation
              dynamics at a fundamental level such that the results can be extrapolated to a
              wide class of materials.  Our preliminary analysis suggests that both dynamics
              are driven by a coupling between the surface curvature and the electric
              potential field.  During electropolishing, the potentia l drop occurs over a
              thin double layer at the metal/electrolyte interface where there is a
              quasi-steady ionic separation.  An idealized sinuous perturbation of the double
              layer would then induce an interphase perturbation of the field gradient. 
              This, in turn, preferentially packs more polar molecules in the electrolyte
              onto the crests and hence reduces the local ion transport and dissolution rate.
               For anodization, the positive feedback mechanism occurs within the oxide layer
              where the potential drop occurs.  A slight curvature of the lower oxide/metal
              interface can focus the field at the upper oxide/electrolyte interface to
              induce highly accelerated local field-assisted dissolution.  Both the proposed
              global electropolishing and local anodization instability mechanisms have been
              expressed mathematically in terms of model evolution equations and they have
              reproduced consistent scalings for the observed patterns and dynamics.  Both
              mechanisms, however, are found to be highly sensitive to the electrolyte
              composition, applied voltage strength and duration and the presence of impurity
              ions in the solid and scrutinizing these effects and extending the technique to
              materials other than aluminum will be the focus of the project.  The models
              would then be authenticated by real-time monitoring of the self-organization
              process using in-situ variable angle spectroscopic ellipsometry.  ***
