Title       : Operator Theory and Free Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9706557

Award Number: 9706557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hari Bercovici bercovic@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Bercovici    Hari Bercovici plans to work in two basic directions. The
              first is related with Voiculescu's free probability theory and harmonic
              analysis. An important direction here is the sudy of limit laws for the
              multiplicative free convolution. Unlike classical harmonic analysis, the study
              of multiplicative convolution cannot simply be reduced to the additive case by
              taking logarithms. It is already known that there are some unexpected `Poisson
              like' probability distributions related with multiplicative free convolution.
              An important obstacle is the correct formulation of the classical limit
              theorems, even the central limit theorem, in the free multiplicative case.  The
              second line of Bercovici's research is in operator theory and its interactions
              with function theory, control theory, and other areas.  Among the specific
              problems in this area are the model theories of restrictions and compressions
              of operators, and the study of dual algebras generated by commuting families of
              operators. He also plans to return to the study of skew Toeplitz operators
              beyond the fairly well understood   scalar case.    In order to give some
              motivation for the research in this proposal I would like to recall that in the
              current description of subatomic processes one has to deal with probabilistic
              processes. Thus, for instance, the location of a particle is not known with
              precision at any given moment. One has instead the probability that that
              particle appears in a given region of space.  Some versions of noncommutative
              probability theory deal with some of the aspects of quantum chemistry for
              instance.  Free probability theory is likely to occur at some point in the
              quantum description of nature.  Besides, it is an interesting object of study
              because it provides, in some sense, the `only' alternative probability theory. 
              The operator theoretical part of this project stems to a great extent from
              problems raised by the control theory of large structures. Some earlier results
              in this theory were proposed a s the main control mechanism of the NASP.  While
              Bercovici's expertise in the practical side of this theory is limited, control
              theorists can formulate their problems in theoretical terms, thus making the
              application of operator theoretical methods possible.
