Title       : Analysis of Multi-Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9706981

Award Number: 9706981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60651              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Beth Ruskai bruskai@cs.uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706981    Ruskai       This research is concerned with problems in the
              mathematical analysis  of multi-particle systems.  The main focus is on bound
              states of atomic  and molecular Hamiltonians with a new emphasis on systems in
              magnetic fields.  In particular, one-dimensional models will be used to study
              the maximum  negative ionization of atoms in strong magnetic fields.  The
              contraction  of relative entropy for general quantum systems will also be
              studied  using monotone Riemannian metrics on non-commutative probability
              spaces,  and some related operator inequalities will be considered.      
              Because real atoms and molecules exist in ordinary 3-dimensional  space with
              well established integer values for the nuclear charges,  models of systems in
              one or two dimensions with fractional, or  asymptotically infinite, nuclear
              charge may seem somewhat artificial  and esoteric.  However, real atoms do not
              exist in isolation, but  within various kinds of materials ranging in size from
              microscopic  computer chips to stars.  The behavior of electrons within such 
              complex materials may be accurately modelled by using a fractional nuclear 
              charge or by supposing that they are confined to one or two dimensions.  For
              example, semiconductor scientists have recently manufactured  microscopic
              materials called "quantum dots" which behave like  two-dimensional atoms with
              fractional nuclear charge.   At the other  extreme, one finds that atoms in
              extremely strong magnetic  fields, such as those found on the surface of a
              neutron star, behave  as if the electrons were confined to one dimension. 
              Thus, the  systems proposed for study have a wide range of applicability.  The
              other part of this proposal is concerned with the generalization  of an
              important class of entropy inequalities to quantum systems.    Entropy and the
              related functionals have significant applications  in such diverse fields as
              economics, statistics, population biology,  information theory, and physics. 
              In view of recent advances in   quantum co mputing, the work on quantum
              mechanical entropy proposed  here is expected to have an impact on information
              theory as well as  physics.
