Title       : Admission Control in High Speed Multimedia Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9706148

Award Number: 9706148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200146             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioannis Paschalidis yannisp@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, technological advances and bandwidth availability have  brought
              about a web of new multimedia and real-time applications, such as  internet
              telephony, interactive TV, video-on-demand, and  videoconferencing. These
              applications have important uses in a wide range of  activities from education
              and health care to entertainment.  Their full  deployment will clearly have a
              huge impact on the quality of our lives and  the society as a whole.    Such
              applications, however, are very bandwidth demanding, very sensitive to 
              congestion, and require real-time and reliable communication.  Although 
              appropriate protocols, such as the Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM)  protocol
              and an enhanced version of Internet's TCP/IP protocol (with RSVP),  already
              exist, Quality of Service (QoS) provisioning remains one of the  fundamental
              open problems that need to be addressed before real-time  applications can be
              reliably supported.  If congestion is not an option,  restricting the number of
              users that are allowed in the network becomes an  extremely useful tool in
              guaranteeing QoS. The central goal of this research  is to devise such an
              admission control procedure and test its performance in  practice.    To
              provide QoS guarantees the network should prevent congestion which causes 
              packet losses due to buffer overflows and excessive delays.  A worst case 
              based admission control algorithm (which allocates to calls bandwidth  equal to
              their peak rate) leads to significant underutilization of the network 
              resources, since traffic is typically bursty, i.e., the peak rate is not 
              sustained for long. To achieve more efficient use of the resources the 
              proposed approach will permit some congestion phenomena which will be 
              occurring infrequently enough to allow for the provision of statistical  QoS
              guarantees. More specifically, it is desired to operate the network in a 
              regime where loss probabilities and probabilities of excessive delays are 
              particularly small (e.g., on the order of 10^{-6}). Real-time app lications 
              can tolerate such small frequencies of congestion phenomena.    This research
              will draw upon methods developed in applied probability,  optimization, and
              optimal control theory, and will use, extending whenever  necessary, many of
              the ideas developed recently by the PI. Calculating  congestion probabilities
              for non-trivial traffic models is particularly hard.  The proposed work will
              therefore resort to asymptotic results using large  deviations theory (a
              subfield of applied probability) as the main analytical  tool.     Issues that
              are considered as prerequisites for successful admission control  will be first
              resolved. Among them the proposed research will address:   -Traffic Modeling.  
                The aim is to propose models that capture the statistical properties of the
              traffic which are relevant to admission control.   -Performance analysis.     
              The goal is to asymptotically estimate congestion probabilities in a    
              multiclass and multihop network environment.     The final product of the
              proposed work will be an admission control algorithm  that provides statistical
              QoS guarantees to admitted calls and possesses the  following characteristics: 
              -Support for multiple service classes.      Applications will be bundled in
              service classes based on the statistical     character of the traffic they
              generate and on their QoS requirements.  -Full utilization of available
              bandwidth.       The controller will be flexible enough to investigate
              different bandwidth     allocation strategies among service classes and deny
              admission only when     there is no feasible allocation that guarantees QoS to
              all connected calls.   -End-to-End QoS guarantees.     Real-time
              implementation.    More information about this project can be obtained from the
              Web at   http://ionia.bu.edu/
