Title       : Bayesian Statistical Methods in Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9706863

Award Number: 9706863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Churchill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Churchill  9706863       The investigator develops new statistical methods for 
              problems in molecular biology.  Three problem areas are  addressed: sequence
              alignment, phylogeny construction and genetic  mapping.  Although diverse and
              individually well developed, these  problems can be unified under a common
              statistical framework.  In  each problem, a graph-valued random variable is of
              primary  interest.  Hierarchical Bayesian models are developed for each 
              problem with an emphasis on common features.  The techniques used  to compute
              posterior probabilities from these models are Markov  chain Monte Carlo
              methods.  This computational approach is  neccessary because analytic solutions
              for these problems are not  attainable.  The overall goal of this project is to
              develop an  inference framework that is of general utility in a variety of 
              problems.  Toward this end, simple models are considered first.  The simple
              models are generalized to the extent that it is  feasible.  This project does
              not solve all of the problems of  computational molecular biology.  The purpose
              of investigating a  broad range of problems is to develop a common framework
              for  statistical inference.       This project develops new methods for the
              analysis of data  that arise in molecular biology and genetics.  These
              statistical  methods have a wide variety of applications and are motivated by 
              the dramatic increase in molecular data due to the expansion of  biotechnology
              and the human genome project.  Ultimately this  leads to a deeper understanding
              of evolution and the  relationships among different groups of organisms and
              their  individual genes.  It also addresses the problem of locating the  genes
              that affect specific traits in humans, plants and animals.  The greatest
              potential impact is on gene mapping in agricultural  plants, due to ongoing
              collaborations with plant breeders at  Cornell University.  Although the
              project emphasizes statistical  theory underlying the analysis of data, the
              methods are  implemented in softw are that is useful to other researchers.
