Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Orthogonal Polynomials and Approximation
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9706695

Award Number: 9706695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Nevai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nevai              Abstract    Nevai plans to continue his research in 
              approximation theory, orthogonal polynomials, and related areas of   analysis
              involving various extremal problems, ordinary and   generalized polynomial
              inequalities, difference and differential   equations, spectral theory of real,
              complex, and matrix-valued   Jacobi, Hessenberg, and banded matrices, Toeplitz
              and Hankel forms,   and Hilbert space operators.  In addition, he will continue
               working on his "Orthogonal Polynomials" software project in   Mathematica and
              on numerical aspects of orthogonal polynomials.   The primary focus of his
              research will be concentrated on three  areas: orthogonal polynomials on the
              unit circle and on arcs of   the unit circle, generalized polynomials and
              polynomial inequalities,   and linear difference equations and growth of their
              solutions.        Approximation theory and orthogonal polynomials form an
              essential   part of mathematical analysis in the sense that (i) they provide  
              theoretical foundations for real life applications of various   results in
              "pure" mathematics, and that (ii) they yield a natural   bridge between theory
              and practice. The extraordinary usefulness   of orthogonal polynomials stems
              from the facts that  among others    (i) they are easily computable by a stable
              three term recursion   formula, (ii) they are a natural medium for expanding 
              "general" functions into well behaved series, and that (iii) their   zeros are
              especially suitable for interplation and quadrature   processes. Quadrature
              processes enable one to evaluate very   complicated expressions involving
              integrals with high degree of   precision. The primary subject of this
              proposal, that is, extensions   of Szego's theory of orthogonal polynomials, is
               especially useful for theses purposes. The proposer hopes to   find efficient
              methods with solid theoretical foundations.
