Title       : CREST: Center for Advanced Materials and Smart Structures.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a9706680

Award Number: 9706680
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagannathan Sankar sankar@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lonnie Sharpe  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              There is a keen interest in developing ceramics for a  variety of applications
              ranging from use as structural  components, to energy-efficient thermal
              barriers, to high-  performance electronic substrates.  Structural ceramics
              have  unique properties that can be used to great advantage in  advanced heat
              engines, such as automotive gas turbines, and  low-emission high-efficiency
              diesel engines.  Certain  composites are also being developed for various high-
               temperature applications such as wear resistant materials  and smart structure
              application.  Smart ceramic fibers and  piezoceramic patch sensors may be
              attached to the external  surfaces of structures, or directly embedded within 
              materials such as advanced composites, to provide in-situ  measurements of
              composite curing, health monitoring of  structures, estimating aerodynamic
              loads on flight vehicles,  etc.  Thin film oxide-based structures, including
              high-  critical temperature superconductor (HTSC) structures and  ferroelectric
              perovskites, are needed for fabrication of  electronic devices such as various
              sensors and transducers,  filters and nonvolatile memories.  This film III-V
              nitrides  have also generated tremendous interest because of high-  brightness
              semiconductor light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and  injection lasers with
              wavelengths ranging from red to  ultraviolet (UV).    This proposal focuses on
              basic science issues affecting both  advanced structural ceramics and
              electronic ceramic  materials in a synergistic manner.  The research team 
              includes North Carolina A&T State University (NC A&T), North  Carolina State
              University (NCSU), Oak Ridge National  Laboratory (ORNL), and selected
              industrial partners.  NC A&T  State University has been associated with both
              ORNL and NCSU  for many years in the advanced ceramic materials research  area,
              and has trained and graduated students together with  these organizations.   
              This proposal addresses the fabrication of advanced  materials and smart
              structures using innovative materials  proce ssing methods ranging from
              ion-assisted pulsed  deposition and plasma-source molecular beam epitaxy for
              thin  films, to liquid infiltration and reaction synthesis for  bulk materials.
               The advanced materials and their structures  of particular interest include
              structural (surface  engineered ceramics, metal-ceramic joints, metal-ceramic 
              composites, tungsten carbide-aluminide composites, and  piezofiber composites),
              and electronic (high-Tc  superconductor heterostructures, piezoelectric thin
              film  structures, and wide-bandgap III-V nitride heterostructures)  materials. 
              The proposal emphasizes materials processing,  characterization,
              structure-property correlations,  performance testing, and modeling for all the
              proposed  materials structures in a coherent way, utilizing  complementary
              skills at NC A&T, NCSU, ORNL, and industry  partners.  The Center will
              systematically investigate the  influence of various processing parameters on
              microstructure  evolution and properties.  Additionally, the atomic  structure
              and chemistry of defects and interfaces will be  investigated using high
              resolution TEM (with 0.18 nm point-  to-point resolution) and STEM-Z contrast
              (with point-to-  point resolution 0.13 nm) microscopy techniques.  The above 
              combination of techniques, expertise and instrumentation  affords the
              exploration of the nature of metal-ceramic  interfaces produced under pulsed
              laser irradiation, and of  interfaces in superconductor and semiconductor 
              heterostructures; and these will then be correlated with  properties and
              performance of these novel materials  structures.  Graduate and undergraduate
              students will be  trained under the joint supervision of NCA&T, NCSU, ORNL and 
              industry partners.  We propose to build upon existing  collaborative research
              and education programs involving  various combinations of the proposal partners
              (NCA&T-NCSU,  NC A&T-ORNL, NCSU-ORNL, NCSU-Kopin, NCA&T-numerous  industries,
              etc.).  Strong outreach efforts targeted towards  the local community will also
              be a pa rt of this center  activity.
