Title       : Variable Hillslope Processes and Sediment Delivery to Tectonically-Quiescent
               Basins: A Late Miocene to Quaternary Record of Buried, Relict, and Modern
               Hillslopes and their Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9706051

Award Number: 9706051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Smith gsmith@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Pazzaglia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1044,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706051  Smith    Siliciclastic detritus in a sedimentary basin follows a path
              from a weathering profile, to the hillslope system, to the fluvial system, and
              finally to the basin depositional environment.  The stratigraphy and
              sedimentology of a sedimentary basin are the net result of the complex steps
              along this path and they record the effects of exogenic forces including
              climate, tectonics, and rock type on surficial processes.  The sedimentological
              literature is rich with interpretations of the stratigraphic record in terms of
              tectonic processes.  In contrast, Quaternary scientists generally interpret
              Quaternary stratigraphy in terms of climatically-driven hydrologic changes. 
              Resolution of the relative roles of tectonics and of tectonics and climate in
              the stratigraphic record can only be addressed if the climatically-induced
              variability in the hillslope processes that produce and deliver detritus to the
              sedimentary basin are understood.   The proposed research has been stimulated
              by unprecedented field observations, in a tectonically quiesent setting, of
              hillslope deposits that can be traced with confidence laterally into Neogene
              lacustrine deposits or remain as relict Pliocene and Pleistocene features on
              the landscape.  We propose to combine sedimentologic and geomorphic approaches
              in the study of these deposits with the hypothesis that significant
              climatically-controlled variations in the production and transport of hillslope
              sediment are evident and that the Neogene and Quaternary records of hillslope
              sedimentation can be compared and contrasted.  This will be accomplished
              through detailed analysis of the stratigraphy, sedimentary petrology, and
              sedimentary structure of buried and relict hillslope deposits and their
              correlative proximal piedmont deposits, along with the study of Quaternary
              stratigraphy and soil-landscape associations.  Results will significantly
              bridge and benefit both disciplines and fill a gap in our understanding of how
              hillslope and fluvial systems have been linked  and have varied with climate
              over the past 12 million years.
