Title       : Passive and Active Factors in Branchiation Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9706225

Award Number: 9706225
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76945              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. A. Bertram   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan G. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Previous research led to the development of a piece of equipment, a transducer,
              to directly measure dynamic force applied by gibbons and chimpanzees during
              locomotion by brachiation.  The transducer made it possible to determine that
              gibbons use a unique mechanical strategy for conserving energy during high
              speed brachiation.  Coordinated exchange of two kinds of kinetic energy,
              translational and rotational, is involved in this locomotor strategy.  This
              newly discovered mechanical exchange strategy appears to be a critical
              component of true brachiation.  The present project extends the previous
              research to quantify the passive and active muscular factors that allow this
              critical energy exchange.  Using the same analytical techniques, the processes
              of acceleration and deceleration in brachiation will also be studied.  The
              white-handed gibbon will be compared to the chimpanzee to determine the
              differences in detailed functional capability and mechanical strategies
              employed by each species during brachiation.  The new understanding of the
              mechanical basis of brachiation that will result from this project will permit
              the determination of the functional limitations and critical design criteria
              that allow animals to utilize this mode of locomotion.  Comparison of the
              gibbon to the less specialized chimpanzee will add detailed information on the
              factors responsible for the production of the brachiation repertoire and its
              anatomical underpinnings.  This is important for the analysis of locomotion
              strategies in extant species, and also critical to the evaluation of the
              functional capabilities of fossil remains.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
