Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Trace Extensions, Commutator Spaces and Single
               Commutators with Applications to the Homology, Determinants and K-Theory of
               Operator Ideals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9706911

Award Number: 9706911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Weiss gary.weiss@math.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Abstract  Weiss    The commutator structure of operator ideals (e.g., the
              class of single commutators, AB-BA, with A, B from two two-sided operator
              ideals, respectively, along with commutator ideals (their linear span)) and
              related trace extension problems will be investigated and exploited to
              determine the Hochschild and cyclic homology for two-sided ideals in B(H), the
              class of bounded linear operators acting on a separable, infinite-dimensional,
              complex Hilbert space. A close connection between certain algebraic K-groups
              has been found for a wide class of two-sided ideals in B(H). Recent important
              advances have been made in characterizing those ideals which have zero homology
              (i.e., those commutator ideals which are the ideals themselves and hence have
              no trace) and in generalizing N. J. Kalton's characterization of the commutator
              ideal of the Hilbert-Schmidt class, and also the commutator ideal of the trace
              class (with B(H)), to arbitrary ideals. A natural generalization is a
              characterization of those ideals whose commutator ideal (with B(H)) contains T
              for a given compact operator T. A question arising in this context is: Which
              normed ideals admit a continuous or positive trace?  The answer to this
              question for symmetrically normed ideals with a dense finitely generated
              subideal is already settled. Techniques under development involve exploiting
              recently found obstructions preventing certain ideals from having a trace
              extension beyond certain smaller ideals, and are related to the associated
              commutator classes and commutator ideals.    The study of operator algebras and
              operator ideals (i.e., special classes of operators each operator of which may
              be viewed as an infinite matrix (a square, infinite array of numbers)) involves
              the investigation of operations between their operators, especially addition
              and multiplication. Operator algebras with these operations play an
              indispensable roll throughout mathematics, science, business, computer science
              and many of their applications to other f ields. The well-known commutative law
              of multiplication is that AB = BA for all numbers A and B, i.e., one always
              obtains the same result no matter which order one multiplies numbers. Algebras
              whose elements have this property are called commutative algebras. But most
              algebras are not commutative and studying the structure of their non-zero
              commutators, AB-BA, becomes central in understanding the algebras   and their
              relation to the more easily understood commutative algebras, inside which AB-BA
              is always zero. The famous Heisenberg Uncertainly Principle in physics provides
              an early example of the relevance of commutators. This proposal is to expand
              our knowledge of the commutator structure of a number of important operator
              algebras and to use the new information towards developing techniques to settle
              some old and new open problems in commutator theory and in operator algebras
              and ideals.
