Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Coarse Geometry of Homogeneous Spaces, Quantization and
               Asymptotic Homomorphisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1997       
File        : a9706960

Award Number: 9706960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51393              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik Guentner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Guentner    The proposed research comprises three distinct projects;
              coarse geometry and index theory of elliptic operators on homogeneous spaces,
              topological invariants of quantum mechanical systems, and the construction of
              an equivariant version of the E-theory groups defined by A. Connes and N.
              Higson.  All three involve the notion of asymptotic homomorphisms of
              C*-algebras which provide an elegant realization of K-homology, the generalized
              homology theory dual to K-theory.  The first is motivated by work of P. Baum,
              R. Douglas and M. Taylor calculating the image of the K-homology class of a
              first order, elliptic differential operator on a manifold with boundary under
              the boundary map in K-homology.  The second is based on the observation that a
              quantization of a classical mechanical system based on a continuous parameter
              of Planck's constant may be used to construct an asymptotic morphism and hence
              an element of a K-homology group.  The third is a joint project with N. Higson
              and J. Trout.  Our equivariant groups will prove useful in a number of
              contexts.  In particular they have applications to the Baum-Connes conjecture. 
              The proposed research deals with index theory on non-compact, complex manifolds
              possessing a large number of symmetries.  The geometric structure of the
              boundary of these manifolds plays an important role in index theory.  I propose
              to study its precise relationship to the analytic properties of elliptic
              differential operators on the manifolds themselves using the techniques of
              coarse geometry and the newly developed E-theory.  The second project is based
              on the close relationship between elliptic differential operators on these
              manifolds to certain quantum mechanical systems.  My methods can be used to
              obtain new topological invariants of these systems and relate them to index
              theory.  The research should lead to a better understanding of a number of
              quantum mechanical systems from mathematical physics and also has bearing on a
              number of outstanding problems in  index theory including the Baum-Connes
              Conjectupe.
