Title       : U-Series Isotope Systematics of Continental Rift Basalts: The Rio Grande Rift,
               USA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1997   
File        : a9706373

Award Number: 9706373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127580             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yemane Asmerom asmerom@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706373  Asmerom  Rifts are unique tectonic settings where magmas derived from
              both the deep mantle and the old lithospheric continental mantle occur.
              Chemical and isotopic studies of continental basalts erupted in rifts can
              provide us with information on the mantle composition under the continents.  In
              contrast to long-lived isotope systems, short-lived nuclides, such as the
              U-series isotopes, allow us to trace dynamical and compositional aspects of the
              present-day crust-mantle system. The study area, the Rio Grande Rift and its
              cratonic margins, is one of the best characterized continental rift systems in
              the US. It contains contemporaneous young alkali and tholeiitic basalts of
              presumed asthenospheric and lithospheric mantle origin in close spatial
              proximity. The U-series isotopic data in conjunction with Pb, Sr and Nd
              isotopic compositions of these basalts will contribute to our understanding of:
              1) controls on the variation of Th enrichment in continental basalts such as
              differences in degree and rate of melting, and depth (source) of mantle
              melting.  Information on the variation of mantle sources with time provides
              constrains for models of continental rifting.  2)  Th-U compositional
              variability of the mantle under continents, and in particular the variability
              in the 232Th/238U ratio (k-value) of the continental lithospheric mantle.
              Information on the k-value is important with respect to global mass balance and
              as indicator of processes such as recycling and metasomatism in the mantle. 3)
              the role of continental crust in modifying the chemistry of rift magmas.
