Title       : Linear and Nonlinear Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9706780

Award Number: 9706780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83532              (Estimated)
Investigator: Avraham Soffer soffer@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706780    Soffer    In this project the analysis of large time behavior of a
              class  of nonhomogeneous and nonlinear wave equations is pursued.  This class
              include solitary wave solutions interacting with radiation.  The aim is to
              develop the scattering theory for nonintegrable            multichannel
              problems. The Klein-Gordon equation with potential term and  nonlinearity is
              one case to be considered. The other example is the  nonlinear Schrodinger
              equation with a potential holding more than one  bound state.  Other parts of
              the proposal deal with the spectral theory of N-body  dispersive equations, in
              particular the proof of local decay and   absence of singular continuous
              spectrum for such hamiltonians.    The project deals with the large time
              behavior of radiation  waves and waves in media. Analytic methods to find the
              radiation   of molecules, spontaneous or stimulated, are developed. The nature 
              of this radiation is used in various applications to determine  the structure
              and chemical properties of the source.  The second part of the project deals
              with waves travelling through  a medium. Such waves often change the medium and
              thus affect the way the  wave moves. Such self-influence lead to NONLINEAR wave
              equations  with new and complicated behavior not seen in vacuum. The most
              striking  examples are singularities that form in a finite time. These are  
              used to explain diverse phenomena, from black hole formation to  air and plasma
              turbulence. Another phenomenon is the formation of   "clumps" of waves that
              move in the medium with unusually high stability,  like solitons in optic
              fibers. The current project is devoted to the  analysis of the large time
              radiation and interaction of nonlinear  waves and solitons. This includes the
              study of the effect of defects and  impurities in optic fibers on the motion
              and structure of optical  solitons used in high speed communications.
