Title       : The Interference Avoidance Hypothesis and Scaling Principles in Crinoids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a9706071

Award Number: 9706071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70919              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomasz K. Baumiller tomaszb@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706071  Baumiller    Crinoids were an important component of ancient marine
              environments and an excellent record of their diverse morphologies has been
              preserved, as is demonstrated by over 900 described genera.  Yet 'm spite of
              their importance and diversity, our interpretations of their evolutionary
              history and paleoecology are limited and many questions remain unanswered.  Two
              problems will be tackled in this study: I)are the predictions implicit 'm the
              tiering model (Ausich, 1980) supported by the pattern of spatial distribution
              of individuals of the same species?  And 2) what structural or functional rules
              govern the growth of stalked crinoids?    To tackle the first problem, one
              prediction implicit in the tiering model (Ausich, 1980), namely that the
              same-tier, upstream neighbors of crinoids interfere with feeding and that
              interferences should be avoided, will be tested by quantifying the patterns of
              spatial distribution of a living isocrinid, Neocrinus decorus.  The patterns
              will be quantified by digitizing  photos taken from a submersible.A first-order
              prediction states that if resources are limiting, since individuals of the same
              species utilize the same resources upstream neighbors should be avoided or
              should lie beyond some critical distance.  Manipulations of in situ specimens
              and specimens 'm a flow tank will be used to further assess whether crinoids
              actively avoid interference.  Another test of this hypothesis will involve
              collecting several 'individuals of N. decorus by submersible, tagging and
              redeploying them onto a small area, and episodically monitoring their pattern
              of distribution; a non-random pattern would support the hypothesis.    A
              paleontological prediction of the intraspecific avoidance hypothesis is that
              the spatial patterns of distribution characterizing avoidance should be
              expressed only among taxa capable of relocation (e.g.: advanced cladids,
              articulates), but not among those taxa permanently attached to the substrate. 
              Tests of this prediction will involve obt aining data on the spatial
              distribution of complete individuals of the same species from a single bedding
              plane of a burial horizon (e.g.: LeGrand, Burlington, Crawfordsville) and
              determining whether the pattern differs from random and is consistent with the
              hypothesis of avoidance.  Results of all these approaches will provide a basis
              for assessing the relative importance of factors such as hydrodynamic regime
              and nutrient limitations to crinoid autecology and, possibly, evolutionary
              history.    To determine if structural or functional rules govern crinoid
              morphology , stalk length and diameter and   arm length will be measured for
              fossil taxa and for extant crinolds collected by submersible.  Comparison   of
              these data to predictions based on three scaling models, geometric, stress, and
              elastic, will be used to   determine if the observed data support any of the
              models.  Stalked crinoid-. which are rheophiles utilize a  feeding posture
              which requires a certain flexure of the stalk, and these crinolds are predicted
              to scale   according to the model of elastic similarity.  If that prediction is
              home out for such crinoids, i.e., those with  "standard" ecologies (rheophiles
              utilizing a Parabolic Filtration Fan Posture), fossil taxa thought to have  had
              unusual ecologies (calceocrinids, Seirocrinus, Pentacrinus) will be examined to
              determine if they scaled   according to rules different from elastic
              similarity.    A successful completion of the project will solve some major
              problems of crinoid functional morphology and test an important ecological and
              paleoecological model, that of tiering.  Although crinoids are the focus here,
              the methods developed have broader implications.  For example, the principles
              governing crinoid morphology should also govern the growth of other aquatic
              rheophiles.
