Title       : Finding Principles of Large Scale Hydrologic Response: Linking Hydroclimatology
               and River Basin Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9706121

Award Number: 9706121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157464             (Estimated)
Investigator: Praveen Kumar kumar1@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Kumar    The objective of the proposed research is to develop principles of
              large scale hydrologic response in different hydroclimatological regimes by
              coupling hydroclimatology and river basin dynamics.  This objective will be
              accomplished via three tasks:      Through joint analysis of the
              atmospheric-hydrologic cycle and streamflow develop parameterizations to link
              hydroclimatology  and basin response characteristics.  In this task we will:
              (I) Classify the entire US into homogeneous hydroclimatic regimes using a
              combination of atmospheric dynamics, and analysis of atmospheric moisture, wind
              velocity and temperature fields, and stramflow observations.  This also
              involves identifying parameters that describe the similarities and differences
              between these regimes.  (ii) Develop relationships between parameters
              characterizing the climatology and the basin response in each homogeneous
              regime.    Develop a non-dimensional formulation of large-scale basin response
              which explicitly incorporates the hydrolimatological influence and
              self-similarity of the three dimensional river networks.                       
                                In  this task we will (I) Incorporate hydroclimatological
              influence and the self-similarity of three dimensional river networks into the
              notion of hydrologic similarity and develop formulation of basin response in
              non-dimensional framework.  (ii) Identify the important parameters that control
              the similarities and differences in responses of two basins within and across
              hydroclimatogically homogeneous regimes, respectively, and examine the scales
              of their applicability Using high resolution digital elevation and streamflow
              data, perform validation studies in different hydrolimatic regimes.In this task
              we will: (i) Compare the basin response generated from the above formulations
              with the observed streamflows in the different regimes .  (ii) Study the scales
              of applicability of the non-dimensional formulations by using basins of various
              sizes (iii) Analyze the effectiveness of  the identified parameters that
              characterize the similarities between responses within homogeneous regimes and
              differences across them.    Model development and testing will be limited to
              basins in two to three homogeneous regimes for the duration of the proposal.
