Title       : Novel Optical and Magnetic Properties of Nanostructured Materials Manufactured
               by Spark-Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9706993

Award Number: 9706993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rolf E. Hummel RHUMM@MSE.UFL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9706993 Hummel  This project addresses spark processing, an exploratory method
              for producing light emitting porous silicon. Spark processing utilizes a plasma
              based discharge between electrodes, and represents an alternative technique to
              the more common anodic etching approach to producing porous silicon. The
              objective is to increase understanding of the properties of light-emitting,
              nanostructured materials prepared by spark processing through a study of
              mechanisms associated with processing parameters. Optimization with respect to
              key optical and magnetic properties carried out, and the development of
              relationships between nanostructure, properties, and conditions prevailing in
              the spark processing environment will be sought. Laser processing will also be
              employed in parallel with spark processing for comparisons, further property
              enhancements, and to gain insight into processing/property relationships of
              nanostructured materials.  %%% The project addresses processing research issues
              in a topical area of materials science with technological relevance.  The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge to important aspects
              of extremely small structured materials with implications for advanced
              electronic/photonic devices and integrated circuitry.  Additionally, the
              fundamental knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
              contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced devices
              and circuits by providing greater understanding and a basis for designing and
              producing improved materials, and materials combinations.  An important feature
              of the program is the integration of research and education through the
              training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
              ***
