Title       : Operator Algebras, Operator Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9706810

Award Number: 9706810
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161125             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Larson larson@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Larson    This project has three areas of emphasis.  The first
              focuses on problems related to the structural theory of non-selfadjoint
              operator algebras.  Prior work by the investigator on quasitriangularity
              considerations within von Neumann algebras has impacted some work of others
              outside the area in applied control theory and in function theory.   He will
              continue this direction of research.   The second ongoing project concerns a
              new functional- analytic approach to some basic issues in wavelet theory.  The
              PI has shown that certain classical orthonormal wavelets could be derived using
              operator-algebraic techniques, and he also proved the existence of
              single-function dyadic orthonormal wavelets in all dimensions greater than one.
               This was a surprise to some other researchers because it contradicted a
              wavelet folklore which indicated that such wavelets were impossible.  He has
              also shown that  the unitary group of a von Neumann algebra can in some cases
              be used to parameterize a norm-path-connected family of wavelets.  This
              suggests the possibility of perturbation techniques.  The third  thrust extends
              prior work of this investigator and collaborators in which counterexamples were
              obtained to some old open problems concerning operator-algebraic reflexivity
              and related properties of single operators.      In prior supported work this
              investigator solved, with collaborators, a  conjecture in the area of
              non-selfadjoint operator algebras that had been posed about ten years earlier
              by another researcher.  This led to an unsuspected development in the applied
              area of control theory which impacted work of others outside of mathematics. 
              He will continue pursuing this line of research.  In a second ongoing
              direction,  this investigator and a former student have shown that some aspects
              of wavelet theory are amenable to operator algebraic computations of a nature
              that were previously unsuspected.  Wavelet analysis and wavelet oriented
              technology has been the scene of a tremendous research  drive in mathematics
              and engineering during the  past few years.  Primary applications have been to
              signal processing and data compression.  They showed that certain classical
              wavelets could be derived using their techniques, and  they also proved the
              existence of certain wavelets in higher dimensions which were previously
              thought to be impossible by many specialists.   In a third direction the PI has
              recently extended some prior work in which counterexamples were obtained to
              some old open problems concerning properties of single operators.  Several
              doctoral students have been involved in all of this work.
