Title       : Optimal Regularity for Nonlinear Pde's and Systems in Carnot-Caratheodory Spaces
               and Applications to Geometry, Symmetry for Pde's, Unique Continuation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9706892

Award Number: 9706892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola Garofalo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706892    Garofalo      The proposal is concerned with three projects: 1)
              Optimal regularity for  nonlinear pde's and systems in Carnot-Caratheodory (CC)
              spaces and the  applications of this theory to geometry, isoperimetric and
              Sobolev  inequalities, minimal surfaces in (CC) spaces and their regularity, 
              Dirichlet problem in nilpotent Lie groups: Connection between harmonic  measure
              and perimeter, harmonic maps between CR manifolds. 2) Symmetry in 
              overdetermined boundary value problems, both interior and exterior, in 
              Euclidean and CR geometry, minimizers in the isoperimetric and Sobolev 
              inequalities in the Heisenberg group, a conjecture of E. De Giorgi and its 
              parabolic counterpart. 3) Unique continuation for sub-elliptic operators, 
              applications to scattering, inverse problems on the Heisenberg group,  unique
              continuation for nonlinear equations of p-Laplacian type.      The proposed
              research sits at the confluence of two main areas of  interest in mathematics
              known as partial differential equations and  geometry. Both areas find their
              origin and motivation in problems arising  in the observation and description
              of natural phenomena, at every  scale. A main focus of the proposed research
              is, e.g., the  reconstruction of the shape of a body knowing some quantities
              that can be  measured on the surface that surrounds the body. Such a problem
              has a  great relevance in the applied sciences and is especially important in 
              areas of Federal strategic interest ranging from computerized tomography,  to
              biotechnology, to control of the core of a nuclear reactor, etc.  The proposed
              research will also contribute to the development of human  resources through
              the involvement of young investigators (doctoral  students). The principal
              investigator is also writing a book which will  focus on those aspects of the
              program that has been developed over the  past few years in collaboration with
              several doctoral students.
