Title       : Complex Dynamics and Classification of Algebraic Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9706018

Award Number: 9706018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregery T. Buzzard   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Buzzard  9706018    This project has three components.  The first
              component is the study of the dynamics of polynomial maps of two variables. 
              The primary goal of this component is to show that the topological notion of
              Omega stability is equivalent to the analytic notion of hyperbolicity.  Similar
              programs have led to a great deal of activity and many new results in the
              fields of one complex variable dynamics and real dynamics.  The second
              component is the study of polynomial mappings of three variables using
              techniques of pluripotential theory.  Pluripotential theory has been an
              effective tool in the study of the dynamics of polynomial mappings of one and
              two variables.  The main goal of this component is to determine the extent to
              which this tool can be applied to higher dimensional polynomial
              diffeomorphisms, whose dynamics have been studied very little.  The third
              component is the classification of algebraic surfaces in terms of a weak notion
              of hyperbolicity.  The main goal of this component is to show that the
              existence of a rank-two holomorphic map from complex 2-space to an algebraic
              surface is equivalent to the existence of a Zariski dense image of the complex
              plane.     The main focus of this project is the study of iterated maps, which
              are mathematical abstractions for processes which are repeated many times. 
              Such repeated processes are commonly found in many diverse fields.  For
              instance, many biological processes, such as DNA replication, are simple
              procedures which are repeated many times.  More directly related to the current
              project is the notion of a genetic algorithm, which is an attempt to use some
              of the features of biological reproduction, such as genetic crossover and
              competition, to produce effective computer algorithms.  The crossover part of
              this procedure can be modeled by iterated maps very similar to those under
              study in the current project.  An important feature of repeated processes is
              that many times, a slight change in the parameters of a process which  is
              repeated many times can lead to a drastic change in the final outcome.   While
              this may be desirable behavior in some cases, it is more common to prefer
              systems which are reliable and relatively unaffected by small errors or changes
              in conditions.  Hence it is natural to ask which processes are stable in the
              sense that a small change in parameters leads to a small change in the final
              outcome.  Resolving this question for some systems is the primary aim of the
              current project.
