Title       : Endomorphisms on Von Neumann Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9706441

Award Number: 9706441
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56455              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey L. Price glp@nadn.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Naval Academy
	      
	      Annapolis, MD  21402    301/267-6100

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Price    Endomorphisms on von Neumann algebras are examples of
              noncommutative dynamical systems which may proceed forward, but not backward,
              in time.  The analysis of the cocycle conjugacy classes of discrete
              endomorphisms is related to the Jones theory of index for subfactors and has
              numerous connections to the classification theory of Connes of the outer
              conjugacy classes of automorphisms on the tracial hyperfinite factor.  An
              important family of endomorphisms is the family of Powers shifts, which appear
              naturally in the construction of shifts on Jones tunnels of subfactors and as
              restrictions of endomorphisms with finite relative commutant index.  Using a
              connection between Powers shifts and linear shift register systems, Price will
              attempt to complete his classification of the rational Powers shifts.  Price
              has also computed the entropy of all rational Powers shifts and expects to work
              with E. Stormer on the problem of determining the range of values of the
              Connes-Stormer entropy among the family of all Powers shifts.  In addition, a
              number of combinatorial problems have arisen from the interplay between the
              study of Powers shifts and shift register systems, and as part of this project
              Price will work with some undergraduate students to answer some related
              questions about the ranks of Toeplitz and Hankel matrices over finite fields.  
               This research project represents an attempt to exploit connections which Price
              has shown to exist between two fields of mathematics, one of which is
              relatively abstract and one of which is comparatively concrete.  Since the
              1930's operator algebras have been used as mathematical constructs to model the
              behavior of quantum mechanical systems.  The field   of shift register systems,
              on the other hand, is a branch of cryptology, and is one of the means by which
              secure messages are encoded and transmitted.  Using some number-theoretic
              aspects of linear shift register systems, and with the participation of
              undergraduate research assistants, Price will con tinue his program of
              classifying families of mappings known as Powers shifts. Powers shifts are
              mappings which may be viewed as determining the forward time evolution of a
              particular algebra of physical observables.  Although this algebra has been
              used in modeling quantum mechanical systems, it has also been studied for its
              applications to knot theory and for its potential applications towards the
              understanding of the structure of DNA.
