Title       : Coded Diversity Combining and Channel Estimation for Wireless Data
               Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9706592

Award Number: 9706592
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246636             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zygmunt J. Haas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Wicker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  Recently, a new post-detection macrodiversity scheme was proposed for
              cellular communication systems. In this new scheme, termed Multiply-Detected
              Macrodiversity (MDM), the signals at multiple base stations are detected and
              used as input to a Decision Algorithm, which provides an optimal decision of
              what was transmitted.  The MDM scheme shows considerable improvement in the
              Bit-Error Rate (BER), especially when the mobile is close to the boundary
              between cells. As the boundary between cells is exactly the region in which the
              quality of the mobile's signal is mostly impaired, the MDM scheme has the
              effect of equalizing the BER throughout the system coverage area.    The
              Decision Algorithm of the MDM scheme requires as an input, in addition to the
              separate detections of the receivers, also an estimation of the quality of the
              received signals, so that appropriate"weightings" of these signals can be
              applied in the post-detection combining process. To obtain estimates, usually
              some sort of channel measurement is performed; e.g., the signal power
              (S-diversity) or the Signal-to-Interference-Ratio (S/I-diversity).  In such
              cases, the measurement process complicates the design of the
              transmitter/receiver hardware and the operation of the system. Furthermore, the
              measurements are subject to high variance and need to be averaged over time.   
              To avoid the disadvantage of the measurement-based quality of signal
              estimation, we propose here to investigate the use of channel coding to
              evaluate the transmission characteristics of a wireless channel for
              macrodiversity reception. The proposed channel estimation schemes use side
              information generated during the decoding process.In summary, we intend to
              study the use of the MDM combining with coded channel estimation in the case of
              a single site equipped with multiple,widely-separated receivers and in the case
              of multiple cell sites. In the latter case, we will investigate the use of both
              post-detection and predetection combining (with quantization of the recei ved
              signal), comparing the performance in the schemes in the presence of channel
              impairments characteristic to the mobile communication environment.
