Title       : Theory of Time-Dependent Phenomena in Quantum Many-Body Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9706788

Award Number: 9706788
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giovanni Vignale vignaleg@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9706788  Vignale  This grant will support the work of a mid-career PI on some 
              fundamental aspects of time dependent density functional  theory.   The PI has
              pioneered the generalized current-  density functional theory to describe the
              high frequency  effects under weak perturbing potentials.  The generalized 
              theory has the prospect of a unified treatment of a large  class of phenomena
              ranging from standard linear response and  transport to nonlinear and
              nonperturbative phenomena and  parametric instabilities.  The PI will study
              exact solutions  as benchmarks, to learn about the rigorous structure of the 
              exact  exchange correlation potentials.  The theory will  also be generalized
              to include the electronic spin degree of  freedom.  The theoretical work will
              benefit from experiments  on the dispersion and lifetime of collective
              excitations in  metals and also on excitations in digitally designed quantum 
              wells.  In addition the PI is also planning to investigate  the excitations at
              the edges of quantum Hall systems.  %%%  This mid-career PI was a pioneer in
              the development of a  theoretical formalism to study the time dependent
              properties  of electrons in metals.  This work is widely known as the 
              current-density functional theory.   In the present grant,  he is planning to
              develop a unified treatment of the  response of atoms, molecules and metals to
              intense and high  frequency  electromagnetic fields.  The specific effects
              include a  study of nonlinear phenomena and also parametric  instabilities in
              metals and in digitally designed quantum  wells.  He is also planning to study
              the special properties  of electrons at high fields, the features associated
              with  the edge states in a quantum Hall effect.  ***
