Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Operator Algebras and Noncommutative Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9706982

Award Number: 9706982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Blackadar bruceb@math.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Valentin Deaconu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Kumjian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Abstract  Blackadar    The investigators propose to continue work on a range
              of problems concerning the structure of operator algebras and noncommutative
              algebraic topology.  Specific topics to be studied are:  structure of inductive
              limits of C*-algebras, structure of groupoids and their C*-algebras, nonstable
              K-theory and the fundamental comparability question, and existence and
              properties of cohomology theories on C*-algebras.    If one takes the point of
              view that a space may be studied via the commutative C*-algebra of
              complex-valued continuous functions on the space, then the study of
              noncommutative C*-algebras is a natural generalization.  Furthermore, there are
              numerous situations in ordinary geometry and topology where the natural object
              of study is a "singular space" which often cannot be studied directly in purely
              topological terms, but where there is a noncommutative C*-algebra which plays
              the exact role of the algebra of functions, and where C*-algebra theory has
              been a crucial tool in advancing the understanding of the topological
              situation.  There has been extensive work in recent years in generalizing
              notions of algebraic topology, and more recently related notions of
              differential geometry,  to C*-algebras.  This work has already paid off
              spectacularly with fundamental advances in the understanding of the structure
              of C*-algebras, as well as the beautiful and deep applications in geometry,
              topology, and mathematical physics.  Perhaps the most important result, though,
              is simply the bridge which has been constructed between operator algebras and
              topology, and the broad new level of understanding of the interconnections. 
              Virtually all of the research the proposers have done in recent years fits 
              into this general picture of noncommutative topology.  The specific projects
              proposed are continuations or natural outgrowths of previous work, taking into
              account the way the subject as a whole has developed.
