Title       : On a Fourth Order PDE - Some Analytic and Geometric Aspects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9706864

Award Number: 9706864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213162             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sun Yung A. Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706864    Chang      In this project, Chang proposes to continue her study of a
               fourth order differential operator called the Paneitz operator.  This
              operator, which arises naturally from consideration  in conformal geometry, is
              the standard bi-Laplacian operator   when restricted to domains in the
              Euclidean spaces. Four problems   are proposed to study the geometric and
              analytic properties of the   operator. The first is to investigate the
              geometric content of some  best constant in the sharp Sobolev imbedding result
              associated with   the operator, the second and the third are to study
              uniqueness and   regularity of some non-linear PDE naturally related to the
              operator.   The fourth is to study general conformal covariant operators which 
               Paneitz operator is a special example.  Mooers proposes to continue her work
              on analysis on incomplete manifolds,  specifically to investigate the behavior
              of the heat kernel on   manifolds with isolated metric singularities and to
              describe the  relationship between the heat kernel of these spaces and their
              geometry.      One of the most important topic in mathematics today is the
              study  of 4-dimensional metric spaces (3-dimensional space plus one-dimensional
               time variable).  Such spaces arise naturally as the state space of   physical
              systems, and these systems can often be   described mathematically as solutions
              to differential equations.  The behavior of solutions is used to study and
              classify the  geometry of metric spaces, and thus possible physical systems. 
              Chang propose to study the geometry of 4-manifolds, metric spaces   that look
              locally like Euclidean space, via some analytic tool--namely   via a fourth
              order differential operator which leads to interesting and   challenging open
              questions both in geometry and analysis.    Mooers proposes to use the heat
              equation to study metric spaces with   isolated metric singularities, spaces
              that are manifolds away from an   isolated point, and with behavior at the
              point similar  to a black hole type anoma ly in space.
