Title       : Critical Behavior In Nanoscale Confined Fluid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2000  
File        : a9706805

Award Number: 9706805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eldred H. Chimowitz chim@che.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yonathan Shapir  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9706805  Univ. of Rochester    Fundamental aspects of the critical
              behavior of a confined fluid in a model nanoscale pore structure are being
              investigated utilizing finite-size scaling theory in conjunction with computer
              simulation methodology.  Original results are described for analyzing critical
              phenomena in there types of systems.  The framework developed incorporates
              critical scaling concepts and rigorously accounts for finite-size effects that
              are important when doing simulations in the critical region.  Underpinning the
              analysis in the confined system has been the assumption of universality between
              the gas-liquid and Ising-type systems, a perspective in keeping with the
              results of modern critical phenomena theory.  The finite-size scaling analysis
              presented leads to very specific conditions that define the onset of critical
              behavior, and hence the phase transition regime, in the confined system.  In
              this way, size dependence is made an ally of the simulations and helps lead to
              novel methods for predicting critical properties and other fundamental behavior
              of interest in these systems.      Understanding the thermodynamic and
              transport behavior of near-critical fluids confined in porous substrates is
              important to several areas of research in chemical and materials engineering. 
              These include the development of methods for using porous materials to
              efficiently store gases with low bulk critical temperatures, metallic thin film
              deposition in porous media using supercritical fluid chemical vapor deposition
              (SFCVD) and the use of supercritical fluids for drying porous silicon and
              aerogels.  In this latter application, the drying trajectory of the process is
              chosen to expressly avoid traversing the intrapore fluid's phase boundary.
