Title       : Wavelets: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9706753

Award Number: 9706753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ingrid Daubechies ingrid@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Daubechies    ABSTRACT    Daubechies will concentrate on several aspects of
              wavelet algorithms   and their applications: a) Riesz bases of wavelets on the
              sphere:   Recent constructions of  wavelet algorithms on the sphere lead to  
              good numerical performance; so far no proof exists that they   correspond to
              Riesz bases for the square integrable  functions on the sphere. Traditional
              methods for planar   constructions exploit translational invariance, absent for
                triangulations on the sphere. b) Irregular subdivision schemes   construct
              curves or surfaces from irregular grids, placing new grid   points in positions
              that are not equally spaced (even locally) as   the grids are refined. Similar
              to the equally spaced  case, preservation of polynomial behavior plays an
              important role in  determining the smoothness of the limit curve or surface.
              Such   irregular subdivision schemes are being explored. c) Approaches to  
              decompose wavelet filters into elementary matrices in an  efficient manner, and
              possibly using only integers. d) Frames of   wavelets can be used for
              multiplexing of signals, similar to  CDMA, as well as for sending information
              efficiently over multiple  channels. e) The role of smart coding strategies in
              realizing the   full potential of wavelet-based nonlinear approximation
              theorems.    Wavelets are a mathematical technique that allows us to view a  
              complex structure as consisting of several, increasingly detailed   layers.
              This "multi-resolution analysis" is analogous to viewing   a painting from a
              distance, where only large features can be   distinguished, and then, as we
              approach closer, perceiving more   detailed, smaller features, until, when we
              are very close, we can   detect even individual brush strokes. As a 
              mathematical tool that has this potential to "fill in" detail at  increasingly
              small scales, and only where needed, wavelets have   turned out to be useful in
              computer aided graphic design, in image   and data compression, and in
              mathematical analysis and numerical    computation, in particular for composite
              materials. Several of the   mathematical problems in this proposal are inspired
              by such   applications of wavelets, and their solutions will widen the scope  
              of settings in which we can use multi-resolution analysis.
