Title       : Some Direct and Inverse Problems in Receptor Neurodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9706307

Award Number: 9706307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Bell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bell  9706307       Mechanotransduction is a fundamental physiological process 
              that is central for such diverse functions as hearing, touch,  digestion, and
              balance.  To understand mechanoreception in the  somatosensory system, the
              investigator continues developing a  detailed mathematical model of one
              receptor, the Pacinian  corpuscle, an encapsulated nerve ending.  One can not
              remove the  capsule without damaging the nerve, so many questions about the 
              voltage distribution along the nerve underneath the capsule can  not be
              answered experimentally.  Since one can only take neural  measurements where
              the nerve emerges from the capsule after  applying displacement stimuli to the
              capsule surface, how does  voltage there depend on various neural parameters
              along the  unexposed nerve?  Does one need a nonlinear current-voltage 
              relation to achieve a threshold voltage at the emerging end?  Can  one do extra
              recordings at the emerging end (overdetermined  boundary conditions) and be
              able to recover the stimuli to the  nerve?  The project undertakes mathematical
              modeling to address  these physiologically valuable questions.       Our bodies
              receive mechanical stimuli continuously, but the  stimuli must be processed
              into neural signals that the brain can  interpret.  This involves receptors
              called mechanoreceptors.  Be  they hair cells in the inner ear, or Pacinian
              corpuscles in the  skin, there are properties that are nearly impossible to 
              establish experimentally, so the investigator uses sophisticated  mathematical
              models to help predict responses to given stimuli,  as well as establish
              internal receptor properties.  For example,  the above mentioned skin receptor
              is a nerve ending which is  protected by a bulb of membranes and fluid. 
              Physiologically one  can not separate the mechanical bulb (the capsule) from
              the nerve  ending without sever damage to the nerve membrane.  But with a  good
              mathematical model one can determine respective  contributions each component
              makes to response behavior.  Also ,  the model can suggest ways of taking extra
              neural measurements  outside the capsule which will aid in finding biologically
               unreachable parameter values inside the corpuscle.  Analysis  increases our
              understanding of the transduction process in the  mammalian tactile system, and
              the analytic methodology transcends  the particular model case considered here.
