Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Ecology of the Ordovician Radiation: Evidence From
               the Basin and Range Province of the Western U.S.A.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9706021

Award Number: 9706021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126462             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Droser droser@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706021  Droser      T'he Ordovician radiation was one of the largest radiations
              in the history of life.  Current understanding of the Ordovician radiation is
              based largely on taxonomic studies of 'individual groups and on synthetic
              literature compilations.  This project will be the first field-based
              examination of the ecology of the Ordovician radiation.    During the
              Ordovician radiation the Cambrian Evolutionary Fauna was replaced by the
              Paleozoic Evolutionary Fauna.  Groups, such as brachiopods, bryozoans, rugose
              and tabulate corals, echinoderms, stromatoporaids, and cephalopods rose to
              dominance.  Marine family diversity tripled, reflecting vastly increased
              morphological diversity in the oceans.  Community complexity increased
              significantly as many new guilds were established.  In this study, four basic
              questions  will be addressed:  1) How do the communities develop?  Are
              community level changes gradual, sudden (geologically), stepped, or some
              combination?  2) Do different clades expand in concert within communities or do
              they just appear to be related when viewed in compilations on large-time
              scales?  3 ) Is the Cambrian fauna actually displaced during community
              development?  Or is it still present m the communities and simply diluted
              (Westrop et al., 1995)?  4) How did community complexity increase?  For
              example, are new communities added to the ecosystem or are clades simply added
              to existing communities?    This project will examine carbonate platform
              deposits preserved in the Great Basin.  This region has one of the finest
              records of shallow marine faunas in the Ordovician anywhere in the world,
              making it an ideal locale to conduct this study.  The Pls have conducted
              preliminary work for this proposal and also have extensive experience studying
              Ordovician rocks and faunas of this region    Field work will be conducted in
              the Cherry Creek Range, the southern Egan Range, and the  southern Hot Creek
              Range in Nevada and 'm the Bear River Range and the Ibex region in Utah.   
              T'he focus wi ll be on shallow-marine soft-substrate communities preserved in
              wackestone and limemudstone facies.  This environment has been chosen for
              several reasons.  Reworking of shells is minimal in these facies.  By confining
              the study to one general environment, rather than a complete bathymetric
              transect, the complications that would result from onshore-offshore changes
              that took place during the radiation can be avoided.    Preliminary work
              suggests that communities were reorganized at least 5 times during the
              Ordovician.  Six stratigraphic intervals, lower, middle and upper Ibexian,
              lower and middle Whiterockian, and Mohawkian-Cincinnatian appear to have
              distinctive community-types that are increasingly diverse and complex. 
              Preliminary evidence also suggests that the reorganizations of communities may
              have occurred quickly at the beginning of each interval.  If reorganizations
              were rapid, communities may have been stable with little change occurring
              during the bulk of these five intervals.
