Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Spectral Operators Generated by Damped Hyperbolic
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9706882

Award Number: 9706882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marianna A. Shubov mshubov@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Shubov    The primary goal of this proposal is to develop the spectral
              analysis for a class of non-selfadjoint operators in a Hilbert space.  These
              operators are the dynamics generators of the systems governed by
              three-dimensional wave equations with spatially non-homogeneous non-spherically
              symmetric coefficients containing first order damping terms.  This proposal is
              based on twelve works by PI (supported by NSF Grant DMS-92 12037 and two Texas
              Advanced Research Program Grants: 00364-116, 93-95 and 0036-44-124, 95-97).  In
              these works, the PI carried out a detailed asymptotic analysis of the spectrum
              and proved the Riesz basis property of the root vectors for two classes on
              non-selfadjoint operators: the dynamics generators for the equation of a
              non-homogeneous damped string with dissipative boundary conditions at the ends
              of a finite interval and the dynamics generators for three-dimensional damped
              wave equation with non-constant spherically symmetric coefficients with
              dissipative boundary conditions on a sphere. The first objective of this
              project is to make the next significantly more difficult step:  to extend the
              spectral results to the three-dim damped wave equation with non-spherically
              symmetric coefficients and dissipative boundary conditions on a sphere.  The
              plan of this analysis is based on a combination of the methods developed in the
              aforementioned works and the PI's earlier works on resonances and resonance
              states for three-dimensional Schrodinger operators with non spherically
              symmetric potentials.  The second objective is to apply the results to the
              control and stabilization problems for linear distributed parameter systems
              using the spectral decomposition method.     An important area of modern
              mathematical analysis, which has a wide range of applications to engineering
              problems, is related to control of the so-called distributed parameter systems.
               Examples of such systems include complicated vibrating elastic structures
              containing as their elements membranes, shell s, etc.  The objective of control
              is to achieve the desired behavior of the system by applying an external
              control force to it.  Problems of this type are of the primary importance in
              robotics (e.g., manipulation of a robot arm) and in aerospace engineering
              (e.g., stabilization of an aircraft).  The aforementioned control problems were
              considered in recent years in extensive mathematical literature and a
              considerable progress towards their solution was made.  In many cases, however,
              only the existence of the desired control functions was rigorously proved which
              left an open question of direct and efficient numerical computations of the
              controls.  A method that provides explicit algorithms for the computation of
              controls is known.  This is the method of the spectral decomposition.  The
              application of this method, however, encounters serious mathematical
              difficulties which significantly restricts its area of applicability to
              practical problems.  Namely, the method deals with a complicated area of modern
              analysis- "the spectral theory of non-selfadjoint operators."  The spectral
              theory of "selfadjoint operators" is a classical chapter of mathematics and
              serves as a main tool in quantum physics.  Because of the difficulties in the
              area, the applications of the method were until recently restricted to one-
              dimensional structures (like strings or rods).  Moreover, the phenomenon of the
              energy dissipation due to the internal friction was not taken into account in
              these models.  The main objective of this project is to extend the results to
              the most practically important three-dimensional systems with the internal
              friction.
