Title       : Biogeochemical Weathering of Layer Silicates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a9706382

Award Number: 9706382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jillian F. Banfield   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706382  Banfield     The proposed research will investigate the inorganic and
              biological mechanisms by which layer silicates are weathered, with implications
              for geochemical cycles, soil fertility, and plant nutrition.  Specifically,
              work will focus on interactions between biotite, chlorite, muscovite, and
              rhizosphere microorganisms and the reactions that convert these minerals to
              clays.  This work builds on our previous studies of inorganically and
              biogeochemically mediated alteration of chain silicates and extensive studies
              of layer silicate structures, microstructures, chemistry, and reaction
              mechanisms in hydrothermally altered rocks.     Layer silicates partially
              transformed to clay minerals will be characterized using atomic-resolution
              transmission electron microscopy and state of the art energy-filtered electron
              microscopic techniques.  Atomic-resolution and low dose image capture
              capabilities will be used to determine whether structural details of clay
              products are consistent with a transformation mechanism that involves
              structural inheritance.  Our work will employ both weathered layer silicates
              from the rhizosphere region of natural soils and layer silicates weathered in a
              laboratory rhizosphere.  The distribution of microorganisms on mineral surfaces
              will be studied using domain level and more specific oligonucleotide probes. 
              The hypothesis that microorganisms in soils accelerate mineral dissolution by
              production of extracellular enzymes (e.g. "mineralases" , analogous to
              cellulases and chitinases microbes produce to degrade wood, chitin, and related
              organic substrates) will be tested.     This work involves collaboration with
              Prof. Robert Goodman (Plant Pathology, UW-Madison.
