Title       : Maximal Averages Over Hypersurfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9706825

Award Number: 9706825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51528              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Iosevich iosevich@euler.math.wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  ABSTRACT    Iosevich      The purpose of this project is to analyze various
              operators that   arise in harmonic analysis and partial differential equations 
               associated with the convex finite type hypersurfaces. The main focus   of the
              project is the study of the maximal averaging operators   introduced by E. M.
              Stein, and the averaging convolution operators   originally studied by Littman
              and  Strichartz. Iosevich proposes a   set of necessary and sufficient
              conditions for the Lp boundedness of  maximal averaging operators, and a set of
              necessary and sufficient   conditions for the (Lp, Lq) boundedness of the
              averaging convolution   operators. Both sets of conditions are expressed in
              terms of   the integrability of the negative powers of the distance functions
              to   the tangent planes to the hypersurface. Iosevich will also work on  the
              problem of Lp boundedness of the maximal Bochner-Riesz means   associated with
              the smooth convex bodies in Rn. It has been   conjectured that these operators
              should have the same mapping   properties as the standard maximal Bochner-Riesz
              means associated   with the ball.      The study of the maximal averaging
              operators and other similar   operators in harmonic analysis is partially
              motivated by the   following interesting question: How close can we come to
              recovering   a set of data from the various kinds of averages of that data? The
                question is of potential practical value since scientists are often   called
              upon to make predictions based on average information. For   example,
              meteorologists make predictions about the rainfall in the   particular location
              based on the average rainfall in the years past   in the nearby towns.
              Seismologists make earthquake predictions based   on the pattern of shocks in
              the surrounding area. The tradeoff   involved in the study of these phenomena
              is, roughly speaking, the   following. If the data is very precise, then it
              can, generally   speaking, be recovered from any kind of a reasonable average.
              If the   data is less pre cise, then we have to make sure that the averaging  
              process compensates the deficiencies  of the data. The main thrust   of this
              project is to study the averaging phenomenon  when the data   is given by a
              certain kind of a mathematical function, and the   average is taken over a
              curved surface.
