Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topological Index for Proper Actions, Asymptotic
               Homomorphisms and Equivariant E-Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1997        
File        : a9706767

Award Number: 9706767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78729              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Trout Jody.Trout@Dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Trout    The proposed research involves defining an equivariant
              ``Atiyah-Singer''-type topological index for elliptic differential operators
              which are invariant with respect to the proper and cocompact action of a
              locally compact group on the underlying manifold, i.e. this index   arises from
              equivariantly embedding the base manifold into a (possibly infinite
              dimensional) Euclidean representation of the group and applying an appropriate
              version of equivariant Bott periodicity. The proof of the corresponding
              equivariant index theorem, namely that this topological index is equal to G.
              Kasparov's equivariant analytic index for the elliptic operator, requires the
              use of equivariant asymptotic homomorphisms of C*-algebras and the associated
              equivariant version of the E-theory groups of A. Connes and N. Higson. This
              research has applications to the Baum-Connes Conjecture and the   Novikov
              Conjecture.    The proposed research deals with the index theory of elliptic
              differential operators   on manifolds which commute with the action of a
              locally compact transformation group,   i.e., studying the spaces of solutions
              of differential equations which exhibit certain degrees  of internal symmetry.
              Associated with each elliptic operator is an "analytic index,"   which can
              carry important topological and geometric information about the manifold  the
              operator is associated with. However, this analytic index is very difficult to
              compute  in general, requiring a great deal of detailed analysis. I propose to
              construct, in a more  topological and geometric fashion, another method for
              computing this index, generalizing  the case of compact groups considered by
              Atiyah and Singer. Being able to compute the  indices of these elliptic
              operators should lead to a clearer understanding of a variety  of problems in
              geometry and representation theory, which are important to physics.   In
              particular the project will have a bearing on the Baum-Connes Conjecture and
              the   still-unsolved Novikov Conjecture.
