Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Symbolic Dynamics and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9706852

Award Number: 9706852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Boyle mmb@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Abstract   Boyle    Boyle will study various topics involving symbolic
              dynamics, including the density of periodic points for surjective cellular
              automata; the inverse spectral problem for nonnegative matrices over the
              integers and other subrings of the reals; algebraic generalizations of this
              problem; the classification of reducible shifts of finite type in a  
              functorial setting suitable to the general algebraic analysis of these systems
              and their relations with C* algebras; topological orbit equivalence; general
              symbolic dynamical frameworks and residual entropy.       To have a crude
              initial idea of symbolic dynamics, think of studying problems involving very
              long tapes of zeros and ones. An appropriate idealization is to consider
              infinite tapes.   Such a study is significant when one considers problems of
              data transmission and storage.  It also is one key to the study of how physical
              systems evolve over time: imagine cutting up a system into (say) two pieces,
              and associating to a point a sequence of zeros and ones according to its
              itinerary through the two pieces. It is actually useful to study a system by
              way of the associated itineraries ...    As happens in math, the theory
              developed for this   has turned out to be relevant to superficially unrelated
              problems in other areas. Two examples are objects of study of this proposal:
              understanding the algebraic structure of nonnegative matrices, which are basic
              in many applications of mathematics, and improving   a framework for
              understanding certain relations with the mathematical subject of C*-algebras.
              Another topic of this proposal involves  understanding cellular automata (the
              computer game of Life is an example) which can be viewed as models for physics
              and   evolution. The final topic, orbit equivalence, involves the study of
              properties of a dynamical system which do not depend on the way itineraries are
              ordered.
