Title       : Viscosity Solutions and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1997     
File        : a9706760

Award Number: 9706760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej Swiech swiech@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706760    Swiech    The proposed research revolves around the notion of
              viscosity  solution, which is a notion of weak solution for equations of 
              Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman-Isaacs (HJBI) type. It is both basic  and applied and
              can be divided into two parts: partial  differential equations in infinite
              dimensional  spaces and applications to stochastic optimal control, and 
              elliptic and parabolic equations. As regards the first part, the  investigator
              plans to continue research in the development of  the theory of viscosity
              solutions (i.e. generalized solutions)  of second order HJBI equations in
              Hilbert space. The basic  issues are the existence and uniqueness of solutions,
              their  regularity, convergence properties, etc. HJBI equations are  of great
              importance from the point of view of applications,  since they are so-called
              dynamic programming equations,  corresponding to problems of stochastic optimal
              control of  dynamical systems driven by stochastic partial differential 
              equations. The second part of the proposed research concentrates  on some
              fundamental problems in the theory of fully nonlinear,  second order, uniformly
              elliptic and parabolic partial differential  equations. The major issue is the
              regularity and uniqueness of  solutions of nonlinear, uniformly parabolic and
              elliptic  equations which are not continuous in the space variable and,  on a
              larger scale, the development of a theory of generalized  solutions for fully
              nonlinear equations with measurable  ingredients. Despite some recent results,
              uniqueness is in general  still a major open problem, even for linear
              equations, where it is  connected to the uniqueness of so-called martingale
              solutions of  stochastic differential equations with discontinuous diffusion 
              coefficient. Finally the investigator proposes to work on a notion of  weak
              solution for degenerate elliptic and parabolic partial differential  equations
              with measurable terms. Equations of this type appear, for  instance, in
              problems involving motion driven by mean curva ture.  The classical theory of
              viscosity solutions does not apply here.  Its extension to such cases is
              needed.    The notion of viscosity solution is widely used by applied  
              mathematicians, and the proposed research has a potential of having 
              far-reaching consequences in applied sciences, especially the part  of it
              dealing with HJBI equations and control of dynamical systems  driven by
              stochastic partial differential equations. In real life  these are systems
              governed by partial differential equations that  exhibit noisy behavior.
              Applications range from engineering to  mathematical finance. One has to
              mention stochastic optimal  control of nonlinear partially observed systems
              (so-called  nonlinear filtering), distributed and boundary control of systems 
              modelled by stochastic partial differential equations, minimax  type control of
              infinite dimensional systems widely used in  engineering (which is connected to
              infinite dimensional differential  games), risk-sensitive control of small
              noise systems  (important in control of adaptive tracking devices), and recent 
              market models of interest rate dynamics (option pricing). The  investigator is
              convinced that the proposed research will help  understand the above problems
              and will provide a mathematical  framework that can be used by people working
              in these areas.
