Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Isotopic Composition of Equus Tooth Enamel and Its
               Relationship to Diet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9706653

Award Number: 9706653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Amundson earthy@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706653  Amundson    The C and O isotope composition of structural carbonate (
              and phosphate) in the tooth enamel of fossil Equids has become widely used in
              Cenozoic paleoenvironmental studies in south Asia, Africa, and North America. 
              Yet, with respect to modern horse (Equus), there is insufficient knowledge of
              (1) what portion of the surrounding ecosystem the horses utilize for their
              diet, (2) the relationship of the isotopic composition of dietary intake to the
              isotopic composition of body water and dissolved CO2 in blood, and (3) the
              inter-and intra-tooth isotopic variability in a given individual.  A better
              understanding of these uncertainties is important to decipher the environmental
              significance of the C and O isotope composition of enamel.    We propose to
              conduct a two pronged study to answer these questions through: (1) controlled
              dietary studies on experimental horses at the UC Davis School of Veterinary
              Medicine and (2) a two year study of two feral horse herds in which we (a)
              isotopically characterize the surrounding ecosystem, (b) monitor the monthly
              plant species composition, and isotopic composition, of the horse diet, (C )
              monitor the O isotope composition of body water, (d) examine inter-tooth
              isotopic variability in selected individuals, and (e) examine intra-tooth
              morphological and isotopic variations.    One impetus for this research are the
              observations reported in the animal science and paleontological literature (as
              well as recent findings by isotope chemists) that Equus teeth form over a
              significant period of an individual's life.  While the exact chronology is
              somewhat uncertain, we believe that teeth may potentially record both annual
              and seasonal variations in the isotopic composition of diet and water intake. 
              If this is true, Equid teeth may provide a more detailed isotopic record of the
              past than previously recognized.  Equally important, potential isotopic
              variations within an individual caused by physiology, rather than dietary
              intake, must be recognized for ade quate interpretation of this isotopic proxy.
                 This research builds on pioneering studies of the relationship between
              environmental water and the O isotope composition of enamel phosphate, and on
              recent studies of in-tooth isotopic variability in fossil and modern organisms.
               Our purpose here is to consolidate this existing knowledge into a cohesive
              experimental design that will adequately answer the question that remains about
              Equus tooth enamel and its relevance as an isotopic proxy for environmental
              conditions.
