Title       : Evolution of Photosymbiosis in Oligocene-Miocene Planktic Foraminifera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9706394

Award Number: 9706394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard D. Norris rnorris@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706394  Norris    Symbioses are ubiquitous in the diversity of life and are
              often cited as a source of evolutionary novelty.  I propose to test the role of
              photosymbiosis in the diversification of planktic foraminifera-a large group of
              pelagic protistans that have a complex and well preserved fossil record. 
              Equally important for this study, planktic foraminifera preserve a clear
              isotopic signal of foraminiferal-algal symbiosis in their calcareous shells
              that permits the history and evolution of symbiosis to be studied in extinct
              species.    My previous isotopic and phylogenetic work has established that a
              large clade of planktic foraminifera (the morozovellids) diversified
              simultaneously with their evolution of foraminiferal-algal symbiosis.  Evidence
              from the ecology of living photosymbiotic foraminifera and changes in the
              taxonomic diversity of extinct groups strongly suggest that at least some
              clades radiated as soon as they acquired photosymbionts-perhaps because the
              photosymbiosis permitted the foraminifera to diversify into oligotrophic
              surface waters.  It remains to study other clades of photosymbiotic
              foraminifera to determine whether these symbioses consistently initiate major
              diversifications of the host foraminifera.  This proposal will examine two
              large clades: the Neogene globiginids (which may have harbored symbionts
              following the major extinction of photosymbiotic species in the middle Eocene).
               Data from both clades will be compared to a previously studied group: the
              Paleogene morozovellids.    The globigerinids are almost exclusively
              photosymbiotic today as demonstrated both by observation of living foraminifera
              and isotopic analyses of their shells.  Yet, a small number of isotopic
              analyses done as a pilot study for this project suggest the surprising
              conclusion that the globigerinids only recently acquired the photosymbiotic
              ecology.  At least some of the early Miocene and Oligocene representatives of
              the group were apparently asymbiotic.  Should this conclusion be supported  by
              further cladistic and isotopic study, this will weaken the hypothesized link
              between the evolution of symbiosis and taxonomic radiation of the host group. 
              Conversely, evidence for the recent evolution of photosymbiosis in both the
              globigerinids and globoquadrinids will provide strong evidence that symbioses
              are easily established in planktic foraminifera-a point also suggested by
              recent molecular phylogenetic data that find that the same symbiotic
              dinoflagellate species within diverse groups of globigerinid foraminifera.   
              This study is significant because it compares isotopic and cladistic evidence
              from three major clades of planktic foraminifera that have independently
              evolved photosymbiosis to determine whether symbioses play an important
              evolutionary role in the diversification of these plankton.  These analyses
              will result in a detailed history of the photosymbiotic strategy in planktic
              foraminifera for the last 65 million years.  The history of photosymbiosis can
              then be compared with the oceanographic record to assess the paleoceanographic
              control on the evolution of photosymbiosis.
