Title       : Oscillatory Sums and Radon - Fourier Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9706883

Award Number: 9706883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86574              (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantin I. Oskolkov oskolkov@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Oskolkov will continue his  investigations of oscillatory sums and integrals
              involving  imaginary exponentials of real algebraic polynomials.   The
              coefficients of the polynomials are considered as  independent real variables.
              These sums and integrals  establish interconnections between such apparently  
              distant fields as Harmonic Analysis, Analytic Number  Theory and Partial
              Differential  Equations. He will also  elaboratee on   Radon-Fourier analysis
              for  functions of several variables. Special emphasis will  be made on
              associated problems of ridge approximation,  which consist in selection of best
              fit linear   combinations of planar wave type functions. These  problems are of
              highly non-linear nature, especially  with respect to optimal  selection of
              wave vectors.       Immediate ramifications of such research include  neural  
              network models that have found wide applications in  industry, engineering,
              computer science, finance and  medicine. The Radon transform is an acknowledged
                powerful tool in several applied areas ranging from   classical quantum
              mechanics and optics to X-ray tomography.   In computational X-ray tomography,
              ridge approximation  can be interpreted as reconstruction of images  of
              non-homogeneities such as tumors. Another  extremely different field is
              recognition of main trends  in evolution of large systems such as bacteria 
              populations or the stock market, where an enormous  number of variables must be
              modeled.
