Title       : Local Plus Global Adaptivity in Moving Node Finite Element Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2001   
File        : a9706353

Award Number: 9706353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Miller kmiller@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9148,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9706353  Keith Miller      Miller plans to work on local plus global adaptivity
              for moving node  finite element methods. He plans first (in collaboration with
              Neil  Carlson of Purdue) to combine the local adaptivity of 2-D
              gradient-weighted  Moving Finite Elements (through the continuous movement of
              its nodes) with  an improved global adaptivity (through addition, deletion and
              reconnection  of nodes, based upon enriched geometric criteria and upon local
              error  estimates). Here they are building upon their longstanding and fruitful 
              collaboration in developing the GWMFE method. This method is especially  suited
              to problems which develop sharp moving fronts, especially problems  where one
              needs to resolve the fine-scale structure of the fronts. GWMFE  does an
              extremely fine job of moving its nodes around locally to resolve  the sharp
              features of the solution, but clearly global adaptivity is  needed if we are to
              have truly robust and flexible codes. Here they  would be making fundamental
              changes and additions to the partial global  adaptivity introduced by Miller's
              student Kuprat in his thesis of '92,  which added so greatly to the robustness
              of the method. Miller plans  second to develop a revised GWMFE with streamline
              diffusion; this should  correct some problems which the present method has on
              certain steady-state  convection problems in which the GWMFE grid drifts
              downstream with the  flow rather than coming to a steady-state. This revised
              GWMFE works  extremely well in 1-D; success in extending it to multidimensions
              would  be a significant advance for slow-transient and near steady-state fluid 
              computations.    Finite element (FE) methods with a triangular grid in 2-D
              typically compute  a piecewise linear approximation to the solution of a
              partial differential  equation (PDE) or system of PDEs; that is, the graph of
              the approximate  solution is an evolving surface with planar triangular faces.
              For standard  FE methods the grid is specified and fixed; however, for the
              GWMFE method  the grid is  allowed to deform and the nodes of the grid decide
              for  themselves how to move. On problems with sharp moving fronts the nodes can
                thus automatically concentrate in the front and move with it. In this way 
              one attains high resolution in the critical regions of the solution  while
              using far fewer nodes and far larger time steps than with standard  methods.
              Examples are the highly nonlinear diffusion of doped arsenic  ions in the
              manufacture of silicon chips, the drift-diffusion equations  for the nanosecond
              evolution of holes, electrons and voltages as a  semiconductor device switches
              states, and the "black oil" equations  for flooding of oil reservoirs. The
              GWMFE method has been strikingly  successful on these and many other problems
              even within the constraints  of a logically-fixed grid; that is, the grid
              deforms automatically, but  the number and interconnections of its nodes remain
              fixed. However, a  logically-fixed grid is inadequate for many important
              problems and it is  apparent that the efficiency and robustness of the method
              can be  greatly enhanced by adding global adaptivity (the insertion and
              deletion  of nodes as needed). This requires a good deal of code development, 
              but the combination of local plus global adaptivity in GWMFE should  yield a
              combined method which is accurate and robust, which uses far   fewer nodes, and
              which thereby renders efficiently computable important  classes of problems
              with moving sharp features which are presently  inaccessible to numerical
              computation.
