Title       : Operator Algebras, Modules and Completely Bounded Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9706996

Award Number: 9706996
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213758             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vern I. Paulsen vern@math.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Blecher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Paulsen/Blecher    The Principal Investigators propose several main
              lines of research on topics related to the theory of completely bounded maps.
              Blecher will be studying the general theory of operator algebras and modules
              over operator algebras, Hilbert C*-modules, and questions relating to
              realizations of Banach spaces as operator spaces. Paulsen will continue to
              study the completely bounded Hochschild cohomology through its presentation as
              a completely bounded relative Yoneda cohomology, some problems concerning
              polynomially bounded operators, and questions in interpolation theory.    The
              study of operator algebras originally grew out of quantum mechanics. The set of
              "observables" in a quantum mechanical system is described as an algebra of
              operators. For this reason, it is often important to see how formulas involving
              numerical variables behave when these variables are allowed to be operator
              variables. This process is often referred to as finding "quantized" versions of
              the old theories and it was out of this process that the theory of completely
              bounded maps grew. Blecher and Paulsen's research focuses mainly on questions
              of how various theories behave under this type of quantization. On the other
              hand, interpolation theory started as a purely mathematical exercise, and only
              in the past 20 years has it been found to have important applications in
              engineering. For example, in electrical circuit design, one starts with a
              desired frequency response, for a few given frequencies, and wishes to design
              the simplest circuit with that given response. Mathematically, this problem
              becomes one of finding the simplest function of a given type that achieves some
              given values at given points. This last problem is what we call an
              interpolation problem. Already the demands of electrical engineering take us
              beyond the known interpolation theories. Surprisingly, interpolation theory and
              the study of operator algebras is interwoven, and this interplay has lead to
              some new interpolation results. We ha ve found that a better understanding of
              the "quantized", i.e., matrix-valued, interpolation is what is needed to answer
              many ordinary interpolation questions.
