Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Nevanlinna Counting Function, Linear-Fractional
               Models, and Orbits of Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9706614

Award Number: 9706614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72537              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Bourdon pbourdon@wlu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington & Lee Univ
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    703/463-8400

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  ABSTRACT  Bourdon    The project entails an investigation of
              function-theoretic issues associated with the following question posed by
              Walter Rudin (in 1988):  when will the set of nonnegative powers of a bounded,
              holomorphic function on the open unit disk constitute an orthogonal subset of 
              the classical Hardy-two space?  Previous work by the project's principal
              investigator suggests that Rudin's question may be answered through an analysis
              of properties of the Nevanlinna counting function and radial subharmonic
              functions.  The project also involves a continuation of the principal
              investigator's study of the behavior of functions and operators under
              iteration:  chief objectives  here are to characterize the cyclic behavior of a
              certain class of  composition operators acting on the classical Hardy space and
              to resolve  the invariant-subspace problem for hyponormal operators on Hilbert 
              space.  Methods to be employed include computer studies of the Nevanlinna 
              counting function (carried out by undergraduates) and an analysis of the 
              extent to which information about orbits of a linear operator can contribute to
              the establishment of the   existence of a nontrivial, invariant subspace for
              that operator.      The project focuses on problems in the areas of function
              theory and operator theory.   The goal of work in function theory is to provide
              information and tools that enable scientists to understand/predict how
              functions of certain types will behave in various situations.   For   example,
              the study of the behavior of functions under iteration (which forms a component
              of the project) connects function theory to the analysis of dynamical systems,
              including systems that behave chaotically.  The goal of much current research
              in operator theory   (including the operator-theoretic component of the
              project)  is to determine when a given linear operator preserves a small part
              of the whole space on which it acts.  When smaller parts are preserved, one
              hopes the whole operator may be understood in terms  of its simpler parts.  
              Linear operations include simple processes such as rotation in space and
              complex processes such as the application of Schroedinger's equation of quantum
              mechanics to certain function spaces. The project will also contribute to the
              development of the nation's human-resources:  three undergraduate students will
              receive significant training and research experiences through their
              participation in the project.
