Title       : Channel Estimation Under Frequency Selective Fading and Multipath
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9706658

Award Number: 9706658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296626             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michail K. Tsatsanis mtsatsanis@voyan.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                          The  objectives  of  the  proposed  work  are to  (i)  study      
              frequency  selective,  fading  communications  channels  and       develop 
              appropriate  models to describe the channel's  time       variations,  (ii)
              derive  novel blind and decision  feedback       algorithms  which  explicitly 
              take  into  account  the time       varying   nature  of  the  channel  and 
              (iii)  develop  the       analytical  tools to assess the  applicability  of
              different       models under different conditions.         Each time-varying
              tap coefficient of a frequency  selective,       fading  channel is typically 
              modeled as a random  processes       with low-pass power spectra.  However,
              traditional  adaptive       techniques  typically do not exploit  this 
              information.  In       the proposed work, Kalman  filtering  methods are
              derived to       track the channel by employing a multichannel autoregressive  
                  description of the time-varying taps in a  decision-feedback      
              equalization  framework.  Fitting a model to the  variations       of the
              channel's taps is a challenging  task because the tap       coefficients are
              not observed  directly.  A linear method is       proposed to estimate the
              channel's spectral  characteristics       from input/output data, and
              consistency is shown.         A different  emerging  framework will also be
              studied, where       each time-varying tap coefficient is described (with
              respect       to time) as a linear combination of a finite number of basis     
               functions.  Examples of such channels  include  periodically       varying 
              ones,  where each  multipath  component  exhibits a       different  Doppler 
              shift or channels  locally  modeled by a       truncated Taylor Series.  It is
              shown that the estimation of       the expansion  parameters is equivalent  to 
              estimating  the       parameters of an FIR Single-Input-Many-Output (SIMO)
              system.       By exploiting this  equivalence, a number of different blind     
               subspace methods are applicable,  which h ave been originally       developed 
              in the context of  time-invariant  SIMO  systems.       Identifiability and
              performance issues will be investigated,       as well as the effects of
              diversity combining, when multiple       receiving antennas are available.
