Title       : An Applied Master's Degree Program in Materials Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9706631

Award Number: 9706631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ryan E. Giedd reg796f@cnas.smsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shyang Huang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jiang-Kai Zuo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Broerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Mayanovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Missouri State U
	      901 South National
	      Springfield, MO  658040027    417/836-5000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1024,1711,1775,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9706631  Giedd    The objective of this education program is to enhance the 
              Master's Degree in Materials Science at Southwest Missouri  State University. 
              It is a response to the new requirements  articulated by industries and by
              government to reinvent  education for the challenges of a highly competitive,
              world  wide economy.  The mission is to educate individuals so that  they can
              efficiently perform the tasks which make companies  competitive in a rapidly
              changing high-technology world.  This program will facilitate the process of
              collaboration  with the materials manufacturing industries in our region.  The
              students are provided experiences in using complex  industrial equipment and
              techniques in order to minimize the  change between academic preparation and
              industrial  employment. Workshops are planned for employers on computer 
              instrumentation and control systems needed for industrial  modernization.  The
              majority of the student body at  Southwest Missouri State University consists
              of first  generation college students who will benefit greatly from  this
              applied approach to education, where high technology  skills will be added to
              their core theoretical knowledge.  Most of these students have a strong desire
              to witness  theory applied to "real world" applications.  The graduates  will
              have the ability to work in the commercial and  industrial laboratories which
              require practical experience  in high-tech materials synthesis, preparation and
               characterization.  This education grant is funded through  the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities and the  Division of Materials Research.  %%% 
              This grant promotes novel opportunities for students to  prepare for academic,
              industrial, government and non-  traditional roles (such as communication,
              business,  leadership, ethics, mentoring) and assists in integration of 
              research and training with curricula.  ***
