Title       : Theory and Application of Numerical Methods for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9706949

Award Number: 9706949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jong-Shi Pang                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jinchao Xu xu@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9706949  Jinchao Xu    The proposed research is on the development, analysis and
              applications of advanced numerical methods for solving partial differential
              equations arising in sciences and engineering.  The focus of research is on
              efficient multigrid and domain decomposition methods and other relevant
              algorithms that are suited for parallel and high performance computers.  One
              major object is to try to make multigrid and domain decomposition methods be
              more practical and more easily used.  In particular, efficient and practical
              multigrid methods will be developed for unstructured grids and also for grids
              that are currently available from existing (commercial) finite element
              software.  Special techniques under development include the agglomeration
              method and auxiliary space (grid) methods.  Theoretical analysis will also be
              carried out to justify the efficiency of various methods and also to motivate
              the development of more sophisticated methods.  A major portion of the proposed
              research will be devoted to the development of efficient multigrid methods for
              convection-dominated convection-diffusion problems, Navier-Stokes equations and
              hyperbolic equations and also to the theoretical justifications of the
              efficiency of some special multigrid methods which use some carefully designed
              domain decomposition methods as smoothers.  Some of the proposed research will
              be carried out in collaboration with computational scientists and engineers to
              develop practical and efficient methods for solving some real life problems.   
              Because of the advent of high performance computers, it becomes more and more
              feasible to use computers to simulate real life problems.  In fact it has
              become a more and more common practice to use computer simulations to replace
              the traditional and oftentimes very expensive laboratory experiments.  Most of
              the real life problems can be modeled and described by the so-called partial
              differential equations.  These equations can become more and more complicated
              if we want to have more  and more accurate and more realistic modeling of the
              real life situations.  Hence it is a constant challenge to develop efficient
              numerical methods for solving these equations.  The proposed research is
              precisely for the study of a class of most advanced numerical algorithms for
              effectively solving partial differential equations on parallel and high
              performance computers.  Our research has been directly tired to various
              practical applications such as environment protection and the design of medical
              material and devise.  In fact, for example, one numerical package that we have
              helped develop (based on research related to this proposal) have been adopted
              by U.S. EPA for environmental assessment and protection.
