Title       : AB Initio Calculations on Eliminations and Proton Transfers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9706242

Award Number: 9706242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Saunders   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor William H.  
              Saunders, Jr., of the Department of Chemistry at the University of   Rochester,
              is carrying out quantum chemical calculations on elimination   and proton
              transfer reactions.  Calculations on fluorine-substituted   carbanions permit
              the assessment of the role of negative ion   hyperconjugation, and studies of
              elimination reactions of   fluorohydrocarbons address the borderline between
              E1cb and E2 reaction   pathways.  Factors governing the orientation and
              stereochemistry of   concerted elimination reactions are examined through
              consideration of   charge distributions, isotope effects, and ion pairing. 
              Particular   attention is placed on developing an understanding of the syn-anti
                dichotomy, wherein cis olefins are produced by anti elimination but trans  
              olefins are produced by syn elimination.  Among the superficially simplest
              chemical reactions are those involving   the transfer of a single
              positively-charged hydrogen atom (a proton) from   one place in a molecule to
              another.  Despite the apparent simplicity of   such reactions, however,
              experimental results indicate appreciable   complexity.  Through the
              application of calculational techniques and with   the support of the Organic
              Dynamics Program, Professor William H.   Saunders, Jr., of the Department of
              Chemistry at the University of   Rochester, is exploring the fundamental
              aspects of proton transfer   reactions.  His studies also extend to the
              analysis of reactions   initiated by the loss of a proton, focusing in
              particular on whether the   overall reaction path for such reactions involves
              simultaneous   elimination of an additional group or if such elimination occurs
                subsequently to the initial proton loss.  These issues are central to an  
              extraordinarily wide variety of chemical reactions, and Professor   Saunders'
              studies are leading to a fundamental understanding of the   factors controlling
              them.                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
