Title       : Topological and Related Aspects of the Structure of C* - Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9706850

Award Number: 9706850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83385              (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Christopher Phillips ncp@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Phillips    The Principal Investigator, N. Christopher Phillips,
              proposes three lines of research: (1) work on the classification and structure
              of simple C*-algebras; (2) a functional analytic characterization of the
              algebra of smooth functions on a smooth manifold; and (3) a continuation of his
              previous work on exponential rank. In (1), he proposes to work with   Qing Lin
              on understanding the structure of transformation group C*-algebras of minimal
              diffeomorphisms. The eventual goal is to show that they are direct limits of
              sub-homogeneous C*-algebras, which would put them close to the classifiable
              class of stably finite simple C*-algebras. Several already interesting
              intermediate results, such as cancellation results in the K-theory of these
              algebras, are closer to realization. He also proposes to follow up recent work
              on the purely infinite case of the classification in several ways: a
              possibility of interesting invariants in the non-nuclear case, a long shot
              possibility for proving that nuclearity implies the Universal Coefficient
              Theorem, and a very plausible approach to the real case of the known
              classification theorem. In (2), he proposes to try to prove a functional
              analytic characterization of the algebra of smooth functions on a smooth
              manifold, in an effort to gain a better understanding of what a noncommutative
              manifold should be. In (3), he proposes to search for a simple C*-algebra with
              large exponential rank, and to try to understand better the exponential rank of
              stable and homogeneous C*-algebras.    The purpose of this project is to
              improve the understanding of he "simple" C*-algebras. A C*-algebra is a kind of
              algebraic system (somewhat like the set of real numbers, with its operations of
              addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division, but somewhat more
              complicated). It has additional structure which, roughly speaking, describes
              when   something is "large" or "small" (again, somewhat like the set of real
              numbers). C*-algebras turn out to be one of the more impor tant kinds of
              structures in mathematics. They have significant applications to other parts of
              mathematics which at first sight seem rather unrelated (geometry, for example),
              and they are also one of the kinds of structure that is important in quantum
              mechanics, the (rather counterintuitive) physical theory needed to deal
              properly with atoms and other very small objects. The simple C*-algebras are
              those that cannot be broken into smaller pieces, and in some sense all
              C*-algebras are built out of them. The project has two main goals. One is to
              advance the understanding of the "internal structure" of simple C*-algebras,
              more or less to know about each one all that it is possible to know. This is
              relevant when they are used in other subjects. The other is to improve the
              knowledge of the classification of C*-algebras: one wants a complete list of 
              all of them, with a recipe for deciding when two simple C*-algebras, obtained
              in different ways, are actually the same.
