Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Complex Integral Geometry and Analysis at Flag Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9706836

Award Number: 9706836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon Gindikin gindikin@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Absract  Gindikin    At the focus of the project there are 2 aspects of integral
              geometry. First, it is the analysis in flag domains which extends the analysis
              in noncompact Hermitian symmetric spaces. The first step is the definition of
              analogs of elementary functions which we call the determinant functions. The
              well known examples of such functions are the norm-functions for symmetric
              domains (or Jordan algebras), but for flag domains there is a richer collection
              of new functions. Using these functions we hope to obtain several explicit
              formulas and results: descriptions of Stein neighborhood of Riemann symmetric
              spaces where it might be possible to holomorphically extend solutions of the
              Schmid equations, parametrizations of complex cycles in flag domains,
              generalizations of the Hua - Poisson integrals and the Hua equations for them,
              their computations on the language of integral   geometry and multidimensional
              residues, the generalized Penrose transform etc. The essential role in these
              constructions are played by the boundary values of the cohomology in nonconvex
              tube domains. Another direction in this project is an axiomatic of the method
              of horospheres and its applications. Several years ago in the process of
              solving the Gelfand problem I gave some axiomatic conditions on a family of
              submanifolds of a complex manifold providing an explicit local inversion
              formula of the corresponding problem of integral geometry. These conditions are
              satisfied for the horospheres on complex semisimple Lie groups, and it is the
              way to invert the horospherical transform without using group structures. Now
              we extend this axiomatic in such a way that it becomes possible to invert the
              horospherical transform for some nonsymmetric homogeneous manifold. The
              integral geometry is a direction of geometric analysis  which connects analysis
              on manifolds with geometrical structures on them. The philosophy of integral
              geometry is that there are geometrical structures more general than group
              invariance which give a base  for the development of a rich multidimensional
              analysis with   important applications to analysis on homogeneous manifolds,
              complex analysis, nonlinear differential equations , mathematical physics, etc.
              Integral geometry is a theoretical base of computer tomography.
