Title       : On Some Problems in Radial-Basis Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9706583

Award Number: 9706583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59414              (Estimated)
Investigator: Natarajan Sivakumar sivan@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Sivakumar      Sivakumar will work on problems form the theory of
              radial-basis  functions (RBF).  The first part proposes the general study of  
              cardinal interpolation (i.e., interpolation at the multi-integer   lattice) by
              shifts of RBFs. The second part of the proposal deals   with the analysis of
              the cardinal-interpolation  operator. Stability   estimates relating to 
              scattered-data interpolation constitute the   subject of the third part of the
              proposal. The final section concerns   interpolation of scattered data on
              Euclidean spheres.  The focus   here is on interpolants which are closely
              related to RBFs, and the   goal is to develop a substantive quantitative theory
              of such   interpolation methods.    As evident from the preceding paragraph,
              the leitmotif of this  proposal is the theory of Radial-Basis Functions, a
              subject  which has been vigorously researched over the last 15 years.  These
              functions provide a viable tool for the interpolation (i.e.,    modeling)  of
              scattered data.  Modeling scattered data is as    natural as it is inevitable. 
              Data gathered for experiments in many    areas of science (e.g., geophysical or
              meterological data collected  over the surface of the earth via satellites or
              ground stations)  invariably come from scattered sites.  It is therefore
              important to  have at one's disposal, flexible and useful methods of producing 
              interpolants (i.e., surface fits) to such scattered data.  The  
              radial-basis-function method accomplishes precisely that; indeed,   its use was
              pioneered by the geophysicist Rolland Hardy in his  studies on topography.  The
              current proposal seeks to undertake  theoretical studies connected with
              radial-basis-function  interpolation.  Some of these issues, especially those  
              addressed in the third and fourth parts of the proposal, also  have some
              practical significance.  These issues concern  the so-called quantitative
              theory of interpolation which  strives to explain how stable the interpolation
              (modeling)  process is likely to b e.
