Title       : Changes in Sahel Land-Surface Characteristics and Climate Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9706403

Award Number: 9706403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251352             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yongkang Xue   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen D. Prince  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9706403  Xue    There are two distinct hydrological phenomena in the Sahel: a
              persistent drought, which is very likely to have been partially caused by the
              land surface change, and a significant seasonal variation in the surface water
              balance.  Simulations that couple a NCEP GCM with a biosphere model (SSiB),
              which has been calibrated and validated against HAPEX and SEBEX data, will be
              conducted to investigate influences of land-surface conditions on hydrological
              processes and regional climate variability in the Sahel, especially the impact
              of land cover on long-term Sahel drought patters.  The simulations will use
              land property data and land cover data from field measurements and satellite
              observations to evaluate the integration between regional and local moisture
              sources in determining rainfall.  The impacts of heterogeneity of vegetation
              distribution on land-atmosphere interactions will be explored.  It will be
              followed by the development of a methodology to aggregate land-surface
              parameters to GCM grid boxes or sub-grid box.  The study will focus on how land
                condition changes seasonal patterns in rainfall, ET, Soil water, and runoff.
              The results will be confirmed through comparisons with observed changing
              rainfall, surface temperature, and in particular, the river discharge.  A river
              routing model will be used to convert the runoff values produced by the land
              surface model in each grid cell of a GCM to the basin outlet.  The diagnostic
              analyses will be made to determine sources of Sahel precipitation, and relative
              contributions of each evaporation source to the rainfall and its anomalies in
              the Sahel.  Attention will also be paid to study the impacts of land surface
              processes on AFJ dynamics and wave propagation.  The significance of the land
              surface effects will be tested with respect to various patterns of land forcing
              anomalies, which include different degrees of land surface degradation and
              different percentage of vegetation cover changes in one GCM grid box.
