Title       : A Study of Concatenated Codes and Coded Modulation Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9706045

Award Number: 9706045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hisashi Kobayashi hisashi@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     We will investigate a general class of concatenated codes and
              coded-modulation, by building upon our recent invention. Our concatenated
              scheme is more general than the conventional concatenated codes in that a
              "coder" can be a channel with memory (e.g., a partial-response channel, a
              channel with intersymbol interference and/or multipath delays, a channel with
              burst noise), or a modulator with some constraint or memory (e.g., continuous
              phase modulation (CPM), trellis-coded modulation (TCM)). We can also
              concatenate more than two coders.        In our proposed system an "ambiguity
              zone detector (AZD)" plays a critical role.  The AZD introduces generalized
              "erasure" symbols, and is found to be a most efficient way of exploiting
              soft-decision outputs.  We also make use of a "permutation" and "iterative
              decoding", as has been done in Turbo codes. But unlike the Turbo codes and such
              other known schemes as product codes, the permutation size required for our
              system needs not be so large.  The main advantage that differentiates our
              approach from prior arts is its extremely simple decoding algorithm. Hence, the
              decoder is easily implementable and the decoding delay is kept minimal.       
              The performance of our system, measured in terms of residual errors/erasures,
              is extremely good. For example, our initial result obtained for a system which
              adopts a Hamming code  and a partial-response channel G(D)=1+D demonstrates
              that our decoding algorithm converges within several iterations, and produces
              nearly error-free outputs even when more than 50% of the AZD outputs are
              labeled "erasures".    In this proposed study we intend to perform the
              following research tasks:    1. Simulation of specific application examples
              (e.g., partial-response channels,   wireless channels with CPM)  2.
              Determination of  good permutations and effective decoders (e.g., optimal
              selections of the ambiguity zones)  3. Performance analysis of the proposed
              codes, and coded modulation schemes  (e.g., bounds and approximation for t he
              decoding error probability)  4. Construction of powerful codes, using a more
              general concatenation topology (e.g. a parallel-serial concatenation), and the
              corresponding decoding procedures.    We also expect that insights to be gained
              in the present study should lead to a better understanding of the Turbo codes,
              and vice versa.
