Title       : Quantum Mechanics and Random Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9706166

Award Number: 9706166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96399              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Brydges   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706166    Brydges    A major problem in equilibrium statistical mechanics is
              the  calculation of critical exponents.  The construction of Euclidean  quantum
              field theory is a closely related problem.  The standard tools  in theoretical
              physics used for these calculations are the epsilon  expansion and the 1/N
              expansion, but neither of these are known to be  correct methods of
              calculation. The epsilon expansion is particularly  perplexing, because it
              involves analytic continuation in the dimension  of space from 4 to 4 -
              epsilon.  This continuation is made term by  term in perturbation theory, but
              it is not known that the resulting  expansion is the perturbation theory of any
              model.  This proposal  considers a different way to introduce a parameter
              epsilon, where there  clearly are models for epsilon not = 0, and yet the
              epsilon parameter  plays the same role of moving four dimensional theories off
              a  bifurcation. The objective is to study the properties of expansion in 
              epsilon and also expansion in 1/N. It is believed that methods based  on
              previous work by the author and his collaborators can be extended  to prove
              that these expansions are correct for epsilon small and for  1/N small. One
              possible outcome of this study is the construction of  quantum field theory in
              three dimensions using the 1/N expansion.  This theory should obey all Wightman
              axioms, but the perturbation  theory in the coupling constant will be
              non-renormalizable.      Quantum field theory originated in elementary particle
              physics, but it  is really a mathematical framework for systems with very large
              numbers  of degrees of freedom. Important applications include: predicting the 
              size and shape of polymers, the physics of sound waves and electrons  in
              crystals, the physics of phase transitions.  When quantum field  theories were
              first proposed, it was not clear that they were free of  internal
              contradictions. Examples are now known which are free of  contradiction, but
              consistent approximations for prediction remain  elusiv e.  The purpose of this
              grant is to investigate two  approximations proposed by Wilson and Fisher, to
              show that they are  truly consistent approximations, and to delineate their
              range of  validity.
