Title       : Bandwidth Efficient Multiple Access (BEMA) Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2001   
File        : a9706591

Award Number: 9706591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahesh K. Varanasi varanasi@schof.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                    This project will explore the potential of a new multiple access technique
              called Bandwidth Efficient Multiple Access (BEMA) in offering higher spectral
              efficiencies than the well-known multiaccess strategies such as TDMA, FDMA, and
              CDMA. The primary emphasis is to realize BEMA with the use  of only single-user
              codecs (and not multiuser codecs about which too little is known) as
              subsystems. Potential applications are in wireless indoor and personal
              communications. At the heart of BEMA will be signal processing algorithms that
              realize the functions of multiuser equalization and signal design by taking a
              combined approach to those two subjects.    A systematic development of a
              theory of multiuser decision feeedback equalization for synchronous and
              asynchronous multiple-access channels will be undertaken. The achievement of
              vertices or near-optimal  points in the capacity regions of Gaussian
              multiple-access channels with correlated waveforms will be sought under latency
              and complexity constraints on the multiuser equalizers. Generalizations of
              Rate-Splitting Multiple Access by combining equalization and successive
              decoding will be considered. Algorithms that determine the order in which users
              are to be equalized and decoded will be obtained, error propagation effects for
              multiuser decision feedback detection will be quantified, and a
              characterization of error exponents for decision feedback receivers for coded
              systems will be sought. The focus in signal design will  be to obtain signature
              waveforms that shape the capacity region under power and rate (quality of
              service) constraints to be achieved for each user via decision feedback
              receivers so as to minimize bandwidth.
