Title       : Outcrop Characterization of Heterogeneity: Explicit Linkage of Hydrological and
               Sedimentological Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1997     
File        : a9706116

Award Number: 9706116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Smith gsmith@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Campana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,1579,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9706116  Smith    Field sedimentological and hydrological studies of outcrop
              analogs for heterogeneous aquifers provide conceptualizations of heterogeneity
              unrealized by subsurface information and provide a means for assessing the
              validity and performance of popular stochastic models based on interpolation of
              well data.  The approach, widely used for decades in the hydrocarbon industry,
              has seen little application to hydrological problems.    Sedimentological
              studies of well-exposed rift-basin alluvium will be complemented by in-situ
              measurements of permeability, thus permitting designation of hydrofacies with
              defined hydraulic conductivity, shape, and boundaries that are linked with
              lithofacies whose distribution is related to depositional processes that formed
              the aquifer material.  Outcrop data will be used to formulate a
              three-dimensional model of heterogeneity at the scale of typical
              subsurface-contaminant-migration scenarios.  The study-site stratigraphy will
              also be simulated by geostatistical techniques using measured sections as
              conditioning data in much the same way as well data are used to condition
              subsurface models.  The predictive ability of the simulation will be gauged by
              comparison to the outcrop data.  The outcrop model will be subjected to flow
              simulations for varying scales (meters to tens of meters) of outcrop-defined
              heterogeneity to evaluate the quantity and type of data required for
              high-resolution prediction of flow paths and rates.  The depositional
              environment selected for outcrop characterization is especially important for
              understanding aquifer heterogeneity in extensional basins of the southwestern
              United States, where studies to date have not adequately described the
              sedimentological characteristics that are of hydrogeological importance.  The
              largest volume of clastic detritus deposited in asymmetric extensional basins
              is delivered from the hanging wall to the master fault.  These alluvial-slope
              facies are the least well known deposits in rift basins.  This projec t will
              produce the first outcrop analog for aquifer characteristics of alluvial-slope
              deposits by providing detailed three dimensional documentation of hydrofacies
              permeability, shape, and boundaries within an extraordinarily well exposed
              basin-fill sequence in the northern Rio Grande rift of New Mexico.
