Title       : Spatio-Temporal Patterns of Taxonomic and Ecologic Diversity of Marine Triassic
               Bivalve Molluscs of Western North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9706040

Award Number: 9706040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. McRoberts   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706040  McRoberts    I propose a species-level analysis of Triassic bivalve
              mollusc faunas of western North America to document spatio-temporal changes in
              taxonomic and ecologic diversity and to test hypotheses regarding the structure
              and causal factors leading to the Early Mesozoic bivalve radiation. 
              Specifically, I aim to assemble a multidimensional database of bivalve mollusc
              species based on literature, museum, and field collections.  Each species
              occurrence will be assigned to various temporal, taphonomic, environmental,
              ecological, and geographical classes based on it's guild membership, facies
              occurrence, location, and age.  Construction of a literature-based database is
              underway, yet needs strengthening by assessing species variability in large
              samples available in museum collections coupled with additional material
              associated with paleoenvironmental and taphonomic data which can best be
              collected in the field.  I am proposing museum visits to important repositories
              of Triassic bivalve collections (US Geological Survey, Geological Survey of
              Canada, National Museum of Natural History, American Museum of Natural History,
              and the University of Montana) and field investigations at several key sites in
              the western United States and Canada (Nevada, Idaho, and northeastern British
              Columbia) where bivalves occur abundantly in nearly continuous sequences.   
              The proposed project will build upon a foundation of prior research on the
              Early Mesozoic bivalve expansion, and will specifically address the questions:
              (1) is there a latitudinal gradient in North American bivalve faunas through
              all or part of the interval, and if so, to what degree are originations,
              extinctions, and ecologic structure of the faunas controlled by latitude? (2)
              is there a onshore-offshore trend in extinctions and originations among all
              bivalve groups with different autecology or is the pattern restricted to just a
              few clades with similar living habits?  And (3) to what degree has differing
              bivalve ecology played a role in  origination and extinction metrics and is
              there evidence for selective speciation or selective survivorship?  Resolving
              these issues bear significant implications not only for the early Mesozoic
              faunal expansion, but in determining the processes of diversification and
              extinction that can be applied to other time periods.
