Title       : Dynamic Control and Parametric Resonance in Hydrodynamic Systems: A Theoretical,
               Computational and Experimental Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2001   
File        : a9706902

Award Number: 9706902
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. F. Chen                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander J. Smits asmits@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yannis G. Kevrekidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant and a companion grant in DMS (DMS-9706951) will support an
              interdisciplinary group drawn from the mathematics and engineering communities
              to study dynamic control and parametric excitations in hydrodynamic systems and
              to examine the interplay between parametric resonance and
              stabilization/destabilization of transitions/bifurcations, through an
              integrated program of analysis, computation and experiment.  The diverse
              combination of the investigators' expertise offers an exceptional opportunity
              to develop a broadly based and innovative research program of research in
              dynamics and control in hydrodynamics.    Two basic flow sets have been chosen
              in order to develop a general understanding of the complex hydrodynamics and
              control strategies.  The two flows are variations on Taylor-Couette flow and on
              vortex breakdown flow.  These generic flows are attractive because the degree
              of complexity can be precisely controlled by relatively simple changes in the
              flow state or boundary conditions, and at the same time they possess rich
              dynamics which are representative of a wide class of general hydrodynamic
              systems that may respond to dynamic control in a complex manner.  In
              particular, these classes of flows may respond resonantly to the parametric
              excitation of the applied control.  An investigation of the behavior of these
              generic flows will help to form a better understanding of more general
              time-dependent hydrodynamic systems.    The interplay between dynamic control
              mechanisms and parametric resonance will be investigated using the (linear)
              Floquet theory as a first step in understanding the dynamics at the point of
              transition or bifurcation.  Flows beyond the validity of the Floquet analysis
              will be studied using three different nonlinear computational approaches, each
              with distinct advantages and limitations.  Their combined implementation is
              capable of resolving a wide range of problems and addressing distinct issues
              within each problem.  The results from the experiment will be used to ref ine
              the analysis and control implementation.    The impact of this research will
              not only be of a fundamental nature, resulting in a deeper understanding of the
              complex spatio-temporal dynamics of hydrodynamic systems, but it will also make
              a significant impact on several problems of practical importance, such as drag
              reduction and reduced fatigue due to aeroacoustic structural resonances in
              aeronautics, and effective control of transitions and instabilities in the
              materials and chemical processing industries. The new fundamental and practical
              insights on control dynamics of complex systems anticipated from this research
              can provide US industry with a competitive edge.
