Title       : Mechanisms of Intercellular Calcium Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9706565

Award Number: 9706565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Sneyd jsneyd@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sneyd  9706565       Intercellular calcium waves are a ubiquitous and crucial 
              feature of intercellular communication, and perform a variety of  physiological
              functions.  Most intriguingly, intercellular calcium  waves in mixed
              neuronal-glial cultures have been observed passing  from glial cells to
              neurons, and thus they may possibly have an  important role to play in
              information processing.  The  investigator uses mathematical models to study
              the mechanisms  involved in intercellular calcium waves.  The first part of the
               work involves the study of the mechanisms underlying  intracellular calcium
              oscillations and waves in epithelial and  glial cells.  Secondly, in light of
              recent experimental evidence,  previous models are modified and used to study
              the mechanisms of  intercellular calcium wave propagation in glial cell
              cultures.  Finally, in hippocampal explant cultures the intercellular  calcium
              waves show a remarkable degree of spatial organisation,  forming propagating
              plane waves and rotating spirals.  The model  is used to determine the
              mechanisms by which intracellular  calcium waves can be coupled on a much
              larger space scale to form  intercellular calsium waves with such a high degree
              of  self-organisation.       Waves of calcium that travel between cells are one
              important  way in which cells can signal to their neighbours.  Such 
              intercellular communication, although not yet well understood, is  known to
              play a vital role in many physiological processes.  For  instance, the response
              of an epithelial cell layer to a wound is  governed (at least in part) by an
              intercellular calcium wave,  while, in the brain, waves of calcium can travel
              from glia to  neurons, and vice versa.  Thus, calcium waves very likely have an
               important role to play in information processing.  For these  reasons, there
              is a great deal of interest in studying the  mechanisms that underly such
              waves.  Mathematics has an important  role to play in these studies.  By its
              very nature, wave  propagation is a complex phe nomenon, not easily understood
              by  intuition alone.  Although mathematics cannot provide answers to  all
              pertinent questions, when used in conjunction with  experimental results, it
              can be used to interpret and understand  existing results, while directing the
              course of future  experimemtal studies.  The investigator (a mathematician) and
              his  experimental colleagues propose a coordinated series of  theoretical and
              experimental investigations that will lead to a  greater understanding of how
              glial cells communicate by means of  calcium waves, and how such communication
              can coordinate activity  over large regions of the hippocampus.  Funding for
              the project is  provided by the program of Applied Mathematics and the Office
              of  Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by the Computational  Neuroscience
              program in BIO.
