Title       : Quantum Statistical Mechanics of Lattice Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9706599

Award Number: 9706599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86886              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruno L. Nachtergaele bxn@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9706599  Nachtergaele    The main focus of the project is on quantum spin models
              that arise in condensed  matter physics. Nachtergaele will uork on three
              classes of problems in quantum  spin (and related) systems. The first is the
              characterization of the complete  set of ground states in infinite  volume.
              Here, ground states are defined in  the sense of stability under arbitrary
              local perturbations. This problem is  best tractable for models with a unique
              ground state, such as the AKLT model. A  harder but also more important problem
              is to characterize the complete set of  ground states when this set includes
              non-periodic states, such as interface  states, which is the case, e.g., for
              the XXZ Heisenberg model. A second problem  is to study the fluctuation 
              properties and low-lying excitations of interface  states in quantum
              statistical mechanics models both at zero and non-zero  temperature. The
              proposal is to prove stability of the 111 interface at  sufficiently low
              temperatures in the Falicov-Kimball model, and, in a second  phase, to study
              111 interfaces in the XXZ Heisenberg model, where new   phenomena related to
              continuous spectrum should be expected. The third proposed  line of research is
              to analyze and use a new implementation of the Density   Matrix Renormalization
              Group method to study various phenomena in   quasi-one-dimensional systems.    
               Quantum statistical mechanics is an area of growing interest because many of  
              the phenomena that are being discovered and studied today are intrinsically  
              quantum mechanical: Bose condensation, superfluidity, superconductivity, 
              quantum optics, quantum computation, and many of the most interesting aspects 
              of magnetism.  Quantum spin models are models for the magnetic properties of a 
              large variety of materials, many of which have only been recently synthesized. 
              The importance of magnetic properties is not just that they allow us to 
              understand the behavior of magnets. Often there is an interaction between 
              magnetic (spin) structure and elect ronic and geometric structure of the 
              material. The novel spin-Peierls materials that in the last couple of years 
              received so much attention are a good example of this interaction. It has been 
              known for some time that antiferromagnetic correlations are an important aspect
               of high-temperature superconductors. Another example where magnetic and 
              transport properties influence each other are the Giant Magneto Resistance 
              materials. The approach in this project is mathematical, and is complementary 
              to the experimental and theoretical research on the same materials by chemists 
              and physicists. This proposal addresses fundamental questions about the 
              mathematical structure of quantum lattice models.  Nachtergaele will also work 
              on the implementation of new mathematical insights into more efficient 
              computational methods.  This research will provide hands-on learning 
              opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students who not only want to 
              become well-versed in mathematics  but also have an interest in concrete 
              applications. In the process these students will become familiar with the 
              language of physicists and chemists working on the same or related problems. 
              This will prepare them better for future careers in an interdisciplinary 
              environment.
