Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Operator Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9706713

Award Number: 9706713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Muhly muhly@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Muhly    Muhly will investigate a variety of problems in operator
              algebra that may be divided into three groups covered by the headings: General
              Operator Algebras, Groupoids, and Toeplitz and Related Operators.  Under the
              first heading, he will pursue 5 strategic problems dedicated to understanding
              the structure of non-self-adjoint algebras.  The focus will be on the
              categories of Hilbert modules associated with operator algebras.  Inspiration
              for this derives from finite dimensional pure ring theory, but the key is to
              understand the interplay between the algebra and the metrics involved.  In
              Muhly's work, groupoids provide concrete coordinates for representing operator
              algebras.  The projects under this rubric are natural continuations of his
              earlier efforts.  Most important among them, perhaps, is the problem of
              developing a good, topological cohomology theory for groupoids.  The problems
              on Toeplitz operators that he proposes to investigate also derive naturally
              from his earlier work and progress on them should help shed light on important
              new connections between classical function theory/harmonic analysis and
              operator theory.  Although in many respects, the detailed aspects of the
              problems Muhly will investigate are inspired by questions from core
              mathematics, their significance to applied mathematics and the "real world" is
              substantial.  Much of Muhly's work contributes to the mathematical underpinning
              of control theory, H-infinity control theory, in particular, which, in turn, is
              the theoretical framework on which engineers base the design of aircraft,
              automobiles, robots, and other devices that need to respond to external stimuli
              and to be controlled to perform within specified guidelines.  His work on
              groupoids and some of his work on Toeplitz operators is closely connected to
              issues of stochastic control, i.e., control problems where there are random
              uncertainties involved and one tries to steer a course that is best on the
              average.  His work on operator algebras, generally, c ontributes to the field
              of multivariable control theory and to non-stationary control problems, i.e.,
              problems where the control response is a function of the time of the input. 
              Such problems are of increasing importance in the design of all types of
              devices, from acoustical filters, to digital processors, and neural networks.
