Title       : RPG: Toward a Model of Inorganic and Organic Carbon Fluxes Through a Cycle of
               Glacier Advance and Retreat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1997    
File        : a9706180

Award Number: 9706180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17922              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne P. Anderson spa@earthsci.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706180  Anderson      Glaciers profoundly impact the landscapes they invade. 
              They reshape fluvial valleys into broad U-shaped valleys.  They produce milky
              streams and brilliant turquoise blue lakes laden with very fine suspended rock
              flour.  These physical effects arise from the unique ability of glaciers to
              pulverize bedrock into fine-grained fresh debris.  Although it is recognized
              that physical and chemical weathering processes are linked, little work has
              been done to elucidate the chemical impacts of glaciation.  Because glaciers
              both increase the rate of erosion processes above those in non-glacial
              landscapes and alter the character of surface materials towards fresher
              deposits, it is likely that glaciers also change the rate and nature of
              chemical processes.  At present, the influence of glaciers on the global carbon
              cycle and climate change is both unknown and debated.  This project lays the
              groundwork for developing a field-based quantitative model of the effects of
              alpine glaciation fluxes important in regulating the carbon cycle, i.e.,
              weathering rates and mineral surface area flux.  Weathering drives the
              inorganic portion of the carbon cycle, and mineral surface area has been
              recognized recently as a fundamental control on organic carbon burial, and thus
              the organic carbon portion of the carbon cycle.  The change in sediment flux as
              a glacier advances, and the stranding of till and outwash as a glacier
              retreats, are both expected to play important roles in modulating these fluxes.
               This work will develop the necessary understanding of the chemical processes
              in glacial sediments, and identify the best field sites for model testing, with
              the ultimate goal of creating a solute-flux model to piggy-back on a glacial
              erosion model in development by others at UC Santa Cruz and INSTAAR.  With such
              a model in hand, we will be able to address the extent to which the physical
              change wrought by glaciers also alters the carbon cycle and contributes  to
              global climate change.   Both sediment and  solute fluxes directly influence
              the carbon cycle.  In marine sediments, organic carbon is strongly correlated
              with mineral surface area, meaning that carbon burial is strongly controlled by
              sedimentation rates.  Therefore the degree to which glaciation alters erosion
              rates and the grain size distributions of sediments reaching the ocean is
              important in setting organic carbon burial rates.  A reconnaissance sampling
              program will address the sediment trapping efficiency of outwash plains and the
              downstream changes in suspended sediment grain size and mineral surface area. 
              Inorganic carbon fluxes are due to mineral weathering reactions.  We know that
              both chemical weathering rates and strontium isotopic ratios decrease with
              sediment age in glacial moraines.  This work will use both lab experiments and
              field observations to establish mineral weathering reactions in young glacial
              debris, the time-scale for the decay in weathering rates, and how predominant
              weathering reactions vary with sediment age.  As an important part of this
              analysis is to explore whether isotopic proxies, such as 87Sr/86Sr, reflect
              weathering rates or weathering processes.  In this research planning project, I
              will identify a field site for a detailed program of field measurement of water
              and solute fluxes, and develop field and lab-based algorithms to describe
              quantitatively the suspended sediment and solute fluxes from a proglacial area.
