Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Polynomially Convex Hulls and Evolution of Pseudoconvex
               Sets by Levi Curvature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9706970

Award Number: 9706970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zbigniew Slodkowski zbigniew@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Slodkowski    Slodkowski will continue working on  polynomial hulls
              improving on   understanding the structure of hulls of families of Jordan arcs 
              under low regularity assumptions. The first part of the proposal   concentrates
              on a series of problems generated by the crucial question   when is such a hull
              a topological hypersurface. Slodkowski plans to   investigate them under
              regularity assumptions formulated in terms of   quasiconformal geometry.
              Realization of this program will yield  applications to holomorphic motions,
              among others.  The second part   of the proposal concerns the evolution  of
              subsets in   higher-dimensional space, defined in terms of weak solutions of  
              certain degenerate nonlinear PDE's involving  the Levi curvature.  The main
              focus is on analyzing  the evolution of pseudoconvex   hypersufaces and  of
              pseudoconcave sets, in order to understand the   structure of weakly
              pseudoconvex domains and of polynomial hulls.                A successful
              completion of this proposal would solve, among   other things, important
              problems on holomorphic motions, which would   have significant applications to
              the theory of dynamical systems and   to Teichmuller theory. The theory of the
              dynamical systems, which is   developing very rapidly at present, has important
              applications to   to many applied problems. The  Teichmuller theory has not
              only   fundamental implications for geometry,  but it is also an important  
              tool  for string theory, one of the newest theories of the elementary  
              particles' physics.                                     Zbigniew Slodkowski
