Title       : Numerical Methods in Large-Scale Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9706866

Award Number: 9706866
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482402             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen F. McCormick stevem@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Manteuffel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9197,9216,9263,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9706866  McCormick     The main thrust of the proposed research is the
              development of efficient numerical techniques for simulation of a wide variety
              of physical processes. Important applications include aerodynamics,
              meteorology, elasticity, electromagnetics, porous media, and particle
              transport.  The general goal is to develop accurate discretization methods and
              fast algebraic solvers for the partial differential equations that govern these
              and other applications.  The research topics include: multilevel first-order
              system least squares, which involves reformulation of partial differential
              equations as well-posed minimization principles to allow for robust and
              efficient solution methods; porous media problems, which will be treated by
              Eulerian-Lagrangian localized adjoint methods that have been successful for
              such multiparty and reactive flows; transport phenomena, which will be
              simulated using efficient and robust least-squares methods for the
              three-dimensional Boltzmann transport equations; and iterative methods, which
              is aimed at developing effective algebraic solvers for the equations that arise
              in many applications.    The focus of this project is research in the field of
              computational mathematics.  The purpose is to improve our understanding of the
              mathematics behind computer simulation of complex physical phenomena.  Such
              simulations are key to the study and control of many important processes,
              including groundwater flow, global change, energy production, and material
              science.  One of the challenges in such simulations is the development of
              improved mathematical methods for solving the equations that arise in these
              models.  The basic aim of this research is dramatic improvement in our ability
              to model increasingly more complicated and sophisticated processes with much
              greater accuracy and efficiency.  This will pave the way for simulations that
              can provide scientists, engineers, and policy-makers with much more powerful
              tools to understand and improve our industry, science, and environm ent.
