Title       : Moving Node Finite Element Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9706768

Award Number: 9706768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Carlson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9706768   Neil N. Carlson     ABSTRACT (Moving Node Finite Element Methods)   
              The gradient-weighted moving finite element method (GWMFE) is an adaptive 
              method well-suited to problems which develop sharp moving fronts, especially 
              those problems where one must resolve the fine-scale structure of the front. 
              Three works related to the method are planned.  First, development of GWMFE  in
              3-D will continue.  The recently completed scalar code will be extended  to
              systems of equations and the direct linear solver will be replaced by 
              iterative techniques based on the work of Miller and Xaba.  The code will be 
              applied to a variety of difficult PDEs and PDE systems: Stefan-type problems, 
              drift-diffusion equations from semiconductor device modeling, the time 
              dependent Ginzburg-Landau equation, are some possible examples.  A parallel 
              version of the code will also be developed.  Second, a new moving mixed finite 
              element method will be implemented in 2-D and 3-D.  Here, in the spirit of  the
              mixed finite element method, the diffusive flux is approximated in an 
              independent finite element space (BDM or RT) and a coupled system of ODEs  is
              then obtained via the same variational argument used in the moving finite 
              element method.  This new method gives a more rigorous treatment of diffusion 
              terms, and in 1-D gives superior grid adaptivity.  Third, in collaboration 
              with Miller (Berkeley), global adaptivity will be added to GWMFE in 2-D.  This
              global adaptivity will be achieved through the periodic addition,  deletion,
              and reconnection of nodes based upon geometric criteria, which  are easily
              identifiable through simple eigenvalue analysis, and upon local  projection
              error estimates.  This complements the very fine local adaptivity  GWMFE
              achieves through the continuous motion of its nodes, and is essential  for a
              robust method.    Many physical processes are modeled by partial differential
              equations.  A solution of such an equation might give, for example, the
              concentration of  of arsenic in a semicon ductor substrate at each instant of
              time and each  point in one, two, or three dimensional space.  Because it is
              generally  impossible to find the exact solution of such an equation,
              approximate  solutions must be sought using some computer-based technique.  For
              a large  class of difficult problems standard techniques are extremely wasteful
              and  inefficient, making computations in two, and especially three, dimensions 
              very difficult if not altogether impossible.  More sophisticated adaptive 
              techniques seek to overcome this difficulty.  The gradient-weighted moving 
              finite element method (GWMFE) is one such technique, and it offers some 
              significant advantages over more conventional adaptive methods.  This project 
              seeks to advance GWMFE and related methods in several directions.  First,  a
              full implementation of GWMFE in the computationally challenging three 
              dimensional case will be completed, and applied to a variety of challenging 
              problems.  Second, a variant of the method which gives a more accurate 
              treatment of some problems will be investigated.  And last, a complementary 
              global adaptivity will be added to GWMFE in two dimensions which will 
              substantially enhance the robustness of the method.  GWMFE has been applied  to
              a variety of difficult problems with great success, including problems  from
              semiconductor device manufacture and device simulation, groundwater  transport
              and oil reservoir engineering, and time dependent models of  superconductors. 
              Being able to computationally model problems like these  is becoming ever more
              important to scientists and engineers.  GWMFE shows  great promise in making
              some of these difficult problems efficiently  computable in two and three
              dimensions, some of which are currently  inaccessible with existing techniques.
