Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Orthogonal Polynomials and Hypergroups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9706965

Award Number: 9706965
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Schwartz schwartz@arch.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Connett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Schwartz, Connett    Schwartz and Connett will continue to study the
              harmonic analysis   of expansions in a family of functions on a subset H of
              Euclidean   n-space when H is not a  group. This lack of group structure can  
              often be compensated  if the measures on H form a hypergroup or some   more
              general measure algebra with the basis functions as characters.   The research
              proposed here falls into several areas: (1) Extend the   proposers' work on the
               classification of hypergroups with polynomial   characters to those with
              multivariable polynomials as characters,  (2) continue to investigate the
              relation between hypergroups and   linear (partial) differential operators, (3)
              develop  the abstract   harmonic analysis of hypergroups, especially in the
              light of the  behavior of the maximum subgroup, (4) investigate the harmonic 
              analysis of the spheroidal wave functions which arise in signal   processing
              and other applications, (5) study the properties of   non-hypergroup measure
              algebras with orthogonal polynomial characters.  and (6) a student research
              project.     It is well known that any sound, no matter how complicated,   can
              be decomposed into a series of pure tones, such as those produced   by a tuning
              fork. This kind of decomposition of a complicated object   into simple building
              blocks (such as the tuning fork tones) is at the   heart of many modern
              technologies such as signal compression and high   definition TV, cat scans,
              nmr scans and image processing. It also   plays a role in mathematical modeling
              of climate and other physical   phenomena as well as for many important
              problems inside of mathematics.   In many of these situations, the basic
              building blocks are more   complicated than the pure tuning fork tones. The
              purpose of this   project is to study and understand the properties of a
              variety of   these systems of building blocks and to discover new systems that 
              may prove to be useful in the future.
