Title       : Video on Demand with VBR Encoded Video
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1998   
File        : a9706495

Award Number: 9706495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Magda El Zarki   (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith W. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research studies how emerging broadband networks can   efficiently deliver
              video on demand. The research assumes that   video is variable-bit-rate (VBR)
              encoded. Particular emphasis   will be placed on a design which the P.I.s have
              recently devised,   Join-the-Shortest-Queue (JSQ) Prefetching. Not only does
              this   exciting design give constant-quality playback and almost 100%   link
              utilization, but it also allows for immediate commencement   of the video upon
              user request and near instantaneous response   to  interactive actions
              (pause/resume and temporal jumps). This   research will examine two distinct
              end-to-end architectures for   video on demand. In the first architecture,
              there is one video server  from which all the videos emanate; the video server
              is attached to  a cable headend or to an ADSL switch. In the second
              architecture,  there are multiple video servers and there is a complex,
              multi-link  network which separates the servers from the clients. The research 
              will study JSQ prefetching for the first architecture; it will study  a
              priority-based scheme which mimics JSQ prefetching for the second 
              architecture. This research shall also develop analytically   based
              call-admission rules for our JSQ prefetching design. It shall   investigate how
              the special structure of MPEG-1 and MPEG-2   encoding can be exploited for
              designing call admission schemes   and selective packet discard schemes at the
              server.   It shall develop an auxiliary payload specification for transporting 
              MPEG 1 and 2 video on demand over real-time protocol (RTP).  Finally, an
              implementation of the JSQ prefetching scheme, which will  stream several
              simultaneous videos to clients, will be developed.    The research is described
              at http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~ross/jsq.html .
