Title       : Probabilistic Problems Arising in Disordered Systems, Wave Propagation and
               Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9706915

Award Number: 9706915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Wehr wehr@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706915  Wehr   The proposal discusses three circles of problems arising in
              mathematical physics of   random systems.  While the problems concern very
              different physical situations, at the   mathematical level they all deal with
              situations where presence of disorder can significantly   change properties of
              the system. Part one studies ground states of random lattice models   in
              statistical mechanics---a question related to understanding thermodynamics of  
              disordered systems.  In part two the focus is on effects of randomness on
              propagation of   nonlinear waves described by partial differential
              equations---of the conservation law and   Hamilton-Jacobi type.  The content of
              part three is statistics of density and of pairwise   velocities of galaxies in
              the universe. From the point of view of mathematics, each part of   the
              proposal involves studying nonlinear functions of many independent random
              variables   or of the realizations of a simple underlying process (often a
              Gaussian one). This relates   the project thematically to the theory of large
              deviations and concentration of measure   phenomena.  The tools include
              functional limit theorems, ergodic theory, large deviation   estimates and
              martingale methods in the first two parts and generalized Gaussian   processes
              in the third part. The interplay of physical and mathematical ideas is
              essential in   the whole proposal.   Many interesting questions in mathematical
              physics are concerned with   complicated inhomogeneous systems.  For example, a
              realistic description of a solid often   has to take into account presence of
              defects and impurities, which make its physical   properties different from
              those of a homogeneous crystal.  These special properties of   disordered
              systems are of crucial importance in modern materials science and technology   
              --- semiconductors and glasses are examples of disordered materials. Another
              example is   the distribution of galaxies in the Universe --- their positions
              do not follow any simple   regular pattern and us ing such a pattern in
              modeling their configuration would not account   for observed phenomena. While
              detailed configuration (arrangement of atoms, galaxies or   other constituents)
              of an inhomogeneous system varies from one region in space to   another, there
              is often an underlying simple statistical regularity, which leads to modeling  
              and studying such systems using concepts and methods of probability theory. 
              Each of the   three parts of the proposal addresses a different physical
              problem of the above type. Part   one involves the study of models of
              disordered solids, focusing on their ground states ---  the energetically
              preferred configurations.  Part two is concerned with propagation of   waves in
              disordered media --- several applications of mathematics to hydrology are of
              this   type. The content of part three is fluctuations of various quantities
              related to the   distribution of matter in the Universe and statistical
              questions arising in interpreting   observational results. The general physical
              motivation behind the proposal is to understand   possible effects resulting of
              the presence of randomness in different physical systems.
