Title       : Compression, Classification and Image Segmentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9706284

Award Number: 9706284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375655             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Gray rmgray@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Olshen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Data compression aims at producing an efficient representation for storage or 
              transmission in order to communicate or store the smallest possible number of 
              bits while retaining high quality in the reconstructed image.  Statistical 
              classification and segmentation are both concerned with labeling parts of an 
              image as being of a certain type or class, such as tumor or normal tissue in a 
              medical image or text, graphics, or photographs in a document page.  
              Classification and segmentation can be used to assist human users of images, as
               in highlighting suspicious tissue in a medical image or defects in an imaged 
              circuit, or they can be used for the automatic extraction of features in 
              intelligent browsing of large databases.  All three operations have in common
              the  goal of efficiently representing an image as a whole, by optimally trading
              off  quality and cost or distortion, an din decomposing the image into useful 
              components.  Most of the systems involving these operations, however, focus on 
              each separate operation rather than on combining them into common algorithms
              with  multiple goals.  This project is devoted to the development of theory and
               algorithms for jointly performing these operations and related signal
              processing  such as the estimation of probability distributions or models from
              observed data.   The approach involves optimizing single combined systems
              subject to possibly  conflicting combined goals, such as maximizing
              signal-to-noise ratios and  minimizing bit rates and Bayes risk.  Theory will
              be reinforced by simulations  for both artificial sources, where theoretical
              performance bounds can be used for  comparison, and real-world examples drawn
              from medical and document applications.
