Title       : Dynamical Systems in Structured Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9706787

Award Number: 9706787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Horst R. Thieme Horst.Thieme@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thieme  9706787       The investigator studies the interplay of population 
              structures and population development via mathematical models  consisting of
              partial differential equations, large systems of  ordinary differential
              equations, and of Volterra integral  equations.  The structures of interest are
              induced by internal  characteristics like (chronological or class) age, size,
              location  or/and by spatial or temporal heterogeneity.  For infectious 
              diseases that lead to permanent immunity, a model is developed  that allows
              arbitrary distributions for the lengths of the  various disease stages.  A time
              scale method is presented that  makes it possible to express the stability of
              the endemic  equilibrium in terms of the first three cumulants of the 
              durations of the disease stages.  Further, effects are  investigated that
              temporarily varying vaccination strategies  (including vaccines with only
              transient effects) have on seasonal  diseases (influenza).  Optimal treatment
              strategies are studied  for diseases with resistant strains in populations with
              core  groups (AIDS, tuberculosis).  As an important tool the  investigator
              extends the persistence theory for non-autonomous  dynamical systems.  In
              population ecology, strategies are  considered by which populations cope with
              spatial or temporal  heterogeneities of their habitats.  In particular,
              migration  strategies in structured metapopulations and adaptive strategies 
              like metamorphosis and cannibalism for populations in ephemeral  habitats are
              investigated that maximize the reproductive ratio.       In order to interpret,
              forecast, manage and control the  dynamics of microbial, plant, animal and
              human populations it is  necessary to understand the interaction between
              population  development and population and habitat structure (as given by age 
              or body size or by spatial and temporal heterogeneity).  The  investigator
              develops mathematical concepts and tools to  formulate and analyze appropriate
              models for this  interdependence.  Particular poi nts of interest are how
              population  and habitat structure affect stability, resilience, persistence 
              and extinction of populations.  In the area of infectious  diseases,
              mathematical models provide a suitable arena to study  various mechanisms that
              cause seasonal outbreaks (measles,  influenza) and to determine adaptive
              vaccination strategies that  deal with them in an effective way.  Further, in
              face of evasive  or resistant microbial strains (AIDS, tuberculosis), it is 
              possible to compare different disease treatment schedules for  populations with
              core groups.  As an important issue in  conservation biology, habitat
              fragmentation leads to the  formation of a patchy environment where local
              populations often  go extinct and are recolonized by individuals immigrating
              from  other local populations.  Structured metapopulation models  present a
              framework to identify the circumstances under which  gradual habitat
              deterioration leads to a sudden collapse of the  total population and, in turn,
              to determine critical thresholds  that must be met in order to successfully
              reintroduce populations  that have become extinct.
