Title       : Computations and Analysis of Fluids and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9706931

Award Number: 9706931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Lowengrub lowengrb@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,9216,9263,AMPP,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9706931  Lowengrub      The main objective of this proposal is to investigate
              the dynamics of  fluid-fluid and solid-solid interfaces by (1) developing and
              applying  state-of-the-art numerical methods to large scale computation and (2)
               performing analytical, numerical and modelling studies of important 
              constituent processes. Specifically, the focus will be on studying  topological
              transitions in fluids and the diffusional evolution of  microstructure in
              solids. These areas involve fundamental physical  processes whose phenomenology
              is basic to understanding the behavior of  real fluids and the material
              properties of solids. Both are  characterized by the presence of multiple
              constitutive components,  complex pattern formation and/or singularities (i.e.
              spatial  complexity).  Although these processes arise in very different
              physical  phenomena (fluids versus solids), both involve free boundary problems
               where the motion of a bounding interface, separating the different 
              components, is driven by a competition between surface energy and  either an
              instability or multi-body interactions.  As such, they can be  treated using a
              common set of analytical and computational tools. The  highly nonlinear nature
              of these problems makes fast, accurate and  robust numerical methods essential
              to their study.    In this proposal, we bring together mathematical and
              numerical  analysis, modelling, and large-scale scientific computation to study
               certain fundamental problems in fluid dynamics and materials science.  For
              instance, one problem we will consider concerns changes in the  topology of
              interfaces between different fluids. Such changes occur,  for example, when
              liquid jets pinch off into droplets and when droplets  of one fluid reconnect
              with another. These topological transitions  occur in many practical
              applications involving transport, mixing, and  separation of petroleum,
              chemical, and food products as well as in  environmental applications such as
              oil spills. Often, reaction and  mixing rates within  these systems are
              controlled directly by the  detailed dynamics of the transition processes. 
              Thus, there is a need  to understand these dynamics in order to develop
              accurate engineering  models for mixing and reaction rate prediction. We will
              use analysis,  modelling and large scale scientific computation to investigate
              the  detailed dynamics of break-up and reconnection of fluid interfaces. 
              Another problem we will consider involves solid-state diffusional phase 
              transformations. These transformations are an important method of  processing
              multicomponent metallic alloys such such as steels. The  result of this process
              is the formation of a multiphase microstructure,  which is a key variable in
              setting the macroscopic mechanical  properties (i.e. stiffness, strength and
              toughness) of the alloy. The  microstructure is characterized by regions of
              different metallic  components separated from one another by interfaces. The
              goal of our  research is to accurately model and simulate the formation of 
              microstructure in alloys in order to provide metallurgists with a  recipe for
              generating new alloys with desirable material properties.  Although the two
              problems described above arise from very different  physical processes (fluids
              versus solids), they are similar in the  sense that the relevant phenomena is
              strongly influenced by surface  tension at the respective interfaces. 
              Consequently, they can be  studied using common analytical and computational
              tools.  The highly  complex nature of these problems makes fast, accurate and
              robust  numerical methods essential to their study.
