Title       : Applications of Functional Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1997      
File        : a9706108

Award Number: 9706108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. Casazza pete@casazza.math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706108    Casazza    The research project will use techniques from Functional
              Analysis   to developed a local theory for wavelets and frames.  The idea is 
              to find the least number of elements from one of these sets to   give a good
              approximation to problems in these areas.  This will  allow finite dimensional
              techniques to be used on  infinite dimensional problems as well as giving quick
               approximations to solutions which are more accessible to the  computer.  We
              use, and extend, deep results from the local theory  of Banach spaces to
              stronger results in Hilbert spaces to carry  out the goals of the project.  The
              project also involves work     on the L(1)-Problem:  Is every complemented
              subspace of L(1)    isomorphic to L(1) or l(1)? A new approach to the problem  
               relies on shifting the problem to an equivalent problem on a    more
              computable space than L(1).  This setting may     allow a solution to the
              problem.    The main goal is to reduce calculations of wavelets and frames   
              to the least number of vectors possible.  First, this will allow    infinite
              dimensional calculations to be reduced to the finite    dimensional setting. 
              Second, in the finite dimensional setting,   it may reduce the number of
              necessary calculations to something    closer to the capacity of the computer. 
              This could significantly    reduce the length of time for calculations and for
              transmitting    data.  These methods are some of the most applied techniques
              around    today.  They are used in imaging problems from everything from   
              satellite imaging to x-rays.  If one could significantly reduce the   
              calculations necessary for such computations, it should have broad   
              application to all of these important imaging problems.
