Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems of Complex Analysis Arising in Complex Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1999    
File        : a9706818

Award Number: 9706818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74934              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric D. Bedford bedford@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Bedford  9706818    The research of this proposal applies to the
              methods of complex analysis to several problems of dynamical systems in the
              complex domain.  The dynamics of polynomial maps of C has been studied in depth
              and has produced a theory which is both a beautiful and compelling model for
              many systems in nature.  The principal emphasis is a two-part investigation of
              polynomial diffeomorphisms of C^2.  The first part involves mappings for which
              the Julia set is connected:  to analyze the structure of the dynamical set J
              and the structure of parameter space (a higher-dimensional Mandelbrot space). 
              The second part involves diffeomorphisms of C^2 which are quasi-hyperbolic:
              these mappings are not uniformly expanding on the infinitesimal level but have
              uniform expansion and bounded geometry at a fixed (finite) level .  This work
              involves several mathematical techniques from complex analysis:  harmonic
              measure, pluri-potential theory, and the geometry of currents.    Many physical
              processes are modeled as dynamical systems:  systems which evolve over time as
              the iteration (repetition) of  a specific rule.  An interesting discovery has
              been that even if the defining rule is rather simple, the resultant  behavior
              can show surprising complex behavior over time.  One of the most intriguing
              features of this model has been the way the behavior of the system depends on
              parameters (the period-doubling cascade to chaotic behavior).  This is more
              clearly seen when we pass to the (seemingly more complicated) complex system. 
              The behavior in the complex leads to an interplay between dynamic space and
              parameter space.  The resulting parameter (bifurcation) space is the Mandelbrot
              set, which has been shown to have "universal" properties.  We consider the
              dynamics of polynomial mappings of two complex variables, which are what is
              obtained when the analogous behavior is considered in two variables.  Our
              research seeks to identify the analogue of the Mandelbrot in two complex
              dimensions and to ident ify its associated dynamical properties.
