Title       : Control of Metallic Particle Contaminants in Compressed Gas Insulated
               Sub-station (GIS) Equipment by Conductor Coating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9706297

Award Number: 9706297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91682              (Estimated)
Investigator: Medhat M. Morcos morcos@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Compressed gas-insulated switchgear (GIS), normally using SF6 gas as an
              insulating medium, is now widely established all over the world and represents
              the leading technique in the construction of high-voltage switching electric
              power stations in urban areas.  It offers distinct advantages to power supply
              utilities.  Due to low space requirements, GIS is adaptable to all types of
              buildings.  GIS also provides environmental protection by shielding humans and
              animals in its vicinity from emanating electromagnetic fields.  It is itself
              protected from environmental hazard, such as lightning and pollution.  The
              advantages of GIS are compromised by the phenomenon of contaminating conducting
              particles which are inevitably present inside the enclosure.  Metallic
              particles are known to drastically impair the insulation integrity of
              compressed gas insulated sub-station (GIS) equipment.  Such particles present a
              special hazard when present in close proximity of support insulators.  Most GIS
              equipment manufacturers employ a variety of techniques and devices, such as
              electrostatic particle traps, to control metallic particle contamination. 
              Further research is vitally needed to detect the presence of these particles
              and mitigate their effects, and thus minimize unplanned outages.  Reliability
              of electric supply is important and its economic impact is recognized by all
              users and suppliers.    The efficiency and effectiveness of dielectric coatings
              on high voltage electrodes in gaseous insulation systems have been studied over
              the past several years.  Data indicate that the dielectric coatings are
              beneficial and improve the breakdown voltage in gaseous insulation systems. 
              Moreover, results of some preliminary studies show that such coatings reduce
              the adverse impact of metallic particles in GIS equipment, thus increasing the
              reliability of the system.    The objective of this project is to use modeling
              and computational methods to investigate the effectiveness of conductor coating
              in mitigating adverse effec ts of particle contamination in a horizontal
              section of a coaxial GIS system.  The probability of insulation failure in the
              presence of metallic particles can be calculated by combining the particle
              position density function with the breakdown voltage profile of a given GIS
              system.  The numerical model also will be used to study the effect of
              parameters such as particle size, gap dimensions, and voltage waveshape on
              particle trapping.  Theoretical results will be verified experimentally.    The
              principal investigator, has studied the dynamics of metallic particle movement
              in GIS equipment.  His research has included the use of a comprehensive
              computational program to analyze the effect of various parameters on the
              particle movement in coaxial electrode systems under 60 Hz voltage.   
              International collaboration between Kansas State University, USA, Chalmers
              University of Technology, Sweden, and the University of British Columbia,
              Canada, will be accomplished in this project.  At Kansas State University the
              principal investigator will elaborate the particle dynamics model in a coaxial
              electrode system with one electrode coated and predict improvement in the
              breakdown voltage profile and the breakdown probability of the compressed gas
              insulated transmission line (GITL) system in general.  Experimental work will
              be needed to verify the results of the modeling.  Experimental data will be
              obtained at the high voltage laboratory at Chalmers University of Technology,
              under the direction of Professor Stanislaw Gubariski.  The proposed
              collaboration will enable verification of modeling outputs by conducting
              appropriate experiments.    The impact of the proposed study will be in the
              broad area of energy infrastructure in urban USA by making compressed GIS/GITL
              technology more efficient, environmentally friendly, and easier to operate and
              maintain.  The proposed project should be of interest to both utilities and
              manufacturers.
