Title       : Heirarchical Basis Multigrid/ILU Algorithms for Solving Finite Element Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9706090

Award Number: 9706090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jong-Shi Pang                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174036             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph E. Bank rbank@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9218,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9706090  Bank           Hierarchical Basis Multigrid/ILU Algorithms for        
              Solving Finite Element Equations            Randolph E. Bank Department of
              Mathematics       University of California at San Diego         La Jolla, CA
              92093    This proposal has two main components. First, we will study algebraic 
              hierarchical basis multigrid algorithms (HBMG/ILU).   These methods  solve
              sparse sets of linear equations arising from finite difference,  finite volume
              and finite element discretizations of partial  differential equations.  They
              are differentiated from classical HBMG  and MG methods in that they do not
              require a coarse grid and sequence  of mesh refinements.  This allows
              application to problems with  geometrically complex domains that require many
              elements just for the  geometric definition, and problems where the adaptivity
              comes from  moving the mesh points rather than from refinement.  Preliminary 
              numerical experiments indicate that the methods are potentially very  powerful
              and robust. The second component of the of proposal concerns  the continuing
              software development of the finite element program  PLTMG. Various versions of
              this program have been in the public domain  since the late 1970's, and it is
              widely used in education and research  environments.  PLTMG solves scalar,
              parameter dependent, nonlinear  elliptic PDE's in  general regions of the
              plane.  The principle  features are adaptive mesh generation, a posteriori
              error estimation,  HBMG (soon to be HBMG/ILU) iteration for linear systems of
              equations,  Newton's method for nonlinearities, and continuation for parameter 
              dependencies. The code also includes an initial mesh generator, a  skeleton
              generator, and several graphics routines. Although the name  PLTMG has remained
              the same, typically 80% or more of the package is  revised with each new
              release.    In many systems modeled by partial differential equations, the
              critical  phenomena occur only in a small part of the physical domain, and may 
              move as a function of time ( e.g. as a flame front). Even with the great 
              advances in hardware, it is not adequate to address difficult  grand-challenge
              class problems of this type using software based on  simple uniform meshes; the
              demands of the problem require that  computing resources be focused on the
              regions of most interest.  The  motivation for adaptive mesh algorithms is that
              the algorithm itself  can and should identify these critical regions and
              respond with an  appropriate mesh with little or no human intervention.  The
              ``brains''  of adaptive algorithms are a posterior error indicators, which both
               estimate the current error, and indicate where additional resources  should be
              focused. The very nonuniform and unstructured meshes  resulting from adaptive
              algorithms require sophisticated methods, such  as multigrid or the proposed
              HBMG/ILU, to efficiently and reliably  solve the resulting systems of
              equations. Overall, this field provides  a mosaic of important and interrelated
              scientific questions ranging  from difficult problems in mathematical analysis
              to difficult  computational challenges in implementing these procedures on
              modern  computer architectures.
