Title       : Evolutionary Proliferation: Diversification and its Contex in Neogastropod
               Molluscs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a9706749

Award Number: 9706749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geerat J. Vermeij vermeij@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9253,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706749  Vermeij    Which circumstances characterize times of evolutionary
              expansion?  What attributes characterize clades that proliferate at such times?
               These fundamental questions motivate the proposed study of diversification in
              selected clades of Cenozoic neogastropod molluscs.  The great morphological and
              ecological diversity, as well as the excellent fossil record of this large
              group of molluscs make the Neogastropoda ideal for the study of evolutionary
              proliferation, an as yet poorly understood but crucially important phenomenon
              in the history of life.    The taxonomy, phylogeny, distribution, and ecology
              of clades with apparently contrasting evolutionary histories will be studied. 
              Building on earlier work with rapanine muricids and pseudolivids, analyses of
              ancestor-descendant and sister-group relationships will be conducted in the
              muricid subfamilies Ocenebrinae and Muricinae, the buccinid subfamilies
              Pisaniinae, Photinae, and Siphonaliinae, and the family Fasciolariidae. 
              Comparisons within and between these purported clades will focus on shell
              characters of fossil and living species, to be examined in the major museum
              collections of the world, and on DNA sequences to be obtained from living
              representatives.  Observations relating shell morphology to aspects of life
              including feeding, locomotion, and defense will be conducted on the two coasts
              of Panama.    Hypotheses to be tested include the following:  1)  key
              innovations as well as antipredatory traits reduce barriers to speciation and
              increase the range of potential phenotypes in a clade;  2)  times of climatic
              warming (Middle to Late Eocene, Late Oligocene to Early Miocene, Early
              Pliocene) favor worldwide diversification;  3)  constriction of the Central
              American seaway beginning in the Late Miocene stimulated speciation in tropical
              America but not elsewhere;  4)  glacially induced climatic fluctuations
              stimulated speciation among high-latitude clades beginning in the latest
              Miocene.  Multiple comparisons among sister-groups, a mong time intervals, and
              among regions with contrasting histories will be used to evaluate the roles of
              these intrinsic and extrinsic triggers of speciation and adaptive
              diversification.    The study of diversification is important not only because
              evolutionary proliferation remains little understood, but also because of close
              parallels with economic growth.  An empirically based economic perspective on
              the history of life may shed light on important controls of the human economy,
              and make possible intellectual links between evolutionary science and the
              social science discipline of economics.
