Title       : Mathematical Analysis of Networks of Neurons with Multiple Time Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9706694

Award Number: 9706694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. Kopell nk@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kopell  9706694       The investigator and her colleagues study the dynamics of 
              networks of neurons, especially networks whose output is  rhythmic.  The
              research uses methods of dynamical systems to  understand how properties at the
              cellular level (intrinsic  membrane dynamics) and the interconnections among
              the cells  (synaptic properties) affect the network behavior.  The research 
              focuses on two kinds of problems.  The first concerns the  mechanisms by which
              networks synchronize or partially  synchronize.  These problems mainly concern
              cortical networks in  which there are large numbers of similar cells.  The
              other class,  motivated mainly by smaller invertebrate networks, is concerned 
              with the determination and regulation of network frequency and  relative phases
              among cells in the network.  In both classes of  problems, the work is
              motivated by specific networks of neurons,  but the techniques are broad enough
              to allow generalization of  the results beyond the motivating examples.  The
              dynamical  systems methods to be used and developed exploit the many  different
              times scales associated with the intrinsic and synaptic  dynamical processes of
              the cells.  One goal is to understand how  network behavior is modulated by
              changing parameters that alter  which subset of dynamical processes is most
              important in  producing the network output.       Networks of neurons producing
              rhythmic output are found in  neural systems governing motor control, sensory
              processing, and  in both sleeping and awake states.  Rhythmic activity in the 
              nervous system is also seen in pathological states, such as  epilepsy and
              Parkinson's disease.  Though there is much detailed  information about the
              physiology of participating cells, it is  not understood how networks that make
              use of dynamically  complicated components are constructed to carry out their 
              appropriate tasks.  This research aims to identify mechanisms by  which
              coherence, frequency and phase relationships of the  rhythmic network output
              are regulated.   Such identification can  potentially allow scientists a deeper
              understanding of how the  nervous sytem uses rhythms to produce appropriate
              behavior, as  well as techniques for removing rhythmic activity that produces 
              pathological states, including tremor.
