Title       : Alluvial Architecture and Floodplain Paleosols: Field Evaluation of Theoretical
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9706115

Award Number: 9706115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Kraus   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Pulham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706115  Kraus    One of the most important advances in fluvial sedimentology
              has been the development of alluvial architecture models.  An important
              component of these models is channel avulsion, and two recent studies provide
              new and more realistic insights on the influence of avulsion on alluvial
              architecture.  The new model of Mackey and Bridge (1995) predicts "avulsion
              sequences" in which major sandstones become progressively thinner up-section. 
              Heller and Paola (1996) have presented a simple geometric model that explores
              how the relationship between avulsion frequency and sedimentation rate can
              influence alluvial architecture.    Despite their potential for interpreting
              the rock record, the validity and usefulness of the models depend upon field
              testing in both modern and ancient alluvial sequences.  Consequently, the
              research proposed here is to examine the alluvial architecture of Eocene
              alluvial deposits in light of the new models.  This research is innovative in
              that the alluvial architecture and the intrinsic and extrinsic controls on the
              fluvial system will be established by integrating the analysis of floodplain
              paleosols with the more typical analysis of sandstone body characteristics. 
              This project has two major goals:  (1) to field test the new concepts of
              avulsion and alluvial architecture and provide field data for refining these
              new models and (2) to further develop paleosols as an integral part of alluvial
              architecture studies (both field and quantitative studies).    To focus on only
              the effects of subsidence rate and avulsion frequency on alluvial architecture,
              time-equivalent upstream and downstream cross-sections in an exceptionally
              well-exposed ancient example will be examined.  The stratigraphic unit to be
              analyzed, the Willwood Formation, is especially appropriate for this study
              because it has excellent biostratigraphic and paleomagnetostratigraphic records
              that can be used for time correlation and calculating sediment accumulation
              rates.  Previous studies of Willwood  paleosols in other parts of the basin
              provide a framework for analyzing the paleosols.    Field study will focus on
              describing the major sandstone bodies and the paleosols surrounding them.  The
              external geometry, internal characteristics, and interconnectedness of the
              major sandstones in the two study areas will be described.  Paleosols will be
              described and further studied in the lab to determine the different the
              different kinds of paleosols and their maturity.  The analyses of the sandstone
              bodies and the paleosols will be integrated to test and refine the computer
              models.  The two cross sections will be examined for up-section changes in
              sandstone body size and interconnectedness and in paleosol maturity to test for
              the presence of avulsion sequences predicted by Bridge and Mackey (1995).  The
              alluvial architectures in the two study areas will be compared and contrasted
              to see what effect increasing rates of sediment accumulation had on alluvial
              architecture and to test how applicable the results of Heller and Paola (1996)
              are to the stratigraphic record.    Both the new alluvial architecture models
              and the integration of paleosol analysis into alluvial architecture studies
              have important implications for the way alluvial processes and the resulting
              deposits are understood.  Together they provide a fundamental new assessment of
              how alluvial deposits can be described and interpreted, and they offer enormous
              potential for better prediction of alluvial architecture in subsurface
              resources such as aquifers and oil and gas fields.
