Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Localization in Mathematical Models of Disordered Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9706076

Award Number: 9706076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66201              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunter Stolz stolz@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706076    Stolz    Dr. G. Stolz of the University of Alabama at Birmingham will
              conduct a  research project on the appearance of "localization" in various
              classes   of random operators which arise in mathematical physics.
              Localization,  i.e. the existence of energy regions with dense pure point
              spectrum and  exponentially decaying eigenfunctions, has been found to be
              common to   most one dimensional models of disordered media. Dr. Stolz'
              research will  aim at a better understanding of mathematical models of
              multidimensional  disordered media. Specific goals include   (i) the extension
              of existing results on localization to models which  give a more realistic
              description of disordered media, such as alloys and  amorphous materials, than
              the models studied previously;   (ii) an intensified investigation of
              three-dimensional models based on  random point-interactions, which have
              potential of providing new insights  in high energy spectral characteristics
              and can also be used to study  physical properties of random surfaces and
              random polymers.    Disordered media are studied extensively in various
              physical disciplines  such as solid state physics, optics, and electrodynamics,
              as well as in  materials science. They comprise various types of materials, for
              example  alloys, crystals with impurities (e.g. semiconductors), and amorphous 
               solids. Random operators provide mathematical models of disordered media. 
              These operators can be studied by using methods from mathematical spectral  and
              scattering theory. They allow to describe and thus predict   conductivity
              properties and the characteristics of wave propagation in  disordered media.
              For example, the mathematical phenomenon of localization,  as studied by Dr.
              Stolz, characterizes insulators (electrical insulators,  respectively sound
              insulators, depending on the underlying physical model).  While a number of
              important results have been obtained for these models,  it will be the goal of
              future research to study more realistic models  and to get a b etter
              theoretical understanding of the underlying   phenomena from physics.
