Title       : CREST: Center for Innovative Manufacturing of Advanced Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a9706871

Award Number: 9706871
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1833230            (Estimated)
Investigator: Shaik Jeelani jeelanis@tusk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 9131      CENTERS FOR RSCH EXCELL IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Tuskegee University proposes to establish a Center for  Innovative Manufacturing
              of High Performance Materials based  on a strong foundation in materials
              research developed over  two decades.  The activities of the proposed NSF/CREST
               Center will be directed towards achieving the following  objectives:        
              Diversify existing research in high performance    composite materials.      
              Provide additional training in mathematics and science    and exposure to the
              areas of materials science and    engineering to minority middle and high
              school students by    involving them in various pre-college programs.      
              Increase the involvement of undergraduate and graduate    students in the
              research of high performance materials.       Launch a doctoral program in
              Materials Science and    Engineering.    Advanced Materials Research:  The
              proposed Center will  address the critical issues related to the manufacturing
              of  affordable, high performance, and rapidly fabricated liquid  molded
              composites.  These composite materials and structures  are primary candidates
              for defense and commercial  applications.  The research is divided into four
              major  components:    1.   Chemical synthesis and analysis of resins for liquid
                 molding;  2.   Innovative resin transfer/resin infusion molding and 
              non-destructive evaluation;  3.   Performance modeling and simulation, and  4. 
               Static and dynamic performance evaluation and failure  analysis.    The
              researchers involved with the proposed Center will  actively collaborate with
              their counterparts from several  research universities, industry, and national
              laboratories.  An extensive collaboration already exists as part of on-  going
              research efforts and the research activities of the  proposed Center is
              expected to further strengthen them.  Undergraduate students will take part in
              the research  activities through the research experience for  undergraduates
              (REU) program built into the research  components.    Pre-College Programs: 
              The proposed Center will recruit,  m otivate and train minority students in the
              field of science  and engineering starting at an early age.  The pre-college 
              programs that will be offered with support from this grant  and matching funds
              from industry include Saturday Academy  (for 8th -12th  graders during the
              academic year), Pre-  Freshman Enrichment Program (six week summer program for
              8th  - 10th graders), Minority Introduction to engineering (one  week summer
              program for 11th graders), Research  Apprenticeship for Disadvantaged High
              Schoolers (eight week  summer program for 11th graders) and Analytical
              Chemistry  Program (eight week summer program for 10th and 11th  graders).  A
              one week summer institute for teachers will  also be held as part of these
              programs.    Doctoral Program:  The development and implementation of  Ph.D.
              programs represents one of the key strategic  directions authorized recently by
              the Board of Trustees of  Tuskegee University.  The establishment of a Ph.D.
              program  in Materials Science and Engineering at Tuskegee University  will be
              spearheaded by the proposed Center.  The Center's  role in the Ph.D. Program is
              primarily to provide access to  the students to the state-of-the-art research
              in materials  science and engineering.  This will be the first doctoral 
              program offered at Tuskegee University.
