Title       : Mathematical Sciences: K-Theory, C*-Algebras & Index Theory of Elliptic
               Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1997        
File        : a9706817

Award Number: 9706817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome A. Kaminker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Kaminker    Several problems involving geometric applications of
              operator algebras and index theory will be worked on.  The major role that
              Ruelle algebras play in the connection between hyperbolic dynamics and operator
              algebras will be developed.  A multiplicative index theory will be studied and
              its connections with the Hirzebruch proportionality principle and the Selberg
              trace formula will be pursued.  Also, a general index theory for eroupoids will
              be worked out and applied to problems of quantization.    This project deals
              with using  mathematical methods to study situations that occur when describing
              the physical world.  In general, when modeling phenomena using mathematics,
              slight changes in measurements can radically change the predictions of the
              theory.  This is one aspect of the notion of ``chaos''.  The classification of
              the kinds of ``chaos'' which can occur is one of the goals of the present work.
               The methods used arose first in the early stages of quantum mechanics and have
              become a well developed part of mathematics.  They take advantage of the simple
              idea that the order in which one does two operations   effects the outcome. 
              Developing that notion mathematically leads to the study of matrices, or
              ``generalized numbers''.  This, in turn, lead to associating these
              ``generalized numbers'' to chaotic systems.  Moreover, they are computable and
              go a long way to  providing a complete list of the possibilities.  It is
              interesting that these mathematical ideas originally would not have been
              expected to be useful in this setting, and it was only after their intensive
              development from a purely mathematical point of view that the idea of  
              applying them in this way occurred.  This work introduces the use of
              ``wavelets'', which had been developed for practical work in sending televised
              images in the most cost effective way.  It is very surprising that they can
              also be used in the study of ``chaos'' and we expect that this relation will
              lead to progress in the general theory of wa velets.
