Title       : hp Finite Element Methods for Shells and Partitioned Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9706594

Award Number: 9706594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manil Suri suri@math.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Suri  9706594       The investigator studies problems arising in the h-p finite 
              element method.  The first problem investigated is how h-p  discretization of a
              complicated domain can be accomplished by  partitioning it to several
              independent workers, and then  reassembling the pieces, without assuming
              compatibility of the  sub-meshes.  The objective is to develop algorithms that
              use  Lagrange multipliers at the interface together with proper  mesh/degree
              combinations, and preserve the (exponential) h-p  convergence rates obtained
              when the domain is analyzed without  partitioning.  The second problem is
              obtaining robust,  mathematically certified h-p methods for shells.  Finite
              element  modeling of shells is complicated by boundary layers and locking 
              phenomena, which seriously affect convergence rates when the  shell is thin. 
              The goal is to design methods free of locking  (such as mixed methods), which
              resolve the boundary layers as  well.       The finite element method for
              solving differential equations  incorporates a mesh --- a quilt of small pieces
              that fit together  to make up the region where the equation holds --- and a set
              of  functions, usually polynomials, for each piece of the quilt.  Accuracy of
              the method depends on how fine the mesh is and how  high the degree of the
              polynomials may be.  The h-p finite element  method couples mesh refinement
              with polynomial degree increase  for enhanced accuracy and convergence.  Finite
              element modeling is  used extensively in industry, from aircraft and automobile
               manufacture, to structural analysis in civil engineering, to the  precision
              design and fitting of e.g. electronic components.  Many  large or complicated
              problems (such as the modeling of an  aircraft) must be first broken into
              separate pieces (such as the  fuselage, wings, etc.), to be meshed separately. 
              This project  develops methods by which such components can be accurately and 
              efficiently reassembled for the final modeling.  Also, individual  components
              (for example wings) are  often ``thin'' and therefore  modeled as plates and
              shells.  The finite element modeling of  shells poses special problems, and
              robust methods are developed  and analyzed to address them.  The research
              affects  state-of-the-art engineering by influencing the development of  (and
              finding application in) updated versions of commercial codes  that have
              incorporated the new h-p finite element technology.
