Title       : Nonlinear Wave Equations and Hamiltonian Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9706273

Award Number: 9706273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Craig craigw@gauss.math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706273    Craig             The proposed research is on a class of partial
              differential   equations which are unified by their character as wave equations
                and by the fact that they can each be written in the form of a   Hamiltonian
              system. Important examples of this class are the   linear and nonlinear
              Schroedinger equations, the nonlinear wave   and Klein-Gordon equations, the
              Korteweg deVries equation, and the   Euler equations governing free surface
              problems in fluid dynamics.  The first project of the investigator is to
              consider issues of   existence and regularity of the initial value problem for
              these   equations, and it will continue a study of KAM tori and other  
              constructions of the principal features of the infinite dimensional   phase
              space in which these equations are posed. The second project   is an analysis
              of dispersive linear equations, principally the   Schroedinger equation,
              addressing details of the local and   microlocal regularity of the fundamental
              solution and its   relationship to the global behavior of bicharacteristics of
              the   principal symbol. The third research project includes a special   focus
              on the mathematical analysis of free surface problems of   fluid dynamics.     
                 The nonlinear differential equations studied in this project  occur in
              mathematical physics and engineering in a remarkable  variety of settings, from
              cosmology to fluid dynamics of the  ocean to nonlinear optics. Work in this
              field addresses some   of the basic characteristics of solutions of these
              equations,   which is a contribution to our knowledge of the physical world,  
              and which can contribute in nontrivial ways to developments   in advanced
              technology. This project also specifically pursues   the purely mathematical
              goal of developing the beautiful analogy   between the theory of classical
              mechanics of last century and   the modern theory of partial differential
              equations.
