Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic Theory of Difference Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1999   
File        : a9706954

Award Number: 9706954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Saber N. Elaydi selaydi@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782123104    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Elaydi    Abstract    Poincar -Perron's Theorem marks the beginning of the 
              asymptotic   theory of scalar nonautonomous difference equations.  However,  
              this theorem is of limited use due to two reasons.  The first is   the 
              requirement that all characteristic roots of the limiting   equation have 
              distinct moduli.  The second reason is that the   theorem does not provide 
              explicit asymptotic representations of   solutions of difference equations.  
              Levinson's Theorem or rather   its discrete analogue addressed the second 
              deficiency by providing   the desirable asymptotic representation of solutions 
              of difference   equations.  However, Levinson's Theorem puts a severe
              restriction   on the coefficients of the difference equation in question since 
               it requires that they  are summable.   The latter condition makes   the
              applicability of the the theorem  rather limited, particulaply   in orthogonal
              polynomials, combinatorics, special  functions, and   continued fractions. The
              proposed research is directed toward   addressing the deficiencies in the above
              two important theorems.    It will attempt  to complete and unify asymptotic
              theory using a   unified approach via the theory  of dichotomy.    Difference
              equations are one of the basic mathematical tools of   computation. There is
              hardly a computational task which does not   rely on recursive techniques, at
              one time or another.  The widespread   use of difference equations can be
              ascribed to their intrinsic   constructive quality, and the great ease with
              which  they are   amenable to mechanization.  On the other hand, like most
              recursive   processes, difference equations are susceptible to error growth.   
              If conditions  are unfavorable, the resulting propagation of error   may or
              will be disastrous.  Hence the need to investigate the   asymptotic and
              qualitative behavior of solutions  of difference   equations.  This is of
              paramount importance since difference   equations occur prominently in many
              branches of applied mathematics,   Economics,  population dynamics, Chaos
              Theory, mathematical physics,   etc.  Asymptotics is even more important in
              Computer Science where   it is used to rate  algorithms and how fast and
              accurate they are.
