Title       : The Multicovering Radii of Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9706078

Award Number: 9706078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Klapper klapper@cs.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  The purpose of this grant is to support research on a new concept related to
                error correcting codes and stream ciphers.  Pseudorandom binary sequences  
              are used for error correction in the presence of noise by introducing
              redundancy   to messages and for security by introducing pseudorandom noise to
              messages.    This research concerns pseudorandom sequences and the fundamental
              properties   that make them useful for coding and cryptography.     The
              covering radius of a code is the smallest radius such that every vector of  
              the given length is contained in at least one sphere of that radius centered at
              a   codeword. It is a fundamental measure of codes, closely related to many
              other   measures.  Covering radii have been extensively studied for some 25
              years.    The multicovering radii generalize covering radii by asking that
              several vectors   be covered simultaneously by codewords.  This new concept
              arose from an   investigation of the existence of stream ciphers that resist
              all possible   cryptanalytic attacks of a very general type.      The principal
              investigator will study basic properties of multicovering radii of   codes such
              as the multicovering radii of specific codes and bounds on codes   with various
              properties.  The result of this research program will be a better   fundamental
              understanding of pseudorandom sequences with respect to   properties that make
              them suitable for use in cryptographic stream ciphers.  It   will also lead to
              improvements in our fundamental understanding of error   correcting codes and
              perhaps to improved design and analysis of such codes.
