Title       : Capacity and Protocols for Integrated Voice/Data CDMA Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1998   
File        : a9706036

Award Number: 9706036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328057             (Estimated)
Investigator: Narayan Mandayam narayan@winlab.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack M. Holtzman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     The aim of this project is to develop an analytical framework that
              provides new understanding of the interaction of voice and data in an
              integrated voice/data CDMA system. The insights obtained from this study will
              be further used to develop new algorithms. The effect of the variability of
              data and its impact on the capacity and performance of the voice service in
              such a multimedia wireless system will be analyzed. New easily implemented
              real-time strategies for call admission, and control after call setup will be
              derived for the data service with delay sensitive voice being given priority.
              The effect of variable quality of service (QoS) the different classes of
              service may require will be included in the analysis framework and methodology.
              Further, the interaction between protocol layers will be included in the study
              and design   of access control schemes for data. Specifically, we will analyze
              the interactions of end-to-end protocols like TCP (Transmission Control
              Protocol) with data access control schemes on the radio link.    Analytical
              Methodology:  Analysis of these problems encounters two serious difficulties.
              Even if all the information (e.g., distributions of relevant random variables)
              was available, exact analysis appears to be beyond current theory leading to
              computationally tractable solutions. Secondly, the needed distributions are
              often not available. We develop instead simple, reasonably accurate, analytic
              methodology  which uses only means and variances, when appropriate, and
              distributional assumptions when necessary.     Data Control Strategies:
              Recognizing that voice is delay sensitive, we develop  data access control
              strategies.  One type of real-time control is based on readily measurable
              quantities related to voice quality and uses broadcasted permission
              probabilities to the data users. The proposal will investigate the varied
              questions  associated with the optimization of the data control algorithms. We
              will develop and analyze such control  strategies for both conve ntional and
              multiuser receivers.    Interaction between Protocol Layers :  Serious problems
              can arise when protocol layers are designed independently but end up with
              unexpected interactions. We address this in the context of a data access
              control strategy operating under TCP. We investigate the problems due to such
              interactions and appropriate modifications in the light of the interactions.   
              Significance of this Project: This project will provide a more complete
              understanding of the complex   issues of voice/data integration. This will
              include development of analytical methodology which is convenient to use and
              consistent with the limited information expected to be available. New effective
                real-time algorithms will be developed for both conventional and multiuser
              receivers. Further, the study of the interactions between data link
              retransmission schemes and higher layer reliability protocols (like TCP) should
              provide valuable insights into system design for optimum coexistence of diverse
              traffic.  The work will thus provide a better understanding of the complex
              interactions both between service types with different traffic characteristics
              and different QoS requirements, and between different protocol layers. This
              will lead to improved design of real-time algorithms for data.
