Title       : Probabilistic Methods in Geometry and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9706910

Award Number: 9706910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elton Pei Hsu elton@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706910  Hsu   This research proposal forms an integral part of the Principal
              Investigator's   program of studying analytical properties of (nonflat) finite
              or infinite dimensional spaces   (mainly Riemannian manifolds and path and loop
              spaces over them) by analytic and   probabilistic methods. The PIs long range
              goal for the program is to establish a complete   analytical and probabilistic
              theory of path and loop spaces over Riemannian manifolds,   whose counterpart
              in (flat) Euclidean space (finite or infinite dimensional) has been known   for
              quite some time. Successes in these efforts will contribute significantly
              towards our   general understanding of nonlinear infinite dimensional spaces.
              For the analytical part, the   PI will concentrate his research on further
              developing analytic techniques subsumed under   the name "Malliavin Calculus."
              In particular for the period covered in this proposal, the PI   will spend a
              substantial amount of his research resources on the equivalence of various  
              Sobolev norms (the so-called Meyer's equivalent problem) and on the spectral
              properties   of the generalized Ornstein-Uhlenbeck operator. For the
              probabilistic part, the PI intends   to launch a detailed study of the
              Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process through sample path,   especially the effect of
              curvature on short-time and long-time behaviors of the process.   The models
              under study, path and loop spaces over such geometric structures such   as
              spheres, ellipsoids, and tori, have been used extensively in recent years in
              the theory of   relativity, quantum physics, astrophysics, and cosmology. The
              Principal Investigator will   study these models by both traditional analytical
              methods and the more recent methods of   probability theory.  Specifically he
              will investigate both long-time and short-time behavior   of a specific random
              process on path and loop spaces in the hope that it will reveal   geometric
              properties which can be applied by theoretical scientists and engineers in
              their   respective disciplines.
