Title       : Research at Undergraduate Institutions, Collaborative Research: Physical Knot
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a9706865

Award Number: 9706865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65184              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory R. Buck gbuck@anselm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Anselm College
	      
	      Manchester, NH  03102    603/669-1030

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9139,9178,9229,9263,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Buck  9706865       The investigator collaborates with Prof. J. Simon, 
              University of Iowa, to study knots and their applications.  Knots  are closed
              loops in space that may be tangled in complicated and  essential ways.  While
              knots usually have been studied as  idealized one dimensional filaments, the
              focus here is on  "physical knots," knots made of real physical stuff, from
              rope to  DNA or other large flexible molecules.  These are modeled as 
              mathematical knots endowed with physical like properties such as  self
              repelling energy or thickness.  The twin goals of physical  knot theory are to
              mathematically model and help understand the  real physical systems, and to use
              the physically inspired  measures of knot-complexity to develop novel methods
              for knot  recognition and classification.  The specific targets of this 
              project include: determining precise relations between different  measures of
              knot complexity, understanding critical points and  the configuration space of
              polygonal knots, understanding the  connections between parametrizations and
              topological properties  of harmonic knots, extending knot energy ideas to other
               structures such as graphs, modeling gel electrophoresis of DNA  loops, and
              using knot energies to help understand physics  phenomena such as
              self-radiating tubes and knotted vortices.       Knotting and tangling happen
              at every scale studied by  science, from microscopic DNA loops to everyday rope
              to tangled  magnetic field loops in the solar corona.  The investigators and 
              their students will study problems that are fundamental and arise  in all the
              physical systems:  How are knots and tangles created?  What mathematical
              properties of the physical systems lead to  knots becoming simplified or
              completely untangled?  How do the  mathematical properties of different kinds
              of knots influence  their physical behavior?  One focus task is to gain a
              better  understanding of gel electrophoresis of DNA loops, hence of the  gel
              process itself; this is one of the most important  b iotechnology techniques,
              so a solid understanding is important.  The project requires powerful computing
              and visualization, so it  will train students, as well as stretch the
              technology, in these  areas.
