Title       : Plio-Pleistocene History of River Incision and Catchment Erosion From Cosmogenic
               26 AL and 10 BE in Cave Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1998       
File        : a9706011

Award Number: 9706011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darryl E. Granger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706011  Granger     The rate and pattern of river incision through bedrock
              determines how landscapes evolve in response to their tectonic and climatic
              environment.  Understanding long-term river incision processes is important for
              understanding landform evolution, patterns of tectonic uplift, the geomorphic
              record of climate change, and the environmental impacts of land use and dam
              construction.  However, because long-term river incision rates have previously
              been very difficult to measure, river downcutting rates remain poorly
              constrained, and theoretical models of river incision remain largely untested. 
              Recently, cosmogenic nuclide techniques have provided new tools for estimating
              both long-term river incision rates and catchment erosion rates.  It is now
              possible to infer detailed histories of river incision and catchment erosion
              rate over timescales relevant to river profile evolution.   This project uses
              comogenic 26Al and 10Be in river sediments preserved in caves alongside the
              Green River, Kentucky, to infer the history of river incision and catchment
              erosion over the past 5 million years.  Because caves provide an environment
              protected from erosion, cave sediments may be left undisturbed for millions of
              years.  The Green River flows alongside numerous caves, including the Mammoth
              Cave system, by far the world's largest cave system with over 500 km of
              surveyed passage.  These caves are a vast repository of river sediment,
              recording the river's incision history over the past 5-10 million years.  
              Intense sampling of the Mammoth Cave system sediments will allow a detailed
              reconstruction of river incision and catchment erosion over the past 5 million
              years, a timespan which includes several major climate changes.  Additional
              sampling along the length of the Green River will allow a study of the river's
              longitudinal profile evolution over the same timespan.  These data will provide
              a record of river incision and catchment erosion unprecedented in its scope and
              detail.   This research is des igned to explore the influence of sediment
              supply on river incision, by simultaneously measuring both catchment erosion
              (the source of river sediment) and river downcutting rates.  It should also
              help clarify the influence of climate change on river downcutting and landscape
              evolution.  This study should provide much-needed data to test and constrain
              the most fundamental hypotheses of river incision through bedrock.
