Title       : Improving Teacher Preparation in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9706060

Award Number: 9706060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1275000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Feuer  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodger W. Bybee  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Suzanne H. Woolsey swoolsey@nas.edu  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Division of Postsecondary Policy and Practice of the National Research
              Council's Center for Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Education will
              undertake a three-year program of activities in teacher preparation. Out work
              will be organized into three initiatives:  (A) deepening understanding; (B)
              improving practice' and (C) enhancing infrastructure in mathematics and science
              teacher preparation.  Communities that will be involved in and addressed by
              this work include:  scientists, mathematicians, and engineers; SME&T faculty,
              teacher educators, and educational researchers; and leaders and policymakers
              for states, institutions of higher education, and other organizations.   
              Building on accomplishments in our current NSF Cooperative Agreement,
              "Partnership for Leadership," we will undertake a set of eight interrelated
              projects which will advance our three major initiatives.  Projects include: 
              developing a brochure about the fundamentals of teacher preparation; creating a
              report which offers a critical synthesis of recommendations, research base, and
              indicator system for improving a workshop and proceedings about helping
              mathematics teachers learn content more effectively; a report synthesizing
              research in mathematics and science teachers preparation in a way that would
              help improve practice; and a white paper from a panel of university presidents
              and state education personnel calling for specific reform of teacher
              preparation policy at the state and national levels.  We also will include a
              strategic effort to inform, interest, and engage the membership of the National
              Academy of Sciences, National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of
              Medicine in teacher preparation issues.    The projects proposed here will be
              shaped, guided, and executed by the three standing boards of the Center's
              Division on Postsecondary Policy and Practice -- the Mathematical Sciences
              Education Board, the Committee on Undergraduate Science Education, and the
              Board on Engineering Education.  These boards normall y meet twice per year. 
              Specially constituted NRC study committees will be established when needed to
              undertake particular projects.  The projects capitalize on the two most
              effective mechanisms of the NRC:  convening expert group for the purpose of
              generating consensus, and producing objective, highly visible and thoroughly
              reviewed reports.  We look for forward to the substantial contributions these
              initiatives can make to improving the system of mathematics and science teacher
              preparation.
