Title       : An Experimental Study of River Incision Into Bedrock: The Role of Sediment
               Supply
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9706082

Award Number: 9706082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150001             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Dietrich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706082  Dietrich     River incision into bedrock is the crucial process linking
              tectonic and geomorphic processes, yet our understanding of the controls on
              incision rates is very limited.  Few field studies have been conducted and no
              experimental observations have been systematically collected.  Most studies
              assume that incision rate is proportional to a stream power or boundary shear
              stress, and implicitly assume that sediment supply influence on incision rate
              is simply proportional to drainage area.  Gilbert (1877) proposed, however,
              that with increasing sediment supply there is an erosion optimum for a given
              transport capacity above which incision rates decline due to increasing
              shielding of the bed by particles.  We present a quasi-mechanistic model for
              abrasion by saltation which supports the Gilbert hypothesis, but which also
              identifies another erosion optimum.  As the transport capacity increases for a
              given sediment supply, the mode of particle movement shifts towards suspension.
               If bed particles are sufficiently fine, high transport capacity may lead to
              reduced incision due to reduced contact with the bed.   We propose to conduct a
              set of three experiments using two unique flumes built specifically for the
              purpose of exploring the role of abrasion on river incision.  The first two
              experiments will use a 8.5 m long, 12cm wide, 1.3 m deep flume filled with
              highly erodable artificial bedrock made of weak concrete.  The first experiment
              will address the question of what controls the extent of alluvial cover over a
              channel underlain by bedrock.  A series of experimental runs will be conducted
              with unerodable and erodable beds to identify under what combinations of
              sediment load and transport capacity the bed turns fully or partially alluvial.
               This is a necessary first experiment to understand sediment supply effects on
              incision rate, but it also should provide critical insight about what sets the
              pattern of bedrock, mixed bedrock and alluvial, and fully alluvial beds in
              rivers.  The secon d experiment will test the Gilbert erosion optimum
              hypothesis and the optimum transport capacity hypothesis.  A large number of
              short experimental runs will be conducted in which sediment supply, discharge,
              slope, particle size and bed resistance to abrasion are systematically varied
              and bedrock erosion rate is quantified.  Numerous runs are necessary because of
              the expected parabolic relationships between erosion rate and sediment
              transport for a given transport capacity and between erosion rate and transport
              capacity for a given sediment supply.  The third experiment, which will run
              simultaneously with the other two, will test whether abrasion rate of natural
              and artificial river beds varies with compressive strength.  We will use two 35
              cm diameter cylindrical abrasion mills to test at least 24 samples obtained
              from the field and from the first two laboratory experiments.  If abrasion
              correlates with compressive strength across a broad range of values then we can
              extrapolate our experimental results to field scales more successfully, and
              field measurements of compressive strength can be compared quantitatively to
              rates of bedrock abrasion.   If these experiments prove successful they will
              form the foundation for further experiments directed at the role of channel
              width, tributary additions of sediment load, and variable rates of base-level
              lowering on bedrock channel longitudinal development.  More importantly, they
              would provide the first quantitative evidence for the role of sediment supply
              in river incision, give insight for a more mechanistic erosion law, provide
              guidance for quantitative field studies of river incision, and offer a tool for
              relating field measurements of rock strength to rates of incision.
