Title       : Chaos and Stability in Quantum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9706256

Award Number: 9706256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72255              (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Howland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9706256    Howland         Howland will study (1.)  stability and chaos in
              discrete quantum  systems driven by time-dependent perturbations; (2.) the
              asymptotics of  resonance widths in multiscale perturbation problems; and (3.)
              the  occurrence of twisted bundles in the Born-Oppenheimer approximation for 
              molecular Hamiltonians.        Chaos Theory, one of the most important new
              fields of mathematics to  arise in the last few decades, is concerned with
              systems which can  exhibit a very erratic motion. The most common example is
              the turbulent  flow of water from a pipe when a faucet is turned on hard. A
              famous  early example concerned computer models of the weather, where the 
              occurrence of chaotic behavior makes it impossible to predict the  weather more
              than a few days in advance. Perhaps the most important  discovery has been
              simply the realization that, far from being rare,  chaotic behavior is not only
              very common, but in some sense, is actually  the most common type of behavior.
              The systems usually studied in Chaos  Theory are described by Classical
              Mechanics, the theory initiated by  Isaac Newton which describes ordinary
              objects like those we experience.  Microscopic systems like atoms, molecules,
              and electrons are not at all  like the objects of ordinary experience, and are
              described by a strange  theory known as Quantum Mechanics, which was developed
              in the first  quarter of this century. The main thrust of the present project
              is to  study Chaos Theory in the context of atomic and molecular systems. This 
              is quite difficult because, since Classical Mechanics and Quantum  Mechanics
              are so very different, there is no agreement on exactly what  it is that one
              wants to study. This is still a field where most experts  feel that some sort
              of new ideas and approaches will be needed before  the problem is understood.
              An example of the type of system that is of  interest is a Hydrogen atom in a
              laser field. As simple as this seems  physically, it is quite a difficult
              mathematical problem. In the  present  project, simple models of such a system
              will be studied in order to try  to come to some understanding of how they
              work.
