Title       : Effectiveness and Efficiency of Fault Removal Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1998  
File        : a9706058

Award Number: 9706058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anthony B. Maddox                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48727              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Leach   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shari L. Pfleeger  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Because lack of control and replication impede many software  engineering
              studies, there is a need to design experiments that  take advantage of
              completed projects (and the associated data),  rather than "live" projects
              (where the goal of getting the  product out the door may compete with data
              capture and analysis  goals).  The research project involves conceiving,
              designing and  preparing a collection of large-scale, multi-location 
              retrospective experiments.  The research focuses on four fault  identification
              techniques (requirements inspection, formal  specification, formal design, and
              fault injection), building upon  existing work by determining which methods are
              more effective and  in what contexts.  In particular, the project seeks
              evidence  about which method is most effective and/or efficient at fault 
              identification and removal.    The research involves a consortium of industrial
              and academic  partners, all affiliated with Howard University's Center for 
              Research in Evaluating Software Technology.  Where possible,  parts of the
              experimental design will be tested by running parts  of the experiment with
              student projects to confirm its  feasibility and to help direct the preparatory
              efforts.  The  results should have wide impact, both on the community of 
              practitioners (who will find the results useful for guiding  resource
              allocation decisions) and researchers (who will note the  feasibility of doing
              software engineering field experiments with  retrospective data).
