Title       : Cognitive Processes in Bilinguals (Human Cognition)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1993      
File        : a9350115

Award Number: 9350115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80703              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith F. Kroll   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 1180,9225,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Kroll's ongoing research seeks to test and develop a model of              
              memory representation in the bilingual.  The model proposes that               
              there are asymmetries in the strength of the connections between               
              words in concepts in different languages that are a consequence of             
              the manner in which the second language is acquired.  During early             
              stages of second language learning, the second language learner is             
              hypothesized to rely on the first language to mediate access to                
              meaning.  As a greater fluency in the second language is achieved,             
              a direct access to meaning becomes possible.  The goal of this                 
              larger research is to identify the factors that mediate cognitive              
              change for the adult second language learner.  This project will               
              further test the proposed model of bilingual memory representation             
              by examining the conditions under which transfer occurs across                 
              languages, and by identifying aspects of individual performance in             
              the first language that predict the attainment of second language              
              fluency.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  teaching              
              a graduate seminar on bilingualism; involving undergraduate women              
              at the host institution in the research project; and organizing a              
              colloquium series and informal mentoring seminar for graduate                  
              student women.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers            
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
