Title       : SSC - NJMS Summer Science Camp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9350528

Award Number: 9350528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147471             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ophelia Gona   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      100 Bergen Street
	      Newark, NJ  071032407    973/972-4400

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9350528  UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School  Newark, NJ  Gona, Ophelia     
              "NJMS Summer Science Camp"    As a means of stimulating minority youth to stay
              in school and  pursue careers in sciences, engineering or mathematics (SEM), a 
              multidisciplinary Summer Science Camp for rising ninth graders will  be
              established at New Jersey Medical School.  Specific objectives  address the
              acquisition of certain SEM skills and familiarity with  professions and
              professionals of these disciplines.  The camp will  provide an almost total
              immersion and integrated experience in SEM  for participants.  A novel,
              Fantastic Voyage, by Isaac Asimov, will  provide the central theme for camp
              activities which will include:  field trips, visits with SEM professionals,
              hands-on  experimentation and exploration, and computer use.  Built into the 
              design are activities to encourage and enhance basic skills.   Numerous
              opportunities will exist for campers to meet SEM  professionals.  Various
              activities will explore the training  necessary for SEM careers.  Parents will
              be active home partners in  their children's summer experience and will have
              opportunities to  visit the camp and take field trips with campers. 
              Participants  will be academically capable minority students.  Staff will
              include  the Director, Counselors (teachers from local high schools), and 
              Junior Counselors (rising college freshmen who have interest and  ability in
              the sciences or mathematics), all of whom will be  underrepresented minorities.
               Achievement of the camp's objectives  will be assessed by techniques such as
              pre-and post-testing,  anecdotal records, etc.  Long-term monitoring and
              follow-up of  participants will be achieve by twice yearly Science Days and by 
              biannual communication with parents and participants for four years  following
              the camp experience.  Long-term goals are for  participants to graduate from
              high school four years after the camp  experience, to attain a grade of B or
              better in each of three high  school science courses an d three mathematics
              courses, and to be  admitted to a college at the end of high school with a
              major in one  of the SEM disciplines.
