Title       : Scanning Tunneling Microscope Instrumentation for Introductory Electronics and
               Materials Characterization Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1993     
File        : a9350914

Award Number: 9350914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19285              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Superfine rsuper@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie E. McNeil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Holmgren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              Courses Scanning tunneling microscope technology (STM) is                      
              being used as a unifying project in our introductory                           
              electronics course and as a bridge to our laboratory course in                 
              materials characterization techniques.  By having the students                 
              build an STM and the compare their homebuilt version with a                    
              commercial unit, we address two major problems endemic to                      
              electronics courses:  the failure to truly interest students in                
              the wide range of circuit techniques presented and the lack of                 
              student exposure to the full scope of a complex design project.                
              We have chosen the STM because of its intuitive appeal and                     
              range of applications engage our students who come from a                      
              variety of scientific backgrounds.  We are building 13 scanning                
              tunneling microscope workstations, each consisting of several                  
              separate circuit modules.  In weekly laboratory sessions                       
              students breadboard and study the circuits in each module, then                
              interconnect previously built units to make a working STM.  The                
              classroom lectures use the performance requirements of the STM                 
              project as a guide to exploring component and circuit                          
              specifications.  We have purchased a commercial instructional                  
              STM which the students use after they have demonstrated their                  
              homebuilt version.  They gain an appreciation of the results of                
              the development efforts of an expert team and come to                          
              understand that a complex instrument is composed of simpler                    
              subunits.  Most students who take the electronics course                       
              subsequently take the materials characterization laboratory                    
              course.  They study the physics of scanning tunneling                          
              microscopy in experiments using the commercial STM, which                      
              complements present experiments in x-ray diffraction and                       
              scanning electron microscopy.  This is excellent preparation                   
              for independent research projects with active graduate research                
              programs in scanning probe microscopies.  Students pursuing                    
              these courses have thorough knowledge of a state-of-the-art                    
              instrument and technique which gives them confidence to master                 
              any technology they will encounter in the future.
