Title       : Modeling the Behavior of Copolymers and Biopoloymersat Penetrable Interfaces
               (Materials Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1993      
File        : a9350083

Award Number: 9350083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76728              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna C. Balazs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1765,
Abstract    :
              The interfacial properties of copolymers contribute to increasing              
              the strength of polymer composites and controlling the behavior of             
              proteins at biological interfaces.  Dr. Balazs will isolate the                
              factors that control the interfacial activity of copolymers at                 
              penetrable interfaces, such as the boundary between immiscible                 
              polymers and the surface of lipid membranes.  Using theoretical                
              models and computer simulations, she will probe the effect of                  
              molecular architecture, solvent quality and temperature on the                 
              interfacial activity of synthetic and biological chains.  The                  
              results of the former studies will yield guidelines for fabricating            
              materials with enhanced mechanical properties.  Through studies of             
              protein-membrane interactions, she will isolate the features that              
              promote the formation of channels within the lipid bilayers.                   
                                                                                             
              In order to develop valid theoretical models, it is particularly               
              beneficial to have discussions with other theorists and, most                  
              importantly, to test the prediction through experiment.  In                    
              studying the behavior of polymers at blend interfaces, the Chemical            
              Engineering Department at the University of Texas is unique in                 
              providing both these opportunities.  In a similar manner, the                  
              Scripps Research Institute also provides an exceptional                        
              environment:  both theorists and experimentalists are currently                
              exploring the behavior of proteins at interfaces at this center.               
              The collaborations will significantly enhance Dr. Balazs's ability             
              to pursue these topics.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:                        
              establishing an Undergraduate Research Opportunities Program in the            
              Chemical Engineering Department at the University of Texas, since              
              the undergraduate years are critical in terms of influencing the               
              students' ultimate career choices, and active research experiences             
              are one of the most effective ways of encouraging students to                  
              pursue scientific careers; and at Scripps, delivering a series of              
              informal seminars to demonstrate how concepts in polymer physics               
              can be used to determine the behavior of biopolymers to facilitate             
              communication between biologists and physicists.                               
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
