Title       : Exploring the Intersellar Spectrum at Sub-millimeter Wavelengths (Astronomy)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1993      
File        : a9350144

Award Number: 9350144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139876             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy M. Ziurys lziurys@as.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1216,
Abstract    :
              At present, the sub-millimeter band is one of the few regions of               
              the electromagnetic spectrum yet to be studied in detail by                    
              astronomy.  Recent developments in detector and telescope                      
              technology are now making sub-mm observations feasible.  One of the            
              newest instruments that is becoming available for scientific                   
              measurements at these wavelengths is the SMT (Sub-mm Telescope) at             
              the University of Arizona.  Using this new telescope, observational            
              studies in astrochemistry will be conducted that will focus on two             
              main areas of research:  1) detection of diatomic hydrides in                  
              interstellar gas, including AIH, CaH, Ch+, MgH+ and SiH, and 2)                
              spectral line surveys of Orion and other objects in the unexplored             
              sub-mm windows at 600-700, 450, and 350 um.  Measurements of these             
              hydrides has important implications for shock chemistry, dust grain            
              composition and electron densities in molecular clouds.  The                   
              surveys should yield new unidentified lines, as well as constrain              
              chemical and physical parameters of the sources observed.  The                 
              astronomical measurements will be supported by a laboratory                    
              spectroscopy effort to measure rest frequencies and establish the              
              carriers of unidentified spectral features.                                    
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  teaching              
              a graduate and undergraduate course, conducting an                             
              interdepartmental seminar series, and mentoring graduate students.             
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
