Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellow: Material Processing and Intelligent Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1998 
File        : a9350209

Award Number: 9350209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Coulter john.coulter@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9296,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9350209 Coulter          The objective of the reserch and teaching program is to
              contribute to the return of the United State to a position of world leadership
              in material processing and manufacturing science technology.  This objective
              will be pursued through the development of an interdisciplinary effort in the
              area of intelligent material processing and manufacturing.  Two fundamental
              problems associated with U.S. process development today are:  (1) the majority
              of manufacturing processes are not completely understand, and (2) product
              quality is not monitored and optimally adjusted during  fabrication.  While
              initially emphasizing molded  or advanced composite products, the effort will
              address these  two basic problems by focusing on three coupled manufacturing
              science areas.  These are:  (1) improved process models for molding and
              advanced composites msnufacturing situations, (2) sensor subsystems for in situ
              product quality assessment during manufacturing, and (3) knowledge based tools
              for real time manufacturing processs adapation.  In the improved process model
              area, a software package for the simulation of molding processes that occur
              during the manufacture of monolithic and advanced composite materials will be
              improved through a sequence of developmental computational research phases.  A
              concurrent effort will focus on the development of a generic methodology for
              the utilization of process model information in an inverse manner.  This
              inverse process model utilization will be done in a real time feedback control
              environment to compensate for the fact that even the best models are rarely
              perfect.  The sensor subsystem component of the program will focus on the
              developme nt of hardware/software subsystems for monitoring product quality in
              real time during fabrication cycles.  A methodology for determining temporal
              flow progression and temporal spatial rheology during operations will be
              developed.  Several sensory transducer mechanisms will be investigated, but the
               initial focus will be on the usage of electronic and  optical fiber sensors. 
              The knowledge based process adaptation phase of the program will focus  on the
              need  for generic computer based control tools fir implementating real time
              inverse process model  information.  The effort will include the use of
              artifical neural networks, with necessary training  information obtained from
              process simulation models rather than from actual manufacturing datqa. 
              Fundamental research advancement in the three coupled interdisciplinary
              manufacturing science areas described will help facilitate an improved
              capability for intelligemt adaptive manufacture of molded and composite
              products for U. S. military and commercial applications.              A
              parallel teaching effort will be undertaken and directd at educating engineers
              who are  well grounded  in scientific fundamentals, capable of crossing
              traditiiiional disciplinary boundaries, and comfortable in environmentals
              charqcterized by design oriented, open ended asignments.  Students will develop
              these traits as a result of being exposed to an academic environment that
              mimics professional situations throughout the education process.  The
              development and improvement of interdisciplinary undergraduate and graduate
              courses in the arcas      h)          0*0*0*         of manufacturing science
              and intelligent material systems will continue.  In all cases, student driven
              learning rather than instructor dominated lecture presentation will be
              encouraged , as it has been found that such a format increases student
              enthusiasm and does not constrain the upper level to which subject are
              explored.  All educationL efforts will be carried out with the following simple
              goal in mind:   to identify knowledge that is of critcal importance to our
              American society and to guide individuals as they apply enjoyable and
              effiecient techniques   to thoroughy acquire this knowledge.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
