Title       : Application of the Adjoint Technique to the Study ofMarine Physical-Biological
               Models (Ocean Sciences)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1993      
File        : a9350097

Award Number: 9350097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63312              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda M. Lawson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1650,9225,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to study the application of data                   
              assimilation techniques to the problem of incorporating ocean color            
              measurements into physical-biological models.  This will be                    
              accomplished through the development and implementation of a series            
              of numerical models of marine systems and will be rely heavily on              
              the adjoint method.  This project is significant in that it will               
              provide a basis for incorporating vast amounts of data obtained                
              from the Coastal Zone Color Scanner and data expected from SeaWiFS             
              into marine systems models.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This study is well-matched with Dr. Lawson's background which                  
              includes many years of modelling experience and is a natural                   
              extension of recent research in which she applied this optimization            
              technique to an ocean surface wave modelling project.  The research            
              aspect of this proposal includes a collaborative effort with Eileen            
              E. Hofmann, Old Dominion University, who has an on-going research              
              program in the assimilation of ocean color data into ecosystem                 
              models.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  teaching              
              a course in the mathematics department, and participating in                   
              seminars and lectures connected with the modelling effort,                     
              including data assimilation, adjoint methods and optimization                  
              techniques.  Dr. Lawson will interact with graduate students                   
              involved in similar modelling efforts.                                         
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government and academic institutions.  By                
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
