Title       : Algorithm Exploratorium: A Distributed Graphical Computing Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9350857

Award Number: 9350857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82284              (Estimated)
Investigator: Istvan Simon simon@mcs.csuhayward.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Nico  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Encarnacion Hernandez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Hayward
	      25800 Carlos Bee Boulevard
	      Hayward, CA  94542    415/881-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              This is a proposal to create a modern, distributed, visually                   
              oriented computing environment to support undergraduate                        
              computer science instruction. The environment will encourage                   
              experimentation with algorithms and programs.                                  
              Students exposed to algorithm animation techniques in the                      
              classroom will be able to use this software to explore the                     
              properties of algorithms on their own in the laboratory.                       
              Through such experimentation, students will discover properties                
              of algorithms by themselves, leading to deeper understanding of                
              the basic building blocks of all software.                                     
              A suite of state-of-the-art graphical tools will assist the                    
              students in designing, analyzing, implementing, debugging, and                 
              testing complex programs. By using powerful analysis tools,                    
              students will be able to discover the structure of existing                    
              large programs. Other tools will assist them in developing                     
              complex programs better and faster and ensure that they are                    
              thoroughly tested. The skillful use of such tools leads to                     
              major increases in both software quality and programmer                        
              productivity.                                                                  
              Hypertext-based tools with powerful searching capabilities will                
              give instant access to documents in a large technical database,                
              which includes on-line documentation, classnotes, and                          
              tutorials.                                                                     
              The environment will consist of an array of networked UNIX                     
              workstations and servers supporting powerful graphical user                    
              interfaces, and appropriate software to facilitate the                         
              experimentation envisioned in this project. Integration of this                
              environment into our curriculum will give our students a better                
              understanding of fundamental principles and practical                          
              techniques available to produce quality software and better                    
              prepare them for the requirements of computer professionals in                 
              the 90s.
