Title       : An Acoustic Pressure Sensor for In-Vivo Intracochlear Measurements (Biological
               Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9350113

Award Number: 9350113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186348             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Olson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1108,9225,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Olson will work with collaborators at Rutgers University /                 
              Newark and the New Jersey Institute of Technology to design,                   
              construct and test a miniature hydrophone for intracochlear                    
              pressure measurements.  By reducing sensor size and increasing                 
              sensitivity compared to previous intracochlear pressure probes,                
              spatial resolution will be improved, and a better opportunity will             
              exist to explore cochlear pressures at low signal levels.  At these            
              levels, the motion of cochlear sensory tissue becomes nonlinear,               
              apparently to enhance sensitivity.  If measurements of nonlinearity            
              in intracochlear pressure are possible, their results will be                  
              useful in resolving the controversy over the process driving                   
              cochlear nonlinearity.  Beyond its use in cochlear research, a                 
              miniature pressure sensor will have diverse applications, for                  
              example, as a component of hearing aids and ultrasonic image                   
              processors.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include conducting              
              a "Saturday Science Program" outreach effort targeted at junior                
              high school students in the community, in which a group of                     
              students, parents and chaperones will go on bi-weekly field trips              
              to area science labs.  Lab tours will be conducted by host                     
              scientists, half of whom will be women.  The goals of the program              
              are improvement of scientific literacy, infusion of scientific                 
              curiosity, and demonstration of the capability of women to be                  
              successful in scientific endeavors.                                            
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
