Title       : Multiwavelength Studies of X-ray Binaries (Astronomy)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9350074

Award Number: 9350074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saeqa Vrtilek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1215,9178,9225,
Abstract    :
              Compact objects (neutron stars and black holes) are known                      
              principally from the effects of mass transfer onto them, thus the              
              understanding of mass transfer and its consequences are fundamental            
              to our understanding of many aspects of the final stages of stellar            
              evolution.  Dr. Vrtilek will use a set of narrow spectral features             
              in the X-ray, ultraviolet, and visible, selected because they                  
              provide important diagnostics of plasma conditions, to study mass              
              transfer processes and accretion disk structure in X-ray binaries.             
              Emphasis on multiwavelength spectral analysis is important as                  
              binary X-ray sources are strong emitters over a broad range of the             
              electromagnetic spectrum with each part of the spectrum                        
              contributing distinct and often time-variable information.                     
              Recently developed theoretical models that predict the                         
              characteristics of line emission over the range from the Hell                  
              recombination line at \4686m to the iron K-shell emission between              
              6-7 keV will be tested against the observations.  This work relies             
              on a balanced mix of existing data, approved observations with                 
              currently operating spacecraft, and detailed plans for the use of              
              future missions.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include teaching a              
              graduate course in X-ray astronomy, a field not currently                      
              represented on the faculty of the host institution.  Dr. Vrtilek               
              will also organize a series of guest lectures, drawing upon experts            
              who will discuss the programs and functions of other area                      
              institutions, supplemented by lectures on techniques of scientific             
              presentation, proposal preparation, and other "survival skills" for            
              graduate students.  A workshop on careers in the physical sciences             
              will be held for area high school students, particularly women and             
              minorities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
