Title       : Chemical Signal Interception by Insect Antennae (Biological Sciences)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1993      
File        : a9350101

Award Number: 9350101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148677             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine Loudon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1148,9225,
Abstract    :
              Insect antennae intercept vanishingly small quantities of chemical             
              signals from the air with great efficiency.  Our ability to                    
              evaluate how antennae function is hampered by our lack of knowledge            
              about the role of physical factors such as air speed or antennal               
              size and geometry on signal capture.  That is, there is no                     
              appropriate null hypothesis available against which to compare                 
              measured antennal performance.  In engineering terms, this exchange            
              of material between the environment and an object is called mass               
              transport.  The objective of this study is to quantify the rate of             
              pheromone interception by real antennae under different flow                   
              conditions and to compare these results with predictions from mass             
              transport calculations.  These calculations require knowledge of               
              mass transfer coefficients, values that are specific for a given               
              geometry, flow situation, and diffusing material.  To determine                
              these currently-unknown mass transport coefficients, physical                  
              modeling will be done using dynamic scaling methods.  This                     
              biomechanical approach will allow predictions to be made for                   
              antennal performance under different flow conditions, such as when             
              an insect flies at different speeds.  This approach will also allow            
              differentiation between the rate of physical events and                        
              neurological events.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  teaching              
              a course in Insect Biomechanics; giving guest lectures in Insect               
              Physiology, External Insect Morphology and Insect Behavior;                    
              participating in a new course on mentoring in science entitled                 
              "Topics in Women Studies:  Women in Science;" and advising                     
              undergraduate students in independent research.                                
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
