Title       : Computer Based Laboratory Instruction in Human Information Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1993     
File        : a9350868

Award Number: 9350868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32809              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Brainard brainard@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Hegarty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta L. Klatzky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The University of California at Santa Barbara is developing a                  
              facility for computer based laboratory instruction in                          
              experimental psychology.  Each work station has ancillary                      
              hardware which enables it to be used in specialized                            
              experimental exercises. The primary courses improved by this                   
              project are in upper level laboratory courses in the area of                   
              psychology known as Human Information Processing. Research in                  
              Human Information Processing is concerned with how humans                      
              perceive, learn, remember, and think about information. The                    
              three laboratory courses have the same general structure.                      
              Students work together in small groups to conduct a series of                  
              psychological experiments. As the course progresses, students                  
              take progressively more responsibility for the design of their                 
              experiments. The course concludes with students conducting an                  
              extended experimental project of their own design. Each of the                 
              three courses is focusing on a separate content area: one on                   
              memory, learning, and reasoning, one on attention and                          
              performance, and one on perception and psychophysics. In                       
              addition to teaching general laboratory techniques, a goal of                  
              these courses is to introduce students to the use of computers                 
              in modern research and data analysis. The ability to use                       
              computers to organize and analyze information is a necessary                   
              skill for many of today's professional jobs; therefore, it is                  
              an important part of the teaching mission of a university to                   
              acquaint students with the techniques available on personal                    
              workstations. For students who go in science, these courses are                
              teaching students how to use of computers for data acquisition                 
              and analysis.
