Title       : Montana Research Infrastructure Enhancement Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9350546

Award Number: 9350546
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7391000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Strobel   (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mont Univ Sys Office
	      307 Montana Hall
	      Helena, MT  596014132    406/444-6570

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              93-50546  Strobel  Montana Research Infrastructure Enhancement Program  The
              State of Montana has initiated a statewide plan to improve the quality and
              effectiveness of  its science and technology infrastructure.  In a series of
              statewide meetings, involving hundreds  of volunteers from the University
              System, the State, and Montana science and technology  businesses, the State
              produced the Montana Science and Technology Policy and Plan which was  followed
              by a detailed Action Agenda.  This Plan and Action Agenda form the basis for
              this  proposal to NSF EPSCoR.    Montana proposes to support research, human
              resource development, and technology transfer  activities to improve the
              state's research infrastructure and competitiveness.  Because  biotechnology
              infrastructure and human resource development are high priorities in the State 
              Plan, four specific research teams in biotechnology will be supported (peptide
              receptors, plant  biotechnology, microbial surface interactions, and
              environmentally influenced mutagenesis) and  the Montana Biotechnology Center
              will be expanded to coordinate and promote biotechnology  research statewide. 
              Montana will also support teams of researchers in optical science/laser 
              technology and non-linear science (mathematics), and an individual from a group
              under-  represented in science, engineering and mathematics.  All projects
              included in this proposal have  been extensively peer reviewed by an external
              mail review and state panel system.    A Science Enhancement Program (SEP) will
              be established to fund activities statewide which  can contribute to the
              overall goals of the State Plan and Action Agenda.  Start-up grants,  research
              opportunity awards, visiting scientists, technicians, graduate students,
              travel, scientific  conferences, technology transfer activities, and public
              education will be supported through the  SEP on a competitive basis.    All
              EPSCoR-supported activities will be coordinated and integrated with other NSF
              initiatives  in Montana, including the En gineering Research Center (ERC), the
              Systematic Initiative in  Mathematics and Science (SIMMS), and the Alliance of
              States Supporting Indians in Science and  Technology (ASSIST), and other EPSCoR
              agency programs where appropriate.  Interaction and  collaboration with
              industry will be encouraged, and an aggressive education and information 
              campaign will be supported to keep Montanans informed about the importance of
              science and  technology in the state.  The State of Montana has pledged a
              dollar-for-dollar match for this  proposal to NSF.    The NSF EPSCoR program
              will result in the development of two sustainable Montana Research  Centers (in
              biotechnology and advanced materials) and in measurable improvements in the 
              number and quality of competitive research programs statewide.  As a result,
              Montana will  attract higher quality graduate students, post-doctoral
              researchers, and new faculty, and will be  viewed, within and without of the
              state, as a significant contributor to the nation's science and  technology
              goals for the 21st century.
