Title       : Comparative Studies of Floral Genes in Paleoherbs and Gnetales (Biological
               Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1996   
File        : a9350106

Award Number: 9350106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Zimmer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,1119,9225,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Zimmer's research will highlight benefits of combining                     
              comparative molecular and classical approaches to the investigation            
              of major biological questions.  In Meyerowitz' laboratory at the               
              California Institute of Technology she will isolate and                        
              characterize "floral genes" from planet species identified by                  
              phylogentic analyses of morphological and DNA characters as                    
              important to understanding angiosperm origins.  These include the              
              gymnosperm Gnetales and paleoherbaceous angiosperms (water lies,               
              monocots and Piperales).  Heterologous gene isolation strategies,              
              successful for isolating homologues from divergent dicots and                  
              monocots, will be used to obtain "similogues" from Gnetales and                
              paleoherbs.  Expression studies on developing reproductive                     
              materials, combined with phylogentic analyses of coding sequences,             
              will then be performed to determine molecular homologies for each              
              key gene or class of genes.  Among hypotheses to be tested are                 
              homology of Gnetalean reproductive structures will specific                    
              angiosperm whorls and the history underlying perianth absence in               
              Piperales.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  teaching              
              undergraduate and graduate seminar courses and sponsorship of                  
              visiting speakers.  Speakers will interact formally and informally             
              with students and faculty.  Invitees include researchers using                 
              interdisciplinary approaches to various biological questions and               
              professionals in the fields of science education and science                   
              writing.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
