Title       : Public Views of Business and Corporate Responsibility (Law & Social Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9350498

Award Number: 9350498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95494              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie P. Hans   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 1372,9225,
Abstract    :
              Despite increasing liability for businesses and corporations in                
              contemporary society, very little is known about how the public                
              conceptualizes and judges corporate wrongdoing.  In prior work, Dr.            
              Hans used three different methodological approaches to provide                 
              converging evidence about lay views of the moral and legal                     
              responsibility of businesses and corporations, including juror                 
              interviews, experiments, and a public opinion survey.  In this                 
              project, she will undertake additional work to elaborate and                   
              integrate the research findings more fully and to place them within            
              a broader framework of scholarship on the relationship between law             
              and business.  A resulting monograph will provide a unique and                 
              important portrayal of how the public views the ethical and legal              
              responsibilities of business.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include: co-teaching            
              an undergraduate course entitled "Corporate Responsibility and                 
              Ethics;" providing guest lectures to both undergraduate and                    
              graduate students in other Legal Studies courses; and holding                  
              special sessions for women students on careers in science.                     
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is valuable              
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
