Title       : Teaching with Combinatorica and Semantica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1993      
File        : a9350967

Award Number: 9350967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51027              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven S. Skiena skiena@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              The Computer Science and Linguistics departments at Stony Brook                
              have been drawn together by a common situation. At present,                    
              both departments are pursuing undergraduate science and                        
              mathematics projects that involve the creation and development                 
              of innovative educational software and curricula.The project                   
              emphasizes the experimental nature of computer science and                     
              linguistics. It builds on the software developed by the PIs                    
              Combinatorica, developed by Steven Skiena, has become the most                 
              widely used combinatorial computing environment for research                   
              and education. The system is implemented in Mathematica, and                   
              comprises over 230 functions for combinatorics and graph                       
              theory. In 1991, Combinatorica received an EDUCOM Higher                       
              Education Software Award for Distinguished Mathematics                         
              Software, and has been used at over 200 educational                            
              institutions around the world. Semantica is an interactive                     
              workbook for linguistic semantics currently under development                  
              by Richard K. Larson (Dept. of Linguistics) and David S. Warren                
              (Dept. of Computer Science), through a three-year grant from                   
              the National Science Foundation's Course and Curriculum                        
              Development program. Based on a Prolog computing engine, and                   
              with extensive visual and natural language support, Semantica                  
              will form the basis of an undergraduate course in linguistic                   
              semantics.Exposing students to a tool like Combinatorica                       
              encourages viewing computer science as an experimental                         
              discipline. By observing phenomenon, such as combinatorial                     
              explosion, that ?students! ... hear discussed in class, they                   
              will gain a deeper appreciation for how the theory arises from                 
              practice.  Using Syntactica, students will be able to directly                 
              create, observe and experiment with the formal rules governing                 
              well-formedness of linguistic expressions. The interactive,                    
              hands-on manipulation of rule systems will strongly reinforce                  
              the experimental nature of the linguistics enterprise, and the                 
              scientific chanracter of its results.
