Title       : SSC: Camp Planet Earth: A Summer Environmental Science Academy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9350572

Award Number: 9350572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karon A. Sturdivant   (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan B. Valdes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney M. Paris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Giardino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1546      SUMMER SCIENCE CAMPS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9247,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SSC-9350572  Texas A&M Research Fdnt.  Collete Station, TX  Sturdivant, Karon,
              Giardino, John, Valdes, Juan and Paris, Rodney     The goal of the Texas A&M
              University Camp Planet Earth:  Summer  Environmental Science Camp is to
              increase the number of African  American, hispanic, and Native American
              students from  educationally, disadvantaged backgrounds who succeed in college 
              preparatory courses in mathematics and science during their high  school years
              and then to enter these disciplines of study at the  college level.
              Participants will work in a stimulating, non-  threatening educational
              environment with professors as mentors and  Texas A&M University graduate
              students and selected former Camp  Planet Earth Students serving as mentors and
              peer role modes.   Through a variety of instructional activities at Texas A&M 
              University and the actual field experience, participants will  obtain knowledge
              and skills related to the scientific investigation  of the environment of
              Planet Earth; develop a strong interest in  pursuing careers in science and
              increase their knowledge of the  educational preparation required for such
              careers; develop academic  skills for their high school studies through
              sessions which focus  on strengthening their skills in reading, writing, and 
              communications with particular emphasis on helping students develop  good study
              skills for mathematics and science courses; and develop  an increased level of
              pride and appreciation in their ethnicities  and cultural sensitivity to other
              ethnic groups.    Environmental science has been selected as the focus for the
              Camp  because it integrates a number of scientific disciplines: geology, 
              meteorology, biology, chemistry, geography, physics, engineering,  and
              mathematics.  This interdisciplinary approach is based on the  strong belief
              that the environment can best be understood by the  application of general
              systems theory to planetary processes.  The  approach requires that Camp
              participants consider the planet from  a holistic point o f view and emphasizes
              the idea of linkages  between the subsystems of the earth as well as the
              various  components and elements of the subsystems.    The four week-long Camp
              Planet Earth will convene on the Texas A&M  campus in College Station.  After
              two weeks of classroom  instruction, the participants, camp faculty and staff
              will travel  to the program's field camp in Alamosa, Colorado.  The camp will
              be  a combination of an academic experience and an "outward-bound"  adventure.
