Title       : CAO Special Project - Mathematics/Science/Technology Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9350534

Award Number: 9350534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Madeleine J. Long                       
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maurice R. Sykes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DC Public Schools
	      
	      Washington, DC  20001    /   -

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Program Summary:  The District of Columbia Public Schools will                 
              mount a comprehensive five-year initiative for systemic reform                 
              of mathematics, science, and technology education in                           
              partnership with key scientific institutions of the nation's                   
              capital.  This initiative will create the curricular and                       
              technological infrastructure to carry the school system into                   
              the twenty-first century.  The effort focuses on improved                      
              instruction based upon a new curriculum, improved methods of                   
              content presentation, and enhanced opportunities for both                      
              students and teachers and improved school system functioning                   
              through improved accountability systems, restructured staffing                 
              patterns and shared decision-making and governance structures                  
              at the local school.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The District of Columbia Public Schools requests $18,208,995                   
              from the National Science Foundation to mount this five-year                   
              initiative.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Program Highlights:  After establishing baseline data on the                   
              current condition of mathematics and science education in the                  
              school district, DCPS will:                                                    
                                                                                             
                   o    Develop Mathematics/Science/Technology                               
                        Curriculum Framework;                                                
                   o    Select Mathematics/Science/Technology                                
                        Fellows to provide instructional                                     
                        leadership;                                                          
                   o    Establish Instructional Support Teams to                             
                        provide on site staff development and                                
                        classroom assistance;                                                
                   o    Train all teachers (K-8) in content and                              
                        pedagogy in three cycles to implement the                            
                        National Council of Teachers of                                      
                        Mathematics Standards and the emerging                               
                        science standards;                                                   
                   o    Upgrade classroom learning environments;                             
                   o    Strengthen and expand partnerships with                              
                        community-based scientific institutions;                             
                   o    Provide internship/mentorship experiences                            
                        for teachers in the scientific community;                            
                        and                                                                  
                   o    Create two state-of-the-art                                          
                        Mathematics/Science/Technology Resource                              
                        Centers.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The Mathematics/Science/Technology Initiative will have a                      
              significant impact upon 58,297 students and 2,872 teachers in                  
              grades K-8.  Expected program outcomes include significantly                   
              increased levels of student achievement in the target                          
              disciplines; the creation of a community-wide infrastructure                   
              to support the learning and teaching of mathematics, science,                  
              and technology; and a broadened pipeline giving all children                   
              an opportunity to pursue advanced study in these fields.
