Title       : Integrated Lab-Lecture Introductory Physics with Computer Aids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1993      
File        : a9350662

Award Number: 9350662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44924              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Benenson benenson@nscl.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary D. Westfall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wolfgang W. Bauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              9350662  Benenson    The equipment is for an integrated lab-lecture elementary 
              physics course (enrollment about 180) for Lyman Briggs School,  which is a part
              of the College of Natural Science at Michigan  State University. The course
              serves as a model for future  physics courses with much larger enrollment in
              the Department  of Physics and Astronomy. The course contains several 
              innovative features: 1) full integration of lecture and  laboratory by team
              teaching with a single syllabus, 2) maximum  use of personal computers with
              existing general-use,  commercially available applications, 3) employment of
              video  frame grabbing techniques as a general purpose tool, and 4) an  open
              laboratory structure. The first three items have already  been tested on a
              limited basis. In the first lecture of the  week, the lecturer describes the
              laboratory experiment and does  one case. For example the lecturer could video
              tape an air  table with pucks colliding. By reading back the video frame by 
              frame, the lecturer can analyze the puck positions and show  that momentum and
              energy are conserved. Preliminary experiments  have been shown to give very
              good data. During the week, the  students schedule use of the camcorder and air
              table to do  their own experiment. After producing a few events on video  tape,
              the students then analyze them on the available  computers. For this purpose,
              plotting, spreadsheet, drawing,  etc. applications are available. The course
              begins by training  the students in the use of these programs. A very large
              amount  of extensive data is easily produced. Analysis on a spreadsheet 
              program and curve fitting with plotting packages produces very  professional
              looking results and introduces the students to the  modern ways in which
              research is actually performed. Data  reduction includes extensive error
              analysis via spreadsheets.     ***
