Title       : Composition Operators (Mathematics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9350040

Award Number: 9350040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73158              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl C. Cowen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara D. MacCluer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1260,9225,
Abstract    :
              Dr. MacCluer's research lies at the interface of operator theory               
              and function theory.  These problems involve aspects of the study              
              of composition operators on analytic function spaces, and include              
              a continuation of joint work with Carl Cowen (Purdue University) on            
              the question of identifying the spectrum of a composition operator             
              acting on a Hilbert space of analytic functions on the unit ball BN            
              of CN, N > 1.  A study of the phenomena of auotmorphism invariance             
              of such a Hilbert space, and its connection with composition                   
              operator questions will be pursued.  Additionally, there is                    
              continuing joint work with Thomas Kriete (University of Virginia)              
              on a study of composition operators on large weighted Bergman                  
              spaces on the disc, and a continuation of recent work of MacCluer              
              and others on basic properties of composition operators on spaces              
              of analytic functions on BN, N > 1.                                            
                                                                                             
              Interactive activities at the host institution include:  teaching              
              a one semester graduate level course based on a book being written             
              by Dr. MacCluer and Carl Cowen at Purdue-the host institution-on               
              composition operators.  Additionally, guest lectures in seminars at            
              Purdue and at the Wabash Modern Analysis Seminar will be given.                
              Dr. MacCluer will also seek out opportunities for interaction with             
              both undergraduate and graduate students in a variety of ways, both            
              informal and structured.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                  
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
