Title       : A Laboratory for Object-Oriented Software Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1993      
File        : a9350708

Award Number: 9350708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore J. Sjoerdsma                   
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35378              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Epstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              R Kline  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R Wyatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              9350708  Epstein                              The aim of the undergraduate
              computer science curriculum is to  provide quality, pre-professional training
              for students, most  of whom will become practitioners of computing.
              Improvements  have been made in the undergraduate curriculum that emphasize 
              the following aspects of software development: rigorous  thinking at a high
              level of abstraction, formal specifications  and design techniques, use of
              state-of-the-art software  development tools, and cooperative work. Many of
              these  objectives are encouraged by  migration away from the  procedural (or
              imperative) language paradigm embodied by Pascal  towards the object-oriented
              paradigm embodied in C++ and Common  Lisp (with CLOS). This project aims to
              establish an  undergraduate laboratory that supports these curriculum  changes.
                          This undergraduate laboratory  enables students to use object-- 
              oriented programming environments running on the UNIX platform.  These
              environments (specifically, ObjectCenter for C++, Allegro  Composer for CLOS
              and ObjectStore for object-oriented data-  bases) enable students to utilize
              the sort of visual software  engineering environments that are becoming
              commonplace in  industry. Such environments are especially important for 
              object-oriented systems development where developers are  confronted with the
              enormous complexity of large numbers of  related classes and interacting
              objects. This project also  encourages the use of modern telecommunications to
              support  cooperative work among students, electronic interaction between 
              students and faculty, and student access to the larger  intellectual community
              over newsgroups.
