Title       : A Modular Control Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1993        
File        : a9350907

Award Number: 9350907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin T. Hagan mhagan@master.ceat.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary E. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carl D. Latino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eduardo A. Misawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,
Abstract    :
              This project develops a new interdisciplinary control systems                  
              laboratory in the Schools of Electrical and Computer                           
              Engineering and Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at                        
              Oklahoma State University. This laboratory will consist of five                
              test benches networked to five workstations supporting real-                   
              time computer aided software engineering (CASE) tools. Each                    
              test bench will have an experimental control system and an                     
              embedded processor.                                                            
              There are several features of the proposed lab which make it                   
              very interesting and unique.                                                   
              . It is interdisciplinary, bringing together a significant                     
              amount of experience in control and real-time systems from two                 
              different departments.                                                         
              . The equipment in the lab will be state of the art, including                 
              real-time kernels, computer-aided-design tools, and networking.                
              An industrial advisory board will assist the principal                         
              investigators in insuring that the lab maintains high standards                
              in this area. We want the laboratory experience to be                          
              consistent with the latest industrial practice.                                
              . There will be a wide variety of challenging and visually                     
              interesting systems to be controlled. Five such systems will be                
              in the lab in any one semester, but new systems will be rotated                
              through the lab from one semester to the next.                                 
              . All of the systems to be controlled will be designed and                     
              built by student teams from the undergraduate capstone design                  
              course. There will be an on-going relationship between this lab                
              and the capstone design course, as new systems will be created                 
              each semester for the foreseeable future. A test of this                       
              concept was conducted last semester, when a very successful                    
              system was created by a capstone design team.                                  
              The main idea will be to get students excited about the design                 
              of control systems by giving them interesting and challenging                  
              problems to solve, with the latest technology equipment.
