Title       : Pathways to Self-Assembly of Ultra-Narrow Size Distributions of Heteroepitaxial
               Semiconductor Quantum Dots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2002     
File        : a0196018

Award Number: 0196018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273520             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff S. Drucker jeff.drucker@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9804310  Drucker    This project addresses self-assembly of heteroepitaxial 
              semiconductor coherent island quantum dots. The approach is to  study atomistic
              mechanisms of self-assembly in the Ge/Si(100)  system; since, although
              Ge/Si(100) is the simplest system for  which self-assembly has been observed,
              it retains much of the  self-assembly related behavior observed in more complex
              alloy  semiconductor systems such as SiGe/Si, InGaAs/GaAs. A variety of  in and
              ex situ microscopies (scanning tunneling, atomic force and  scanning and
              transmission electron microscopies) will be employed  to characterize ensembles
              of self-assembled quantum dots (SAQD)  formed using molecular beam epitaxy
              (MBE) and chemical vapor  deposition (CVD). The phase-space of experimentally
              accessible  parameters; substrate temperature, deposition rate, total  coverage
              and postgrowth annealing, will be systematically  investigated in order to
              identify pathways to obtaining desired  size and shape uniformity throughout
              the ensemble of SAQD. A  primary goal is to obtain this uniformity while
              retaining the  flexibility for varying the mean radius of the dot size 
              distribution and the areal density of the dots from sample to  sample. The
              observed morphology of the Ge/Si(100) SAQD will be  correlated with their
              optical properties using photoluminescence  spectroscopy. The experimental
              investigations will be  complemented by further development of a model of
              microstructural  evolution in strained island systems. This model incorporates
              the  elastic energy of coherent islands and a diffusion bias away from 
              strained islands which increases with island size. Further  insight into the
              self-assembly process will be gained through  kinetic Monte Carlo simulations
              of strained island growth.  %%%  The project addresses basic research issues in
              a topical area of  materials science having high technological relevance. The 
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a  fundamental
              level to important aspects of electroni c/photonic  devices.  Experimental
              tools are now available to allow atomic  level observation of elementary
              processes which when better  understood will allow advances in both fundamental
              science and  technology. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the 
              research is expected to contribute to improving the performance  and stability
              of advanced devices and circuits by providing a  fundamental understanding and
              a basis for designing and producing  improved materials, and materials
              combinations.  An important  feature of the program is the integration of
              research and  education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
               technologically significant area.  ***
