Title       : CRB: Experimental Tests of Captive Breeding Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a0196101

Award Number: 0196101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa M. Meffert lmeffert@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Meffert   9726667    The research will use a model experimental system to
              simulate the captive management of an endangered species and its subsequent
              reintroduction into the wild. Standard captive breeding programs for endangered
              species focus on maximizing genetic diversity with the intention to safeguard
              the ability to adapt to the unpredictable conditions of the wild. However, some
              studies suggest that alternative schemes to select against deleterious genes
              might be more prudent. Anecdotal evidence from actual captive breeding projects
              supports both sides of this debate, but a comprehensive evaluation is not
              feasible on a true endangered species. Specifically, controlled comparisons of
              the contrasting breeding schemes cannot be performed on remnant populations,
              and long generation lengths obviate long-term studies. Consequently,
              irreversible decisions are being made in efforts to restore endangered species
              even though critical examinations of how populations recover from
              near-extinctions are lacking. This research will take advantage of the
              amenability of the housefly experimental system for large-scale tests of the
              long-term effects of reduced population size. Through a collaboration with the
              conservation biology program at the Houston Zoological Gardens, the experiment
              will incorporate fertility constraints and captive breeding designs that are
              realistic for real-life efforts to save endangered species. The experiment has
              three phases: (1) over the course of ten generations, replicate housefly
              populations will undergo continual reductions in population size to the point
              of imminent extinction, (2) each resultant population will then be subjected to
              eight generations of one of the two contrasting captive breeding designs
              (maximizing genetic diversity versus selecting against deleterious genes), and
              (3) over the course of the next eight generations, the populations will be
              exposed to the environmental stress of unpredictable temperature. Reproductive
              health and genetic diversity will be asses sed throughout the experiment. This
              three-year project, spanning 26 generations, will thus obtain data that would
              take decades or even centuries to glean from actual captive breeding projects. 
                Research in conservation biology applies broadly to understanding the
              consequences of reduced population size. Many natural populations often undergo
              cycles of population-crash and rebound, independent of human influences.
              Rampant invasions by agricultural pests also attest to the ability to
              spontaneously recover from low population size. Experiments on model systems
              have proven to be a fertile methodology for detailing the genetic complexities
              of near-extinctions. However, these same studies have implied that the
              conventional restoration strategies for present-day endangered species are too
              simplistic and possibly even counter-productive. This research has unique
              potential to explain how populations in captivity, agriculture, and nature
              escape near-extinctions.
