Title       : Logical and Stochastic Approaches to Mismatch Resolution in Machine Translation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2001       
File        : a0196352

Award Number: 0196352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean M. Gawron   (Principal Investigator current)
              Megumi Kameyama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A major bottleneck in present-day machine translation (MT) is identifying
              appropriate approximations when no exact translation exists between the source
              and target languages.  An MT system must resolve mismatches either by
              incorporating implicit information from context or leaving out some information
              in the source text.  A prototype MT system is implemented, incorporating the
              usual MT steps, analysis (analyzing English sources into an English-oriented
              semantic representation), transfer (transferring the English-oriented semantics
              into a Japanese-oriented semantics), and generation (building Japanese targets
              from the transferred semantics), and adding a novel Mismatch Resolution Module
              (MRM) called when generation fails.  In this architecture, both analysis and
              generation modules are purely monolingual, and transfer is simplistic,
              incorporating minimal context information, and the bulk of mismatch resolution
              and disambiguation is done in the generation-MRM loop, where the MRM offers
              solutions to the problems encountered by generation. Two kinds of MRMs are
              explored, logical and statistical, with the design goal of a single MRM
              combining the advantages of both approaches.  Translations are evaluated by
              monolingual English speakers applying evaluation measures modeled on those of
              the DARPA MT program.  The focus is on translating the Japanese joint venture
              business articles in the MUC-5 corpus into English.  This project attacks the
              crucial mismatch resolution problem with a novel architecture, logical and
              statistical techniques, and on-line text resources.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
