Title       : Gynoecial Diversification in Saxifragales: Clarifying the Evolution of Epigyny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0196379

Award Number: 0196379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 16,  2001  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas E. Soltis dsoltis@botany.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry D. Hufford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9726225  Soltis    GYNOECIAL DIVERSIFICATION IN SAXIFRAGALES:  CLARIFYING THE
              EVOLUTION OF EPIGYNY    A key manner in which the architecture of flowers
              varies is by shifting the position at which the ovary is inserted relative to
              the perianth and stamens.  A superior ovary is inserted above the perianth and
              stamens, and an inferior ovary is inserted such that the perianth and stamens
              are positioned along its length.  Inferior ovaries vary depending upon the
              point at which the perianth and stamens are inserted along the ovary. Ovary
              insertion is highly labile in the Saxifragales, a monophyletic order of
              flowering plants.  In the Saxifragales, these variations in ovary insertion
              impact pollinator interactions with flowers; hence, they are significant in
              reproductive ecology and the origin of species.  Species of Saxifragales
              display a range of ovary insertions, ranging from superior ovaries through
              various forms of inferior ovaries.  Traditional dogma indicates that ovary
              evolution proceeds from superior to inferior, but our preliminary data show
              that this is not possible among Saxifragales.  Indeed our preliminary data show
              that some Saxifragales reported to have superior ovaries actually have a
              developmental ground plan associated with inferior ovaries.  We describe these
              as superior mimics and our research aims to show how developmental patterns
              have evolved to create not only these superior mimics, but also a diverse array
              of ovary insertions among Saxifragales.  We are particularly interested in how
              shifts in proportioned growth between different regions of flowers are a factor
              in creating an array of ovary insertions.  To understand how developmental
              patterns evolve to create these architectural variations, we will map
              developmental information on phylogenetic reconstructions based on DNA
              sequences.
