Title       : The Role of LEAFY in the Evolution of Rosette-Flowering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0196403

Award Number: 0196403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130155             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Baum dbaum@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0078161
Baum 

Plant species differ in the manner in which they bear their
              flowers.  The aim of this work is to elucidate how such differences might arise
              through the modification of gene activity and function.  The strategy is to
              compare the genetic model system, Arabidopsis thaliana, with some wild
              relatives (Jonopsidium acaule, Leavenworthia alabamica and Idahoa scapigera)
              that differ in the manner in which flowers are produced.  Whereas Arabidopsis
              produces flowers on an elongated, leafless inflorescence, the other three are
              "rosette-flowering," producing flowering from the axils of rosette leaves. 
              Phylogenetic data show that rosette-flowering evolved three times independently
              from inflorescence-flowering ancestors.  Based on information from Arabidopsis
              and prior work on Jonopsidium it is likely that the difference in flower
              production reflects changes in the regulation of the flower meristem identity
              gene, LEAFY (LFY).  The aim of this study is to test this hypothesis by (1)
              characterizing LFY expression in Idahoa and Leavenworthia and (2) by cloning
              LFY homologs (with intact promoters) from the rosette-flowering taxa and the
              introducing those genes into Arabidopsis.  If Arabidopsis plants containing
              exogenous LFY show modified LFY expression this will suggest evolution in the
              LFY promoter.  Additionally, If transgenes cause partial or complete conversion
              to rosette-flowering the most likely explanation is that changes at the LFY
              locus contributed to the evolution of rosette-flowering.  The study will,
              therefore, shed light on the role of LFY in the evolution of flowering
              morphology, and will serve to clarify a general approach that can be used to
              study the genetic basis of morphological and developmental evolution

