Title       : STTR Phase I: A New Device for Quantitative Determination of Trace Gas Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2001       
File        : a0196320

Award Number: 0196320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wen-Bin Yan wbyan@meeco.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tiger Optics
	      250 Titus Avenue
	      Warrington, PA  189762426    215/343-6600

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project is addresses the
              feasibility of an ultrasensitive device for quantitative determination of trace
              gas species. It is based on fundamen-tal new design for cavity ring down
              spectroscopy (CRDS). Notably, present-day CRDS devices have limited spectral
              coverage; their mirror reflectivity is high for only a few percent of the
              design wavelength. The proposed device differs from conventional CRDS in that
              it is a broadband in-strument and useful throughout the UV to IR spectral
              region
for multi-species detection. In addi-tion, the CRDS sensor offers fast
              response times, requires no calibration, and is compatible with corrosive
              gases. We will design and build the new CRDS device, and test its sensitivity
              and capa-bility over a wide range of wavelengths. If feasibility is proven, a
              very sensitive, broadband, trace gas analyzer will be developed.

The
              principal applications for CRDS include spectroscopy, environmental monitoring,
              chemical analysis, and advanced process control. CRDS sensors can serve as
              on-line process monitors that reduce waste and increase product quality and
              yield. They can be used as a laboratory instru-ments, as well as for moisture
              and other trace gas detection in corrosive gases. By the same to-ken, CRDS
              sensors work in hostile environments such as combustion and discharge
              processes. Other potential applications include medical diagnostics, like
              neo-natal or asthmatic breath analy-sis, and antiterrorism devices (both
              explosives and nerve gases).

