Title       : An Integrated Pose and Correspondence Approach to Non-rigid Image Matching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0196457

Award Number: 0196457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anand Rangarajan anand@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 

IIS-9906081
Rangarajan, Anand
Yale University
$76,326 - 12
              mos.

An Integrated Pose and Correspondence Approach to Non-rigid Image
              Matching

This is the first year funding of a three-year continuing award.
              The research is concerned with robust non-rigid image matching, which is
              required in a variety of domains. In robot vision, non-rigid matching is
              applied to the tracking of deformable objects. In medical imaging, it is needed
              in the non-rigid registration of brain structures. In pattern recognition, it
              is useful in matching handwritten characters and fingerprint minutiae. Also,
              non-rigid matching distance measures can be applied to clustering image
              databases.  
This project is to validate and evaluate a new approach to
              non-rigid image matching in the domain of human brain mapping. The new approach
              is based on minimizing integrated pose and correspondence objective functions
              using deterministic annealing methods derived from statistical physics. The
              basic theme is to derive new distance
measures and algorithms for non-rigid
              matching by incorporating parameterized spline-based deformations into these
              objective functions. The non-rigid integrated pose and correspondence approach
              has a novel interpretation as weighted graph matching where the graphs are
              determined by the spline kernels. The graduated assignment algorithm,
              previously designed for general, inexact graph matching problems has been
              adapted to minimize these non-rigid matching objective functions. Here, an
              important task is the
non-rigid registration of cortical anatomical structures
              that have been extracted from different subjects' magnetic resonance brain
              images.

