Title       : Collaborative Research: Differentiated Product Oligopolies and the Antitrust
               Litigation Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0196486

Award Number: 0196486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41490              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bart J. Wilson bwilson3@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Increasingly, U.S. antitrust authorities evaluate horizontal mergers in
              terms of how proposed consolidations may affect the strategic situation in
              specific oligopoly models.  Most prominent is the analysis of horizontal
              mergers in markets where products are differentiated.  In such contexts
              Department of Justice (DOJ) staff have developed an Antitrust Litigation Model
              (ALM) merger simulation as a screening device to help determine when
              competitive problems might arise. The DOJ staff use the ALM to assess the
              effects of a merger in a two step process.  First, staff collect price and
              market share data, and estimate some demand parameters.  Second, these data are
              inserted into the model to generate imputed cost parameters and post-merger
              predictions.
     Despite the convenience of the ALM's predictions, a number
              of questions critical to the usefulness of this approach remain unanswered. 
              First, the relationship between price predictions generated under
              model-specific assumptions and outcomes in more general naturally occurring
              circumstances is not clear.  Second, even on the domain of the theory, the
              incentives that drive predicted unilateral effects are subtle and may have
              little explanatory power.  Third, the model is used to distinguish between
              relatively subtle differences in market outcomes.  Some information about the
              potential accuracy of pre-merger demand parameter estimates would thus be
              useful.
     Laboratory methods provide an ideal medium for examining these
              important questions.  In the laboratory the demand system, the nature of
              strategic interactions and the underlying equilibrium predictions can be
              specified a priori.  Thus, the relationship between predictions and outcomes
              can be examined explicitly.  This proposal describes three experiments designed
              to provide some insight into the importance of the assumptions underlying the
              ALM.
     First, suppose that the underlying demand system for a model is
              logit and that sellers are Bertrand competitors, the assumptions of the ALM. 
              An experiment conducted under these "best shot" circumstances could evaluate
              the correlation between actual and predicted prices and market shares, as well
              as the accuracy of the models' imputed cost measures.  Further, analysis of
              post-merger performance would allow examination of the capacity of theoretical
              comparative statics effects to predict behavioral outcomes
     Second,
              although a logit demand system offers analytic advantages, there is no a priori
              reason to believe that many natural demand systems are logit.  An experiment
              would examine the effects of the changes in the underlying demand system. 
              Starting with identical observable pre-merger information, we can evaluate the
              importance of the underlying demand specification on pre- and post-merger
              performance by shifting the demand system from logit to linear.
     A third
              experiment assesses the importance of assuming that sellers are Bertrand
              (quantity-setting) competitors.  Although economists typically assume that
              strategic interactions are Bertrand when products are differentiated, there is
              no good reason for supposing that this assumption reflects the nature of
              competition in natural contexts.  Holding the observable market information
              fixed, we can evaluate the importance of an assumption about the nature of
              strategic interactions.
