Title       : Hydrolic Cleavage of RNA by Metal Complexes; A Fundamental Study in Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a0196147

Award Number: 0196147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320700             (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. Bashkin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1504,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              James Bashkin
CHE-9802660

Title: Hydrolytic Cleavage of RNA by Metal
              Complexes; A Fundamental Study in Catalysis

Abstract

This Grant
              Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award in the
              Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program and the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
              (MPS/OMA) supports research on the mechanism of metal-catalyzed RNA cleavage by
              Dr. James K. Bashkin of the Chemistry Department, Washington University.  The
              destruction of RNA is a process of fundamental biochemical importance, and also
              has direct bearing on the development of new genomic-based drug strategies. 
              The destruction of RNA is accomplished in this proposal by inorganic catalysts
              that cleave RNA through transesterification of its phosphodiester backbone. 
              For example, appropriate catalysts are derived from Cu (II) terpyridine, as
              well as from other complexes of copper, zinc and the lanthanides.  Here the
              mechanism of RNA cleavage by all of these classes of catalyst will be studied
              using a new substrate containing a single RNA residue embedded in a DNA
              polymer.  The new substrate is called "embedded RNA", or embRNA.  The embRNA
              substrate maintains the biological relevance of RNA polymers but provides the
              simplicity and practicality inherent to RNA dimers.  EmbRNA furthermore allows
              highly specific features of RNA-metal binding to be assessed for their
              importance to the cleavage reaction.  These features include charge and
              hydrophobic effects, remote coordination of metals, and subtle two-metal
              mechanisms.  The work has relevance to development of pharmaceutical reagents
              to fight viral infections and cancer.  The approach is to gain an understanding
              of the reaction mechanism so that RNA cleavage can be optimized for use in
              chemotherapy.  The mechanistic information gained from this work will feed into
              separate projects that focus on the sequence-specific cleavage of RNA by
              ribozyme mimics.  Graduate students involved in the project will gain
              industrial experience through internships at Reliable Biopharmaceutical and
              Monsanto Company.  Reliable Biopharmaceutical will also provide resources and
              expertise on nucleoside analogues and testing of new ribozyme mimics.

