Title       : BIOCOMPLEXITY: Collaborative Research: Factors Affecting, and Impact of,
               Diazotrophic Microorganisms in the Western Equatorial Atlantic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a0196141

Award Number: 0196141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mercedes Pascual pascual@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1366,1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              BIOCOMPLEXITY: Collaborative Research: Factors affecting, and impact of,
              diazotrophic microorganisms in the western Equatorial Atlantic Ocean

	This
              biocomplexity research focuses on plankton dynamics in the western Equatorial
              Atlantic Ocean (WEQAT).  This is a complex and understudied ecosystem that has
              significant impacts on marine resources in the region as well as in downstream
              areas such as the Caribbean Sea. The study centers on diazotrophic (nitrogen
              fixing) microorganisms as keystone species. Geological, physical, biological,
              chemical and even social factors all have a major influence on population
              biology and activity of diazotrophs in the WEQAT. Diazotrophs in turn have a
              major impact on other phytoplankton and trophic levels through input of fixed
              nitrogen (N). The Amazon River affects the region physically by changing
              salinity and thereby water column stratification, and geochemically by
              introducing iron and silicate which can then biologically stimulate the growth
              of diatoms that contain the N2 fixing endosymbiont Richelia intracellularis.
              Furthermore, the area receives significant seasonal atmospheric inputs of iron
              in dust from the Sahel region of Africa, which can promote the growth of the
              important N2 fixing cyanobacterium Trichodesmium. This atmospheric iron source
              is directly deposited on the surface waters where biological activity is
              greatest. For Trichodesmium, the physical environment (e.g. high wind speed)
              can also inhibit activity and the formation of blooms. Diazotrophs may be
              affected by land use practices in the Amazon Basin and the African Sahel, and
              N2 fixed by marine plankton can affect humans by stimulating primary
              productivity and fishery yields.
	Using both remote sensing and shipboard
              measurements, scientists will examine the complex processes which structure
              these planktonic diazotroph populations, influence their importance in CO2 and
              N2 fixation, which, in turn, affect other planktonic processes. The seasonal
              and spatial relationships of Trichodesmium and Hemiaulus / Richelia
              associations will be examined with direct reference to the major routes of
              inputs of Fe and Si, and with regard to the physical environment. The group of
              collaborating scientists will examine the trophic structures associated with
              each diazotrophic community, including the vertical distribution of processes
              and associated autotrophic and heterotrophic plankton populations. These data
              will be used to develop and verify biogeochemical and trophodynamic models that
              incorporate the complex physical, chemical and biological interactions that
              characterize the WEQAT region. The models will, in turn, be used to examine the
              hypothesis that physical forcing, through its effect on the diazotrophic
              populations and the structure of the food web, influences N2 fixation and, in
              part, determines the high productivity of the WEQAT.
	The work uses a
              combination of both observations and models to address three fundamental issues
              in biocomplexity: 1) the relationship between ecosystem structure and function
              in a system that is both nonlinear and high-dimensional; 2) the response of a
              nonlinear ecosystem to environmental forcing; and 3) the relevant level of
              detail, including the resolution of physical space, that must be incorporated
              in nonlinear systems to capture the dynamics of a global ecosystem property
              (here, high productivity).  The research will significantly advance our
              understanding of the interaction between physical and biogeochemical processes
              in an important area the world's oceans, and identify how these interactions
              regulate variability in marine ecosystem productivity. 

