Title       : Global Expression Studies of the Arabidopsis Genome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0196098

Award Number: 0196098
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7600000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Ecker ecker@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9179,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The elucidation of the DNA sequence of the 130 Mb Arabidopsis genome by the end
              of the year 2000 is estimated to reveal the presence of approximately 25,000
              genes using various computational approaches. In order for this vast structural
              information to be most useful to plant biologists, another large-scale project
              is needed to characterize the expression patterns of the entire genome. This
              project will provide a framework for the identification of all the
              transcriptional units and the construction of full-length cDNAs for all the
              genes in the Arabidopsis genome. Such an endeavor will allow the precise
              determination of the molecular mass of each protein encoded by each
              transcriptional unit. In addition, this approach is much more cost effective
              than having different laboratories isolate and sequence individual cDNAs of
              interest. 

The central focus of this project is the development of molecular
              resources (infrastructure) for the entire plant biology community by utilizing
              emerging genomic technologies for understanding various aspects of plant growth
              and development. The project takes advantage of the rapid growth in Arabidopsis
              genomic sequence and the advent of new technologies to achieve this long term
              goal.

This award will support the following objectives: 

(1) Construction
              and development of a high density Affymetrix oligonucleotide chip that contains
              all the predicted genes from the Arabidopsis Genome Initiative. The chip will
              be updated annually until the entire genome sequence is available. 

(2) 
              Global expression studies for determining the expression pattern of all the
              Arabidopsis genes utilizing the Affymetrix chip and mRNAs isolated from ~100
              different treatment conditions of various tissues from dark and light grown
              plants. The chips will be available to the entire scientific community 

(3) 
              Isolation and sequencing of 8,000 full-length cDNAs. The completion of this
              goal will provide experimental annotation of 1/3 of all Arabidopsis genes and
              determine the accuracy of computational approaches currently utilized for gene
              prediction. The cDNAs will be useful tools for a variety of experimental
              purposes.

An important feature of this proposal is that all of the
              above-described materials will be made freely available to the plant biology
              community as soon as they are produced. These new resources will allow the
              advancement of plant biology and by extension, world agriculture and plant
              biotechnology.

