Title       : Acquisition of a Variable Temperature Four-Circle X-Ray Diffraction System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0196017

Award Number: 0196017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chang-Beom Eom eom@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Otto Z. Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Tsui  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen W. Teitsworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theda Daniels-Race  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1189,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9977614
Eom

This project will use support from the Major Research
              Instrumentation program to acquire a variable temperature four-circle x-ray
              diffraction system to be used as a shared facility within North Carolina
              Research Triangle area.  A versatile system that satisfies all of the
              experimental requirements has been identified. It consists of key components
              from three different vendors:  (1) an 18 kW rotating anode X-ray generator
              (Rigaku UltraX 18SFHB), (2) a four-circle goniometer (Huber 430-440-512.1) ,
              (3) graphite and Ge monochromators and He-filled beam path, detectors, optical
              table, radiation shield enclosure, electronics and control and analysis
              software (Blake Industries), (4) a low temperature (6.5- 350K) cryostat and
              compressor (APD cryogenics CSW-202G,), and (5) a high temperature reaction
              Chamber (RT - 900 C) (Enraf-Nonius). The instrument will be used to perform
              in-situ and ex-situ x-ray diffraction experiments, in conjunction with
              electrical and magnetic property measurements to study the crystal structure,
              three-dimensional strain states, defects, phase transition, morphology, and
              their roles in materials properties.  It will also be used to monitor
              solid-solid and solid-gas reactions in-situ to determine the conditions and
              mechanisms by which the reactions take place.  This will facilitate synthesis
              and fabrication of novel solid state materials and investigation of their
              structures and electrical and magnetic properties.  This instrument will
              enhance the research capabilities of five members from three departments at
              Duke University and the University of North Carolina (UNC), as well as
              significantly enhancing the educational mission of the Materials Science
              Programs at Duke and UNC.  The variable temperature four-circle x-ray
              diffraction system is an ideal instrument for a laboratory component of 
              courses in X-ray diffraction and analysis and will be used for training
              students at Duke and UNC in state-of-art materials characterizations.   It will
              also provide an outreach mission to other research institutes and industries in
              the North Carolina Research Triangle Area. 

Nanostructured and thin film
              novel materials are of national interest because of their applicability to a
              wide variety of electronic, magnetic and optical devices.  Structural analysis
              of materials on an atomic scale is very important for understanding material
              properties.  Furthermore, it greatly facilitates the synthesis of new materials
              and the study of fundamental physical phenomena.  The variable temperature
              four-circle x-ray diffraction system that will be acquired using Major Research
              Instrumentation program funds will enhance the research capabilities of
              researchers in the North Carolina Research Triangle Area, as well as provide a
              vehicle for training students in state-of-the-art materials characterization
              techniques. 


