Title       : Asymptotic Approximations in Semiparametric and Separable Nonparametric Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0196239

Award Number: 0196239
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157052             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oliver B. Linton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : London Sch Econ & Pol Sci
	      
	      London, UK  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730282  Linton    One of the areas in which econometrics has made great
              advances during the last fifteen years is semi-parametric estimation.  These
              new classes of estimators are able to efficiently estimate the parameters of a
              wide array of non-linear models, such as tobit and probit models, with only
              very minimal information about such things as the error generation process or
              the function form of any regression functions.   This grant renews support for
              research on a major problem with semi-parametric estimators.  The problem is
              that the first-order approximations to the asymptotic distributions of these
              estimators provide poor approximations to their sampling behavior for the
              sample sizes that are typical in applied economic research.  The previous grant
              developed more accurate formulas for the asymptotic distribution of a wide
              class of parametric and semi-parametric estimators and test statistics.  This
              project continues this work on: (1)semi-parametric instrumental variable
              estimators and test statistics; (2) semi-parametric binary choice models; (3)
              adaptive estimation of linear regression; and (4) specification tests of
              parametric null against non-parametric alternatives.  Computing these
              estimators typically requires selection of a smoothing parameter called the
              bandwidth.  The new expansions developed provide bandwidth selection methods
              that are second order optimal.      This grant also provides non-parametric
              methods that circumvent the curse of dimensionality and hence provide flexible
              but reliable methods.  The basic model is additive non-parametric regression
              for which a number of new methods have recently been proposed.  This grant
              develops a new method which seems to resolve most of the problems with previous
              methods.  In particular, it only involves one-dimensional smoothing operations
              and so is completely free from the curse of dimensionality.  At the same time
              it is efficient and computationally tractable.  Asymptotic normality has been
              established.  The practical performanc e of this method will be addressed.  The
              method will be extended to more general models that allow for some parametric
              components and to more general types of separability.  The project also
              investigators separability tests.      ??
