Title       : Boundary Value Problems for Stochastic Parabolic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a0196396

Award Number: 0196396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey V. Lototsky lototsky@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. Stroock  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9972016
Stroock

	In this research project, the investigator plans to study
              second-order stochastic parabolic equation in bounded domains.  The traditional
              approach, based on compatibility conditions, provides only partial results
              about solvability and regularity of the solutions of such equations and often
              excludes equations appearing in applications.  The investigator's goal is to
              establish solvability and regularity results for a wide class of linear and
              quasi-linear parabolic equations without using compatibility conditions.  To
              control the solution near the boundary of the region, special Sobolev-type
              spaces with weights are introduced.  These spaces can also be of independent
              interest in the classical theory of deterministic elliptic and parabolic
              equations.

	Many natural phenomena are modeled by equations with randomness.
               The random, or stochastic, component in the equation accounts for the
              uncertainties in the model.  Successful analysis of the real life models is
              impossible without a rigorous mathematical theory of these stochastic
              equations.  The aim of the proposed research is a comprehensive study of a
              major class of such equations using various probabilistic and analytical tools.
               Some of these tools have been developed by the investigator and his colleagues
              and successfully used to study the equation of optimal nonlinear filtering, the
              main equation used in target tracking and target recognition.  The results of
              the proposed research could be used to develop better navigation and air
              traffic control systems.


