Title       : RUI: Dynamic Interaction of Pitch and Loudness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0196178

Award Number: 0196178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 10,  2000   
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70023              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Neuhoff jneuhoff@wooster.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Wooster
	      
	      Wooster, OH  44691    216/263-2000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1096,9107,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In a natural listening environment many sounds exhibit a positive
correlation
              between changes in pitch and loudness.  As sounds get louder,
they tend to get
              higher in pitch.  Surprisingly, most previous research on
pitch and loudness
              perception has used static tones that remain constant in
both frequency and
              intensity.  This has yielded static structural models of
pitch and loudness
              perception that may not accurately reflect the perception
of pitch and
              loudness in a natural listening environment.  Recent work has
shown that under
              dynamic conditions, pitch and loudness interact in a way
that is opposite that
              predicted by these static models.  The current project
sets forth a
              theoretical framework in which it is proposed that the dynamic
perceptual
              interaction of pitch and loudness has evolved to take advantage
of the
              correlation between frequency and intensity change that occurs in a
natural
              listening environment.  Under various experimental conditions,
listeners will
              be presented with frequency- and amplitude-modulated sounds,
and in a variety
              of psychophysical experiments make perceptual judgments
about positively and
              negatively correlated changes in frequency and
intensity.  The findings will
              provide an empirically based, theoretical
account of dynamic pitch and
              loudness interaction, and provide some
preliminary information about the
              location of the mediating neural
mechanisms. The work has potential
              implications for the hearing impaired,
communications, auditory display, and
              sensory substitution systems for the
blind. 


