Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows/Presidential Early Career Awards for Scientists and
               Engineers (PFF/PECASE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0196162

Award Number: 0196162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weinan E weinan@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1076,1187,9161,9296,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9629133  E    This work is supported by a Presidential Early Career Award for
              Scientists   and Engineers.  The research component will focus on the
              understanding   and modeling of complex materials and complex fluids.  This
              includes   polymeric liquids (of which liquid crystal polymers are one
              example),   turbulent flows, and flux flows in type-II superconductors, etc. 
              The work   on liquid crystals and polymers includes two aspects: (1) the phase 
               separation process and (2) the hydrodynamics of liquid crystal polymers.   
              The main issues for the first problem are the dynamics and morphology for  
              polymerization driven phase transition and the interplay between phase  
              separation and orientational order.  For the second problem, the role of  
              defects in the hydrodynamics of large molecule liquid crystals is of interest. 
                The focus of the work on turbulent flows will be on turbulence models and  
              large eddy simulation.  The understanding of macroscopic instabilities of  
              flux fronts and flux flows in type-II semiconductors requires a macroscopic  
              theory of flux flows.  A macroscopic theory for thin films has been   developed
              by considering the hydrodynamics of interacting vortices in   combination with
              a novel interfacial boundary condition.  The approaches   to these three
              problems involve similar steps:  (1) establishing continuum   models under the
              guidelines of nonequilibrium thermodynamics, (2)   developing effective
              numerical methods, (3) using asymptotic analysis of   simplified situations to
              provide insight, and (4) identifying prototypical   problems for rigorous
              mathematical analysis.  The investigator has worked   toward enhancing the
              curriculum at his institution through the development   of special courses in
              computational incompressible fluid mechanics and   materials science and has
              been actively engaged in summer programs to   enhance interactions among
              different groups (university faculty, high school   teachers, students) in the
              mathematical sciences community.    The Presid ent Early Career Awards for
              Scientists and Engineers (PECASE)   were created to recognize demonstrated
              excellence and promise of future   success in scientific or engineering
              research, and the potential for eventual   leadership of the awardees in their
              respective fields.  These awards are   designed to produce a prominent cadre of
              scientists and engineers and to   encourage their continued development.
