Title       : Number Theory and Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  2001    
File        : a0196109

Award Number: 0196109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : June 1,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Gunnells   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns problems in number theory and algebraic
geometry in four
              specific areas.  First, in joint work with Avner Ash
and Mark McConnell,
              Gunnells is exploring conjectures in automorphic forms
by studying the action
              of the Hecke operators on the cohomology of
arithmetic groups in different
              contexts.  Second, jointly with Robert
Sczech, Gunnells is studying the
              connections between special values of
L-functions and group cocycles for the
              unimodular group.  Third,
jointly with Lev Borisov, Gunnells is investigating
              the construction
of modular forms using toric varieties.  Finally, jointly
              with Eric
Babson and Richard Scott, Gunnells is studying the geometry of
              certain
configuration varieties naturally arising in representation
              theory.

This proposal deals with number theory and algebraic geometry. 
              Number
theory is the study of the properties of the whole numbers and is
              the
oldest branch of mathematics.  Algebraic geometry studies
              geometric
figures that can be defined by the simplest of equations,
              namely
polynomials.  The questions and phenomena which arise from combining
              
these two subjects serve as driving forces in much of contemporary
              mathematics
research.  Moreover, the combination of these subjects has
              contributed many applications
in such diverse areas as codes and data
              transmission, robotics, and
theoretical computer science.
