Title       : Log Canonical and Rational Singularities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2000   
File        : a0196072

Award Number: 0196072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynne Walling                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandor J. Kovacs kovacs@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Sandor Kovacs
98 18357
 
      Professor Kovacs will study log
              canonical singularities with special regard to deformations, vanishing
              theorems, connections with Du Bois singularities, Kollar's conjecture, and
              cohomologically insignificant singularities.  He will try to establish the
              validity of the conjecture that non-isomorphic minimal models of an algebraic
              variety cannot be deformed into each other.  He will also consider
              generalizations of the relative de Rham complex similar to Du Bois' absolute
              complex in an attempt to build a relative de Rham cohomology theory for non
              smooth morphisms.

	This is a project in algebraic geometry.  In this
              important branch of modern mathematics, geometric objects like curves and
              surfaces are modeled using algebraic constructions.  The abstract nature of the
              now algebraic objects makes them easier for mathematicians to study. 
              Nevertheless, newly discovered properties of the algebraic models translate
              back to new properties of the geometric curves and surfaces.  Prof. Kovacs is
              particularly interested in singularities, places where the geometric objects
              sort of collapse on themselves.  He also hopes to establish the complete
              validity of an educated guess that says small geometric changes to certain
              important objects, algebraic varieties, cannot change the algebraic properties
              of the varieties.  As these powerful algebraic techniques are developed,  other
              scientists and mathematicians will have additional tools to use on their
              geometric problems. Already algebraic geometry has become an important tool in
              theoretical physics. 

