Title       : Hybrid FRP/Steel Strengthening of Unreinforced Masonry Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0196510

Award Number: 0196510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125742             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. R. Hamilton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Fiber reinforced polymers (FRP) have been examined as a convenient and
              cost-effective means of strengthening unreinforced masonry (URM) structures. 
              However, seismic design in the U.S. is based almost entirely on the assumption
              that the structural system provides a ductile failure mode.  One alternative is
              to combine the desirable traits of conventional steel systems with those of the
              new FRP systems.
The proposed research includes investigating and defining the
              failure modes associated with a combined FRP/Ductile connection at the pier
              interface.  Several connection methods are proposed for use with both concrete
              and clay masonry.  A predictive model based on experimental and analytical work
              for the pullout capacity of the ductile anchor will be developed.  A series of
              connection tests will be conducted on proposed techniques.  Furthermore, a
              series of sixteen pier tests are proposed with eight concrete masonry specimens
              and eight clay masonry specimens.  From the experimental work, a predictive
              analytical model for the in-plane strength and ductility of the hybrid
              FRP/Ductile connection will be developed.  A predictive model for in-plane
              shear strength of FRP strengthened piers will be defined.  This will include a
              review of existing experimental work and analytical modeling of various aspect
              ratios.


