Title       : CAREER: Analysis and Control of Areas Undergoing Change in the Value-Chain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0196513

Award Number: 0196513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tava M. Olsen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The value-chain encompasses the entire value creation process, which
              transforms material and information into product that satisfies customers'
              needs.  Value-chains across all industries are currently being revised and
              re-engineered.  This grant provides funding to take a closer look at the types
              of changes occurring in the value-chain, to analyze their relative importance,
              and to suggest successful methods for managing these changes.  In particular,
              it provides funding for three specific aspects of the
              value-chain:
vendor-managed and vendor-owned inventory systems; coordination
              in batch processing environments; and rationing in the value-chain.  This grant
              also provides funding for: (1) course and curriculum development to bring
              manufacturing issues into the classroom;  (2) increasing active learning in the
              classroom; (3) case study development; (4) programs to promote student
              mentoring; and (5) programs to promote student involvement in research.  Key to
              this research is interaction with real companies.  Working closely with
              industry will help to yield results that are practical and implementable. 
              Vendor-managed and vendor-owned inventory contracts are becoming increasingly
              common in industry; effective modeling will help them to be used efficiently
              and appropriately.  A comprehensive theory for coordinating batch production
              systems could save money both in production dollars spent and through improved
              supplier performance.  An assessment of the impact of rationing policies on the
              customer base has direct implications to the viability of retailers in the
              US.
     If successful, the results of this research will have significant
              academic contributions in the areas of queueing theory and stochastic
              scheduling.  The curriculum content and case studies mentioned above for
              courses on manufacturing systems and stochastic processes will be based on the
              research areas funded by this grant.  This will foster a synergy between the
              historically disparate educational and research components of academia. 
              Furthermore, courses on manufacturing systems and stochastic processes promote
              student interest in manufacturing and give students the analytic tools required
              to analyze such systems; hence, these courses strengthen the pool of talent
              devoted to improving this country is manufacturing base.

