Title       : Regulation of Hairy Expression in the Leg Imaginal Disc
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0196059

Award Number: 0196059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 21,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa V. Orenic torenic@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long term objective of the research is to understand the mechanisms that
              generate the spatial organization of the multiple cell types found within an
              organism.  This question will be addressed by utilizing the legs of the
              Drosophila melanogaster adult as a model system.  The epidermal structures of
              Drosophila adult legs exhibit a precise organization, the most notable feature
              of which are the rows of small bristles that alternate with bristleless
              cuticle.  This pattern is established in part through the function of the hairy
              (h) gene, which in pupal legs is expressed in four longitudinal stripes in
              regions corresponding to primordia of bristleless cuticle.  Two longitudinal
              stripes are expressed along the dorsal/ventral (D/V) axis (D/V-h stripes), and
              the other two traverse the anterior/posterior (A/P) axis (A/P-h stripes).  h
              patterns the leg bristle rows by regulating the periodic expression of the
              proneural gene achaete (ac).  In the pupal leg disc, a stripe of ac expression
              on either side of each h stripe defines the primordia of the leg bristle rows. 
              In the absence of h function, ac expression expands into the domains normally
              occupied by h, resulting in disorganized bristle rows in the adult.  Thus,
              proper regulation of h expression is fundamental to patterning of the leg
              bristle rows.  As such, study of the regulation of the spatial and temporal
              pattern of h and ac expression in the developing leg should provide insight
              into the mechanisms by which leg pattern is produced.
