Title       : PECASE: Investigating Biodiversity Cascades in an East African Savanna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0196177

Award Number: 0196177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 4,  2000    
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Felicia Keesing keesing@bard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bard College
	      
	      Annandale-On-Hudson, NY  12504    914/758-6822

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9874776
Keesing
Savannas cover 50% of the area of Africa and harbor a
              spectacular diversity of organisms. These savannas are dominated by the
              presence of both high density and high diversity of large mammals, particularly
              ungulates and carnivores. Consequently, the focus of most research on savanna
              community ecology has been centered on these conspicuous mammals. This emphasis
              has obscured interest in how the effects of these dominant organisms
              reverberate through their communities. This CAREER research project will
              investigate how the effects of ungulate biodiversity cascade through a savanna
              community, affecting the diversity and abundance of small mammals, vegetation
              and arthropods through disturbance and herbivory. This project will address
              both the cause and the consequences of changes in biodiversity within savanna
              ecosystems, a topic of great theoretical and empirical importance. This project
              will take advantage of an existing field enclosure experiment at the Mpala
              Research Centre in central Kenya. Specific goals of the research are to
              investigate (1) whether small mammals can compensate for herbivory by large
              mammals when the latter are excluded, (2) whether large ungulates increase
              small mammal diversity through disturbance and its effects on plants and
              arthropods, and (3) whether the local density of small mammals influences
              recruitment of woody vegetation. Research will be conducted by the PI and a
              number of undergraduate students from Siena College.
	Students participating
              in the project will also be involved in educational research, in cooperation
              with the Evaluation Consortium of the State University of New York in Albany.
              Educational research will determine the degree to which students' beliefs about
              the nature of scientific knowledge influence and are influenced by their
              participation in research. Thus, this project will integrate scientific
              research by the PI and student investigators on the causes and consequences of
              biodiversity in African savannas with educational research on how students
              learn about the process of science.

