Title       : Computational Studies of Collision-Induced Polymerization and Thin-Film Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a0196190

Award Number: 0196190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan B. Sinnott sinnott@mse.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and computational Chemistry Program is supporting   Professor
              Sinnott at the University of Kentucky.  This work is also   cofunded by funds
              from the Division of Materials Research.  This research   will investigate the
              mechanical and chemical processes which occur when   organic molecular clusters
              impact surfaces at hyperthermal (about 5-80   eV/molecule) and keV incident
              energies.  The approach will be molecular   dynamics simulations where the
              forces on the individual atoms in the   clusters and surfaces are obtained from
              many-body empirical potentials.    These results will be checked by repeating
              the smaller simulations using   tight-binding approximation methods and
              comparing to experiment.  This   study will provide information about the types
              of chemical reactions that   occur under the high pressure conditions of
              cluster-solid- surface   impacts, detail the mechanisms of these reactions,
              reveal the types and   yields of chemical products, and document any structural
              changes to the   surface.  They will also reveal how the chemical reactions
              depend on a   number of factors including surface reactivity and cluster
              molecular   species, size and incident kinetic energy.  Cluster-solid-surface
              collisions are one of the most interesting topics   in the area of
              particle-surface interactions.  Some of the possible   outcomes include
              chemical reactions within the cluster to make new   chemical products and the
              growth of thin coatings of the cluster material   on the surface.   However,
              there is much that is not known about the   chemistry that occurs during such
              collisions, especially those that   involve clusters of carbon and hydrogen,
              despite the scientific and   technological importance of hydrocarbon materials
              (such as petroleum   products and diamond).  This research will use
              computational simulations   to investigate the mechanical and chemical
              processes which occur when   these molecular clusters impact surfaces at speeds
              comparable to those   that occur during explosions and in interstellar space. 
              The results will   provide information about the types of chemical reactions
              that occur   under the high pressure conditions of cluster-solid-surface
              impacts and   reveal the variety and yields of chemical products.  They will
              also show   how the chemical reactions that take place vary with changes in the
                reaction conditions.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
