Title       : Tracing the Garnet Signature in MORB from Ultra-Slow Spreading Centers: A Lu-Hf
               Isotopic Study of the Southwest Indian Ridge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2000  
File        : a0196083

Award Number: 0196083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51901              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Janney   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The role of garnet remains a major unresolved question in the generation of
              mid-ocean ridge basalt (MORB).  Trace element abundances in MORB suggest that
              melting occurs in the presence of garnet at most mid-ocean ridges, but if
              melting does begin within the garnet stability field (>75 km depth) most
              melting models predict significantly more melt production than is needed to
              generate the 7 km thickness of typical oceanic crust.  This paradox is even
              more problematic at ultra-slow spreading ridges (<1 mm/y half-rate), as lavas
              from these ridges display the strongest garnet signatures found in MORB, yet
              the crust produced is significantly thinner than that generated at other
              mid-ocean ridges.  We intend to probe the origin of the garnet signature in the
              ultra-slow spreading Southwest Indian Ridge (SWIR) by conducting a Lu-Hf
              isotopic investigation of MORB from this ridge.  In particular we wish to test
              the hypothesis that the garnet signature may be due to the tapping of garnet
              pyroxenite veins in the upper mantle beneath the SWIR.  These pyroxenite veins
              may represent ancient unhomogenized continental or oceanic lithospheric
              materials that were introduced into the southwestern Indian Ocean mantle during
              the breakup of Gondwanaland, and may be responsible for large observed Sr, Nd
              and Pb isotopic anomalies.  The sensitivity of the Lu-Hf system to melting in
              the presence of garnet makes this isotope system ideal for testing the garnet
              pyroxenite hypothesis.


