Title       : 2-Deoxyglucose Kills Myxococcus Xanthus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a0196367

Award Number: 0196367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. Kent Peters                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 31,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. Youderian   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Hartzell  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Youderian
The predatory Gram-negative bacterium, Myxococcus xanthus, derives
              its metabolic energy primarily from the oxidation of amino acids. This species
              is the best-characterized representative of the Myxobacteria, the only group of
              bacteria that respond to starvation (for proteins) by undergoing a program of
              multicellular development. Previous studies suggested that M. xanthus does not
              have a "sweet tooth". That is, simple hexose sugars including glucose do not
              stimulate its growth, even on defined medium. However, M. xanthus is sensitive
              to the glucose analogue, 2-deoxyglucose (2dGIc). This antibiotic is toxic,
              because it is phosphorylated by hexokinase, the first enzyme in the primary
              glycolytic pathway for sugar catabolism present in most organisms that utilize
              glucose. The isolation and characterization of spontaneous mutants of M.
              xanthus resistant to 2dGIc shows that M. xanthus makes a hexokinase and must
              transport simple sugars. This hexokinase is unusual, because it is inhibited by
              the two essential hexosamine sugars glucosamine and N-acetylglucosamine.
              Another bacterial hexokinase, made by E. coil, is also inhibited by the same
              sugars. The three main goals of this research are: (1) to understand why these
              enzymes are sensitive to 2dGIc and inhibited by hexosamines; (2), to identify
              the precise target of 2dGIc-6-phosphate responsible for the toxicity of 2dGIc
              in most organisms; and (3) to understand the regulatory mechanism in this
              organism that governs the preference for amino acids over glucose. To
              accomplish the first task, the kinetics of substrate binding and utilization of
              these sugars by hexokinase will be examined using kinetic and mechanistic
              approaches. The hexokinase gene from M. xanthus will be cloned and sequenced,
              and both the M. xanthus and E. coil enzymes will be purified. Second, the
              recent discovery that the production of intracellular 2dGIc-6-phosphate results
              in the depletion of ATP in M. xanthus, as it does in mammalian cells, has led
              to the search for the critical enzyme involved in central carbon metabolism
              specifically inhibited by low concentrations of 2dGIc-6-phosphate, again using
              traditional biochemical tactics. Third, glucose catabolism in M. virescens,
              which oxidizes glucose readily, and in M. xanthus, which may not, will be
              compared.

Many living organisms, like humans, burn sugars for energy, but
              prefer a rich protein diet. The soil bacterium, Myxococcus xanthus, chooses a
              protein-rich diet ("steak") over a carbohydrate-rich diet ("potatoes") to an
              extreme, because sugar doesn't stimulate its growth. The goal of this research
              is to understand why some individual organisms have this kind of dietary
              preference. Biochemical studies show that the steak-loving bacterium M. xanthus
              can still taste sugars, because it is fooled by the sweet poison of
              2-deoxyglucose, which tastes like sweet glucose-rich Gatorade TM, but has the
              opposite effect. This poison, 2-deoxyglucose, has been known to be toxic to
              most living things for 50 years. No one really understands why, except for the
              finding that it drains ATP (energy) levels in many living cells, including M.
              xanthus.  M. xanthus will be used as a model organism to figure out why this
              poison is a poison, and, at the same time, gain fundamental insights at a basic
              chemical level about how organisms choose what to eat.


