Title       : (EGB) Development and Compilation of Geochemical Kinetic and Biochemical Data
               Base and Numerical Modeling of Reactive Transport in Subsurface Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2000  
File        : a0196048

Award Number: 0196048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288410             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gour-Tsyh Yeh gyeh@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1584      ENVIRO GEOCHEM AND BIOGEOCHEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1584,9189,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9708494  Yeh    Experimental investigations of biogeochemical processes must be
              transformed into quantitative data bases to further scientific advances.  While
              thermodynamic data bases can be found in many geochemical equilibrium models,
              biogeochemical kinetic data bases are meager.  Conceptual models derived from
              scientific understanding must be solidified with mathematically and
              computationally sound numerical models to include coupled biogeochemical
              reactions and hydrological and thermal transport for practical applications. 
              It is therefore, proposed to conduct research to:    develop a kinetic data
              base for better physical-biogeochemical coupling by synthesizing experimental
              data available in the literature to extract rate constant and reaction
              parameters.  make the kinetic data base freely on a web site as a forum for
              continuous compilation and refinement.  create efficient and robust numerical
              algorithms for solving nonlinear advective-dispersive-reaction transport
              equations, and    develop and verify a coupled model of hydrological, thermal, 
                             geochemical, biochemical processes, incorporating the numerical
              algorithms and kinetic data base.                                        The
              significance of this research is two fold.  First, it initiates development of
              geochemical kinetic rate constants and biochemical reaction parameters, which
              should become the forum for the continuous compilation of a data base.  Second,
              the numerical software will be instrumental in the identification of reaction
              paths and in the interpretation of biogeochemical and hydrological processes
              affecting the fate, mobility, treatability, and transport of wastes found in
              field sites.      This proposal was submitted in response to the Environmental
              Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry solicitation NSF-96-152, and is being funded
              jointly by the Divisions Earth Sciences and Mathematical Sciences.
