Title       : NER: Molecular Diode and Molecular Nonvolatile Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2001 
File        : a0196553

Award Number: 0196553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaewu Choi jchoi@ece.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 2878      SPECIAL PROJECTS - CCR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1676,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSAL NO.:  0102765
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  Choi, Jaewu
INSTITUTION NAME: 
              Louisiana State University & Agricultural and Mechanical College
TITLE:  NER:
              Molecular Diode and Molecular Nonvolatile Memory

The proposed research
              program addresses the challenges and opportunities
available with molecular
              diode and molecular nonvolatile memory. The proposed
molecular diode and
              molecular nonvolatile memory can be achieved with carbon
nanotubes
              functionality and heterostructure of carbon nanotubes with a
              ferroelectric
linear polymer.
The carbon nanotube, itself, has many
              functional properties, such as quasi-one
dimensionality, metal-semiconductor,
              mechanical stiffness, capillarity, high aspect ratio,
large surface area, and
              chemical stability. In application of these carbon nanotubes to the
electronic
              devices, one serious obstacle is handling the chiarlity, which plays
              an
important role in determining the metallic-semiconducting behavior of the
              carbon
nanotubes. The proposed research program allows us to overcome these
              difficulties by
utilizing the carbon nanotubes as a backbone for a diode and a
              sensor for a nonvolatile
memory.
First of all, the proposed molecular diode
              consists of the differentially doped
single carbon nanotube. This is based on
              our own research work on the electronic
structure study of the modified carbon
              nanotubes by ion-bombardments, alkali metal
doping, and atomic and molecular
              gas adsorption. These recent studies show that the
density of states near
              Fermi level, work function, and band gap of the carbon nanotubes
can be
              tunable. Therefore, it does not require any junction of two carbon nanotubes
              with
different chirality to make a molecular diode, which has been suggested
              in a theoretical
calculation by growth of a single carbon nanotube with
              different chiraity. To make a
diode from a single carbon nanotube in this
              proposed research program, the half of the
tube will be doped with p-type
              acceptor (like oxygen or fluorine) and the other half will
be doped with
              n-type donors (alkali metals) using screening doping.
Secondly, the proposed
              molecular nonvolatile memory is a heterostructure of a
carbon nanotube and a
              ferroelectric linear polymer with a permanent dipole moment. The
carbon
              nanotube has been studied as a gas sensor and a gas-storage. Adsorption of gas
              on
carbon nanotube induces the conductivity change and band gap opening. In
              this proposed
carbon nanotube-ferroelectric polymer heterostructure, we are
              going to detect the
conductivity change of the carbon nanotube due to the
              electric dipole reorientation of the
ferrolectric polymer by applying the
              normal TTL (transistor-tansistor logic) voltage.
Therefore, the carbon
              nanotube-ferroelectric polymer heterostructure is the combination
of the
              sensor and information storage. The interface between the carbon nanotube and
              the
ferroelectric polymer, PVDF, of the proposed heterostructure systems is
              changed from
the hydrogen or fluorine rich to the hydrogen and fluorine
              mixture across the
conformational switching from all trans to
              gauch-trans-gauch bar with variation of
temperature or applied voltage (a gate
              voltage). This is the working principle of the
proposed molecular nonvolatile
              memory.
Through this proposed program on molecular diode and molecular
              nonvolatile
memory, graduate and undergraduate students will be involved and
              trained in the cutting-
edge research area (an emerging area of nanoscale
              science and technology, in special
molecular electronics) of science and
              technology with advanced synchrotron and
microfabrication facilities.

