Title       : Duplicate Genes and Plant Phylogeny: Phytochromes and the Rooting of Seed
               Plants, Angiosperms, and Eudicots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a0196150

Award Number: 0196150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 17,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Pfister   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Donoghue  (Principal Investigator former)
              Sarah Mathews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Donoghue  DEB 9806937    Major evolutionary questions concerning the root of the
              phylogenetic tree of seed plants, of flowering plants, and a major lineage
              within flowering plants (the eudicots) have received considerable attention
              from evolutionary biologists, but have resisted convincing resolution.  New
              approaches are, therefore, needed.  The PIs propose a new strategy in which
              they will analyze a series of gene duplications in the phytochrome family of
              nuclear genes from members of each group to help solve this problem.  Duplicate
              gene rooting relies on simultaneous phylogenetic analysis of genes that
              resulted from a gene duplication event that occurred along the branch
              subtending the plant group of interest.  This procedure yields an unrooted gene
              network wherein two gene trees should be connected by a single branch, and the
              best rooted species tree is the one that is congruent with the two gene trees
              when the network is rooted along the connecting branch.  Phytochrome genes are
              particularly well-suited for this approach because major duplications in the
              gene family apparently have occurred along the branches leading to each of the
              three main plant groups that we are interested in.  Moreover, our preliminary
              analyses reveal a high level of agreement among duplicate gene trees, ample
              nucleotide variation, and considerable support for a number of critical
              branching events.  We therefore are confident that this approach will provide
              insight into early branching events for each of the phylogenies in question. 
              Additionally, these studies will elucidate the evolution of the phytochrome
              gene family in plants, and will highlight and elaborate the duplicate gene
              rooting procedure, which we hope will be of use in solving other difficult
              rooting problems.
