Title       : Mobility Tolerant Adaptive Multicast Protocols for Ad Hoc Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2001  
File        : a0196156

Award Number: 0196156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandeep Gupta sandeep.gupta@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pradip Srimani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Mobile ad hoc networks consisting of mobile hosts that communicate via
              wireless radio channels are being increasingly used for local area networks,
              law enforcement, military operations and myriad of other applications.  Most of
              these applications, if not all, involves sending messages from one host
              (source) to a specified group of hosts and there can be a large number of such
              groups in the network for diverse kinds of applications.  Multi-cast involves
              sending messages to a restricted group of processes and forms the basis for
              efficient implementation of group based applications on a distributed system. 
              Many protocols
for efficiently performing multi-cast in static networks are
              available while at this time, a number of critical technical issues in
              designing such protocols for ad hoc networks remain unresolved, including
              elegant solutions to issues of power limitations and high speed data, effective
              methods of assurance for losslessness of the messages during transition period
              due to host mobility and the ability to contain the effect of any topology
              change locally.  In mobile ad hoc networks the topology of the network changes
              with node movements, variations in the radio propagation conditions, and
              depletion of battery power of the nodes.  The rate of topological changes can
              be different at different times, as well as in different regions of the
              network.  The network can experience frequent network partitioning and may
              require reconfiguration of the partitioned subnetworks.
     The proposed
              research will take a combined theoretical and experimental approach and will
              apply this to emerging distributed applications.  In this proposal the
              researchers with combined expertise in the fields of group based communications
              in networks and stabilization of protocols in asynchronous distributed
              computing systems are proposing an innovative integrated research project in
              fault-tolerant multi-cast protocol design for mobile ad hoc networks.  The
              proposed design intends to demonstrate a variety of impressive benefits
              including:
  (1) The protocol will support mixed traffic of variable rates
              with the ability to adapt fast with ease to sudden changes in traffic via a
              dynamic link cost estimator (that depends on channel bandwidth,
              quality-of-service (QoS) to the applications, battery power of the hosts,
              etc.)
  (2) The protocol is self-stabilizing in that any topological change
              due to mobility of nodes will trigger the protocol and the optimal multicast
              tree will be for the new topology and quickly reconstructed.
  (3) The
              self-stabilizing protocols are augmented with features that guarantees that the
              service remains available while the multi-cast tree is being adapted to the new
              topology (i.e., multicast messages present in the system during the recovery
              period are not lost).
 (4) The self-stabilization features of the protocol are
              triggered in a controlled manner so as to not overwhelm the system in presence
              of high mobility by using efficient fault-containment strategies.
 (5)  The
              research intends to develop a new execution model for the self-stabilizing
              algorithms in a distributed system based on the real-life conditions of an ad
              hoc network as opposed to the traditional adversarial oracle model for such
              algorithms.  The researchers  expect that this will lead to the use of the
              concept of self-stabilization to solving other real life problems involving
              recovery from a transient behavior.
     Efficient solutions for performing
              multi-casting in mobile ad hoc networks with the above benefits will rely on
              what support underlying data link layer can provide and how the network layer
              multi-cast protocol can exploit these facilities to intelligently control the
              overheads while providing desirable QoS.  This proposal will take a synergistic
              approach in designing the multi-cast protocols so as to make them compatible
              with the underlying networking layers.  The developed protocols will be
              extensivaly evaluated through simulation.  Further a prototype protocol stack
              will be implemented on the top of IEEE 802.11 MAC layer to evaluate the
              improvement in QoS to distributed media distribution and collaboration
              applications.

