Title       : Collaborative Research: Effects of Herbivory and Stress on Seaweed Resource
               Acquisition, Allocation Patterns, and Fitness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2000  
File        : a0196076

Award Number: 0196076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268402             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Williams

	This research will investigate how an ecologically important
              intertidal fucoid alga (Fucus gardneri) allocates resources in response to
              variation in two key environmental variables, herbivory and desiccation stress
              (such as that experienced high in the intertidal zone). These variables are
              typically studied independently, yet it is their combined effect on seaweeds
              that must be important in nature. Algae must make "decisions" about how to
              allocate acquired energy to growth, reproduction, deterrency (e.g.,
              anti-herbivore chemicals), and other key life-history functions, particularly
              when stress reduces resource acquisition capacity. While resource allocation
              patterns are being investigated intensively in terrestrial plants, almost no
              comparable work exists for algae, despite their ease of manipulation,
              abundance, interesting phylogenetic contrast to vascular plants, and important
              roles in nearshore marine ecosystems. In addition, virtually nothing is known
              about the consequences of allocation patterns to seaweed fitness. Fitness here
              is represented as the finite rate of population growth. Linking physiology to
              fitness is critical because changes in growth, or even reproduction, may not
              translate to effects on seaweed populations.
	In this project, a simple model
              that balances resource acquisition will be developed first (as Net Primary
              Production) against all known major resource allocation sinks for fucoids
              (growth, reproduction, phlorotannins, storage, exudation, loss to herbivores).
              This model will provide a tool to compare the physiological response of Fucus
              to gradients in stress and herbivory in the field and when manipulated in
              mesocosms. The research will involve: 1) observations of field populations of
              fucoids to quantify variation in their allocation patterns across natural
              gradients in herbivory and stress; 2) physiological measurements in the
              laboratory of Net Primary Production (emersed and immersed) and the other terms
              of the model for field-grown thalli; 3) manipulation both in the field and in
              laboratory mesocosms of the key variables of stress (emersion time,
              desiccation) and herbivory where thalli will be raised to reproductive size
              under these conditions, and then their allocation patterns will be assessed;
              and 4) development of demographic models to estimate population growth rates
              from life-history transitions measured in thalli across an intertidal gradient
              in stress and herbivory. Preliminary studies of the chemical composition and
              deterrency of extracts thought to contain anti-herbivore compounds will also be
              performed.
The approach is designed to evaluate several specific issues
              involving resource allocation in, and its consequences for, intertidal seaweed
              populations that have broader implications than the response of seaweeds to
              stress and herbivory. Although virtually all previous studies of resource
              allocation in organisms assume that resource acquisition is constant, this
              project will  test this assumption with measurements of Net Primary Production.
              Net Primary Production hypothetically varies across intertidal gradients in
              stressful conditions. If the assumption is false, allocation trade-off
              comparisons would not be valid without accounting for variation in resource
              acquisition. It is also hypothesized that there is a critical stress level
              above which reallocation among resource sinks is not possible. A physiological
              limit to the capacity to reallocate resources has rarely been addressed.
              Finally, allocation patterns demonstrated in adult organisms often are assumed
              to represent an important aspect of fitness or adaptedness. Yet, the adult
              phase might not be the most important life history stage in contributing to the
              population growth rate, and thus persistence of the populations.
              Sensitivity/elasticity analyses of the demographic models will determine which
              life history transitions (e.g., adult survival and reproduction versus
              recruitment) are most critical to the population growth rate, and thus, if
              allocation patterns within adults are important to 	seaweed population
              growth.	. -
	This research will provide the first integrated approach to
              questions of resource allocation in seaweeds, and will demonstrate to what
              extent environmental harshness (biotic or abiotic) is reflected in algal
              performance. In this way, it will provide a link between physical changes (such
              as might occur during global warming) and the ability of algal individuals to
              grow and reproduce and seaweed populations to persist.


