Title       : Development and Manufacturing of Highly Damage Resistant Fiber Glass Reinforced
               Window Panels for Buildings in Hurricane Prone Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a0196428

Award Number: 0196428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjeev K. Khanna khannas@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robb M. Winter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1056,1576,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
This project attempts to develop and manufacture a new fiber-glass reinforced
              transparent laminated glass window to alleviate the breakage of glass panels
              during windstorms.  The proposed glass panel will consist of an outer glass
              ply; a fiber glass reinforced plastic (polyester) ply, and an inner glass ply. 
              Subsequently the reinforced panels will be subjected to extensive testing and
              fracture analysis under simulated windstorm conditions.

The goal is to
              obtain maximum toughness and an optimized glass composite panel, which is
              highly damage resistant, lighter and cheaper than the present panels.  The
              study will also focus on the effect of the variations in the interface
              properties such as adhesion between layers and the interface fracture
              toughness.  Interfacial properties between glass and polyester matrix will be
              studied by carrying out fiber pull-out and nanohardness tests using an
              Interfacial Force Microscope (IFM), a scanning force microscope capable of
              performing nanomechanical measurements and imaging.  

Stress field equations
              will be developed for a crack in the istropic-anistropic bimaterial interface. 
              These stress field equations will be combined with the orthotropic stress optic
              law to analyze the isochromatic fringe patterns around an interface crack tip
              under mixed mode loading to determine the stress intensity factors.  

The
              body of knowledge generated and experience gained from this effort will be
              useful in developing other similar types of panels based on different composite
              systems in future.  Also other agencies involved in producing advanced
              materials for civil infrastructure and transport systems can benefit.  The
              successful implementation of the experimental and analytical approaches and
              fabrication of the proposed product (the composite-glass panel), will have a
              lasting effect on several industries and businesses, and contribute to the
              advancement of knowledge and science of composite materials.  
              

Collaboration with an industrial partner in Saint Louis has been
              established to facilitate the manufacturing and utilization of the glass
              reinforced panels.



