Title       : Effective Logistic Management: Integrated Scheduling of Job Processing and Job
               Delivery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0196536

Award Number: 0196536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi-Long Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research is to investigate an integrated scheduling model that schedules
              jointly the processing of jobs in the processing facility and the delivery of
              finished jobs to customers. The integration model is motivated by interactions
              with industry.  Although this model is very important in practice, almost no
              attention to date has been given in the literature to address such integration.
               The model involves two research fields: machine scheduling (for job
              processing) and vehicle routing (for job delivery).  Although each of the
              individual areas has been extensively studied in the last three decades, no
              research has investigated these two areas simultaneously. This research plan is
              to study various problems under the integration model.  The goal is to develop
              optimal and near optimal solution approaches to solve these problems with a
              large scale.  Solution approaches based on the column generation method,
              dynamic programming, and local search will be developed. Since the problems to
              be investigated are new, motivated by industry applications, and more general
              than traditional machine scheduling and vehicle routing problems, numerous
              original and publishable works can be derived from the project results.
              

From a theoretic point of view, this research will broaden the field of
              manufacturing and service logistics and scheduling, and contribute new
              techniques to the solution literature. From a practical point of view, the
              research results should have a great applicability in many manufacturing and
              service companies for maximizing customer satisfaction at minimal cost.  In
              addition, it will have a great impact on our educational programs. 

