Title       : Status Positions and Symmetry in Relational Systems: A Formal Model and
               Empirical Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0196331

Award Number: 0196331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87085              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger V. Gould roger.gould@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In studies of status rankings in knowledge-producing communities, organizations
              and task groups, there is strong evidence that subjective assessments are
              profoundly socially influenced. Social scientists working on these topics have
              frequently concluded that the uncertainties inherent in quality judgments gives
              rise to a self-reinforcing process in which groups adhere to, reproduce and
              thereby validate socially provided assessments. This project develops a formal
              model that reflects and elaborates this mechanism, capturing the tension
              between a hypothesized concern for relational symmetry and the self-reinforcing
              status mechanism referred to above. A key difference between the proposed model
              and those extant in the network literature is that it offers an explanatory
              account of observed structure (a distribution of status positions) without
              assuming a pre-existing underlying structure. Formalizing the model permits the
              derivation of specific hypotheses regarding the interaction between collective
              attributions of status, reciprocity considerations, and individual positions in
              the structure of status attributions. These will be tested using a data set
              consisting of the network of opinion citations of U.S. appellate court judges.
              Confirmation of the hypotheses would indicate that the development of
              judge-made law is governed in part by the structural logic of status
              attributions, not just by the inherent quality or importance of the opinions
              themselves.
