Title       : The Development of Language and Attention in Infancy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0196498

Award Number: 0196498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34873              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rochelle S. Newman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There has been a great deal of research investigating a phenomenon known as
              "motherese".  This refers to the fact that most adults adjust their speech when
              talking to an infant.  Research has shown that infants prefer listening to this
              type of speech, suggesting that its purpose may be to increase infant attention
              levels to speech, thus aiding language learning.  Another possibility is that
              these variations in speaking style serve to make speech more unique, and thus
              easier to separate from background speech.  In fact, many of the variations
              common in motherese are analogous to cues shown to be important in musical
              streaming.  Parents report that they frequently speak to their infants when
              other speech is occurring in the background, suggesting that there might be a
              need for such aids to streaming.   Although most adults do adjust their speech
              when speaking to an infant, they vary tremendously in the degree to which this
              occurs.  If these adjustments help infants to separate the speech of
              simultaneous talkers, then speakers who use more extreme versions of motherese
              should be easier to separate from adult-directed background speech than are
              other speakers.  We will present 20 adult listeners with the speech recordings
              used in our infant streaming experiment.  They will be asked to rate the extent
              to which these talkers exemplified motherese speech.  These ratings will then
              be used in a re-analysis of our infant studies, to determine whether those
              infants who listened to speakers with more exaggerated speech perform better at
              the streaming task than do those listening to less extreme versions of
              motherese speech.  The results of this study will contribute to the
              understanding of early language acquisition in children.  

