Title       : Accessible Space Physics: Developing a National High School Magnetometer Array
               (AFGE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a0196002

Award Number: 0196002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80510              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark B. Moldwin mmoldwin@igpp.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1078,9177,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9978314
Moldwin

The project offers schools across the country the
              opportunity to measure and experiment with Earth's natural environment, to
              contribute data to the nation's space weather program, and to have effective
              teaching tools to educate young scientists about the space environment.  It
              will develop a relatively inexpensive, robust, sensitive magnetometer in kit
              form that can be purchased and distributed to schools, assembled by students,
              then set up and used to take research-quality data.  Teachers will be trained
              in their operation and how to use them in classroom activities that demonstrate
              "space-weather."  The data will be transmitted through the GLOBE Program
              infrastructure, so that students can compare their local readings with those of
              students at other sites around the continent and can be used by university and
              other researchers to study geomagnetic Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF) waves.  Low-to
              mid-latitude magnetic pulsations provide important information about the solar
              wind-magnetosphere interaction and the dynamic coupling of the magnetosphere
              and ionosphere.  The project will train High School science teachers in the use
              of induction coil magnetometers, provide the basic space science content needed
              for the understanding of magnetic pulsation data in space physics research, and
              develop mentoring relationships between space physicists and local high school
              science teachers and their students.  These relationships will allow the
              magnetometer data to be fully utilized both scientifically as well as
              educationally.  The planned data-collection interval overlaps with the main
              data collection phase of ISTP/Solar Max, thus enhancing scientific
              collaborative opportunities.  This project directly impacts graduate,
              undergraduate, and pre-college education by providing High Schools with
              real-life space physics instrumentation and undergraduates and graduate
              student's ULF data for analysis.

