Title       : Attention and Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a0196094

Award Number: 0196094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 21,  2000    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon D. Logan gordon.logan@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project will develop and test a mathematical theory that describes the
              interaction between attention and memory in the acquisition of automatic skills
              and in the expression of those skills in performance.  The theory combines in a
              common formal structure two theories developed by the Principal Investigator
              with previous NSF support.  One is a theory of attention that describes how
              stimuli are selected and how responses to those stimuli are generated.  The
              other is a theory of memory that describes how a domain-specific knowledge base
              builds up over extensive practice on the task.  The proposed research consists
              of three empirical projects that test the theory's assumptions about learning,
              representation, and real-time processing, and a theoretical project that
              extends the theory and relates it to formal theories of memory and cognitive
              control.       The basic idea behind the theory is that attention governs
              access to memory, determining what is learned from experience and what is
              retrieved from memory to support performance on various tasks.  Memory records
              the things that attention selects, and the things that attention selects act as
              retrieval cues, pulling from memory information relevant to the task at hand. 
              Memory also governs attention, determining the set of alternatives that
              attention chooses among.  To attend is to interpret and categorize, and memory
              provides the categories.  The theory suggests that this interaction between
              memory and attention is ubiquitous, occurring in every act of cognition.  Thus,
              the theory is broad in scope.  Its formal structure and formal relations to
              other theories give it depth as well as breadth.  It allows analytical,
              quantitative predictions of the interaction between attention and memory.      
              The proposed research is significant theoretically and practically.  From a
              theoretical perspective, it integrates research on attention and memory,
              revealing quantitative and qualitative relations between phenomena that were
              previously regarded as separate.  It takes important steps toward a unified
              theory of cognition, providing a coherent account of many important phenomena
              in a common formal structure.  From a practical perspective, the theory and the
              experiments conducted to test it will have strong implications for training and
              education, providing a principled way to design training programs that maximize
              generalization (e.g., from the classroom to the workplace) and optimize skilled
              performance.  `There is nothing so practical as a good theory.`                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
