Title       : Dynamics of Model Long-Chain Branched Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a0196135

Award Number: 0196135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynden A. Archer archer@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9816105
Archer
Annual production of polyolefins with multiple long side
              branches per molecule is close to 4 billion pounds in the United States alone. 
               These polymers are inexpensively synthesized, but the best procedures for
              shaping them into useful articles are rarely obvious.  The complexity comes
              from a lack of fundamental understanding of how long side branches affect
              polyolefin flow properties, and how flow properties in-turn affect polymer
              processibility.  Thus, even two polymers that appear similar from standard
              shear rheology tests, can perform quite differently in a real process.  The
              objective of the proposed research is two-fold.  First, to determine the
              fundamental effect of long chain branching on relaxation dynamics of flexible
              polymers with multiple entangled side branches.  Second, to develop a clearer
              understanding of why LCB polymer rheological properties are often very
              different in shear and extensional flows.  Specifically, the effect of
              branching (e.g. number per polymer chain, length, and distribution of branches
              along the chain contour) on nonlinear shear and extensional flow properties of
              model multi-arm polymers will be addressed.  This research will combine polymer
              synthesis, purification and characterization procedures, nonlinear shear and
              extensional flow rheometry, and some novel flow birefringence measurements to
              provide new insights into the dynamics of polymers.
%%%
Results from this
              study will help guide emerging theories for multi-arm polymer dynamics and
              should also help motivate constitutive equations capable of describing branched
              polymer behavior in various elongation and mixed flows common in polymer
              processing.
 

