Title       : Evolution of New Genes in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2000   
File        : a0196029

Award Number: 0196029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205080             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Begun djbegun@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1174,9104,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The goals of these experiments are to describe the basic biology of Finnegan,
              a novel gene descended from Adh in the repleta group of Drosophila, to find
              other examples of new genes descended from Adh in Drosophila.  These data will
              provide the first insight into general patterns and processes in the evolution
              of new function and provide the raw material for further experiments on
              evolution of novel function.

Despite its obvious importance in evolution,
              the origin and elaboration of evolutionary novelty at the genetic level is only
              poorly understood.  Our lack of insight into this key problem can be attributed
              to at least three gaps.  First there are few known examples of genes having a
              recently evolved function, yet it is such cases where we should have the best
              chance of understanding the mechanisms responsible for the origins and early
              stages of functional divergence of new genes.  Second, it is often difficult to
              imagine how the selective pressures driving molecular evolutionary novelty,
              might be inferred since many examples involve ancient reorganization (e.g.,
              exon shuffling) of basic cell function genes.  Finally, since there has been no
              concerted effort to search for genes with recently evolved function there is no
              way to understand how common such events are, no knowledge of their
              phylogenetic distribution, no understanding of their correlations with
              ecological factors, and no understanding of the general principles determining
              the evolutionary paths open to particular genes or types of genes.

