Title       : Scalable Sparse Solvers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a0196125

Award Number: 0196125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Padma Raghavan raghavan@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The efficient solution of large, sparse linear systems on high-performance
              multiprocessors continues to be the subject of research.  There is no single
              method that is consistently superior across application domains and computing
              platforms.  For example, for linear systems associated with the numerical
              solutions of elliptic partial differential equations, domain decomposition
              methods provide a naturally parallel, efficient formulation.  However,
              domain-decomposition relies on close tie-ins to partial-differential-equation
              discretization and mesh formulation.  Consequently, it is not suitable as a
              general-purpose "black-box" sparse solver given only the sparse matrix and no
              other information.  Both Krylov subspace iterative (KSP) solvers and direct
              solvers can be used as "black-box" solver.  But, once again, both classes of
              methods have serious limitations.  Direct solvers (based on some form of matrix
              factorization) are not memory scalable; memory  requirement grows nonlinearly
              with problem size when original zeroes fill-in.  KSP iterative solvers avoid
              the memory problem but their convergence can be very slow or fail altogether
              depending on the spectral properties of the sparse matrix. Robust, scalable
              sparse solver, suitable for a variety of large-scale applications on
              high-performance multiprocessors, require a spectrum of methods that range from
              pure iterative to pure direct methods.  This project will develop parallel,
              "flexible," hybrid solvers based on KSP with matrix factorization
              preconditioners.   The hybrid solvers developed will combine the inherent
              scalability and parallelism of KSP iterative solvers with robust
              preconditioners obtained using data-structures, algorithms and graph-techniques
              from sparse direct solver.  The project will work on two fronts: (1) developing
              scalable, hybrid solvers by extending current technology, i.e., incomplete
              factorization preconditioners, and , (2) developing new improved "structurally
              enhanced" matrix factor preconditioners by using a combination  of structural
              and numerical information.
