Title       : Biophotonics: Acousto-optic Elastography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0196172

Award Number: 0196172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267362             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean J. Kirkpatrick skirkpatrick@providence.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffery C. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Medical Laser Cente
	      9205 SW Barnes Road
	      Portland, OR  972256629    503/216-2213

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1606,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0086719
Kirkpatrick
It is well known that the mechanical properties of
              pathological tissues vary from that of healthy tissue.  For example, many
              disease processes such as tumors of the breast and prostate manifest themselves
              as stiff, hard nodules relative to the surrounding tissue.  Subsurface skin
              tumors present themselves as objects with distinct mechanical properties
              relative to the surrounding normal tissue.  The displacement of fibrillar
              papillary dermis by the softer, cellular mass of a growing melanoma is one such
              example of this.  This feature frequently allows their detection through manual
              palpation.  However, standard soft tissue palpation is not only qualitative,
              but also highly subjective.  Furthermore, it provides information on a rather
              large spatial scale, thus the ability to detect small tumors by palpation is
              limited.  Acousto-optic elastrography (AOE) offers the potential for increased
              spatial resolution (i.e. smaller lesions may be detected) and better strain
              resolution (low-contrast elastic modulus distributions may be visualized) than
              other elastographic methods.  However, this increased spatial and strain
              resolution is gained a the cost of decreased probing depth, as optical methods
              are limited to the outer few millimeters of tissue.  Furthermore, optical
              elastography is limited in that only relatively small areas or volumes of
              tissues may be probed at any one time.  Never the less, optical methods can
              still be useful in the early detection of neoplastic changes because many of
              these early changes occur in the mucosa and submucosa of the affected organs. 
              In this proposal, the investigators aim to implement a novel, acousto-optical
              method for evaluation tissue mechanical properties.  The method, incorporating
              a novel fiber-coupled laser speckle strain gauge, provides high resolution
              strain and strain rate measurements in tissues undergoing loading or undergoing
              creep recovery following loading.  These data can be used to quantify tissue
              regions with differential stiffness for both diagnostic purposes and for basic
              tissue mechanics research.  Using image and signal processing techniques,
              tissue regions which display differential tissue stiffnesses can be delineated
              from these images.  The end goal is that these images can provide the clinician
              direct information regarding the pathological state of the tissue under
              examination.


