Title       : POWRE: Strategies for the Construction of Knock out Mutants in Hyperthermophilic
               archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0196309

Award Number: 0196309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jocelyne DiRuggiero jd92@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goals of the project are to determine the molecular mechanisms
              that allow hyperthermophiles to survive at temperatures near the boiling point
              of water. The underlying hypothesis of these studies is that growth at
              temperature in excess of 90oC requires the presence of co-regulated DNA repair
              genes. In previous studies, sequence analysis, physiological, and biochemical
              studies have been used to investigate DNA repair processes and maintenance of
              genome integrity in hyperthermophiles. Although this approach has been very
              successful, it is increasingly clear that new techniques must be developed to
              understand how hyperthermophiles prevent thermodegradation of their DNA. The
              goal of this work is to establish genetic methods for gene disruption in
              hyperthermophiles. These methods are widely used to determine gene function in
              Bacteria and Eukarya, but have yet to be applied in hyperthermophilic Archaea.
              To achieve this goal, the Principal Investigator will visit Dr. Forterre's
              laboratory in Paris and receive training in manipulation of archaeal vectors
              and transformation protocols for hyperthermophiles. The Principal Investigator
              will use the information obtained from comparative genome analysis to design
              selectable markers for shuttle vectors. Two strategies will be used to
              accomplish gene disruption, in vitro transposon mutagenesis and knock out
              mutant constructions of known genes. With the first strategy, new DNA repair
              mutants will be identified and characterized. The second strategy will yield
              information necessary to determine the functions in vivo of repair genes
              previously identified. Mutant phenotypes will be investigated for their
              sensitivity to DNA damaging agents. The location and identity of the disrupted
              genes will be determined, and regulation of their expression in cells exposed
              to mutagenizing treatments will be analyzed. This POWRE award will allow Dr.
              DiRuggiero to develop an independent line of research by learning new skills
              and methodologies.
