Title       : Derived Moduli Spaces and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a0196209

Award Number: 0196209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Helen G. Grundman                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 31,  2000    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66302              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ionut Ciocan-Fontanine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Working with his colleagues, the investigator will develop the 
formalism of
              Derived Deformation Theory. This theory aims to 
resolve in a systematic
              fashion many of the difficulties arising 
from the fact that moduli spaces in
              algebraic geometry related
to higher dimensional varieties are typically
              singular. The basic 
idea is that the correct object to consider for a moduli
              problem 
is some ``derived moduli space'' which should be manifestly smooth
              
in an appropriate sense and should carry a differential-graded 
structure
              sheaf. The usual moduli space is obtained from the derived 
version as the
              degree-zero truncation, and this explains its singular
nature. In recent work,
              Ciocan-Fontanine and Kapranov defined and
studied the ``right derived category
              of schemes'', whose objects are 
differential-graded schemes, and they have
              constructed the derived  
version of Grothendieck's Quot scheme. The
              investigator will extend 
the formalism to a larger category of
              differential-graded stacks, and 
use it to construct derived versions of some
              other important moduli 
spaces in algebraic geometry (such as moduli of vector
              bundles, stable 
maps, etc.).  As a first application of the theory, it is
              proposed to 
give a simpler and more general construction of the virtual
              fundamental
classes of Behrend-Fantechi and Li-Tian. This new construction is
              
expected to be better suited to investigate the properties of virtual
              
fundamental classes in the case of moduli of stable maps of higher genus 
to
              a hypersurface in a Fano manifold and to understand mathematically
mirror
              symmetry at higher genus. The project has also a part dealing
with some
              explicit calculations of genus zero Gromov-Witten invariants 
of flag
              manifolds, and applications to mirror symmetry.

This is research in the
              field of algebraic geometry, which is one of the 
oldest branches of modern
              mathematics. In recent years, the methods and 
ideas of algebraic geometry,
              especially the study of moduli spaces, have 
been employed in string theory, a
              very active part of theoretical physics. 
Developments in string theory have 
              sparked a fruitful interaction between 
the two communities of researchers and
              have led to the discovery and study 
of many striking new phenomena. Mirror
              symmetry is one example. 
It is expected that a better understanding of moduli
              spaces in algebraic 
geometry will lead to more applications to string theory.
