Title       : Scaffolding Young Children's Data-Based Scientific Research:Narrowing The Gap
               Between Children's and Scientists' Inquiry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a0196149

Award Number: 0196149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 22,  2001   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen E. Metz kmetz@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY    ~ .    The Project Summary should include a statement of
              objectives, methods to be employed, and the significance of the proposed
              activity to the advancement of knowledge or education. Avoid use of first
              person to complete this summary. DO NOT EXCEED ONE PAGE. (Some Programs may
              impose more stringent limits.)    Scaffolding Young Children's Data-Based
              Scientific Research  Narrowing the Gap Between Children's and Scientists'
              Inquiry    The habitual poor performance of US students on evaluations of both
              science and mathematics achievement, together with the many societal and
              individual needs for scientific and mathematical literacy, point to the
              importance of fundamental reform in these subject areas. The results from the
              most recent National Assessment of Educational Progress (1990) indicate that
              students continue to attain only a low level of understanding in these
              disciplines. For example, in mathematics only a minority of students
              demonstrate proficiency at solving non-routine, multi-step problems. In
              science, only a minority of high school seniors have the knowledge adequate to
              interpret scientific data in graphs or table form, or to design experiments.   
              Both the mathematics and science education communities have formulated
              recommendations for reversing this dire situation. This proposed project is
              framed in terms of a synergy we perceive between key recommendations from the
              mathematics and science education reform literatures, recommendations that when
              combined form the basis of an instructional approach powerfully addressing
              needed changes in both subject areas. In short, the influential National
              Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) has argued for a stronger conceptual
              and applied orientation to mathematics curriculum, with the goal of attaining a
              curriculum where children come to view mathematics as a powerful means of
              sense-making and solving genuine problems. NCTM contends that the nature of the
              problems in the curriculum needs to be greatly expanded, to include  extended
              open-ended investigations, many involving the children's formulation of the
              question, decisions about how to go about solving the problem, and representing
              and interpreting their results. According to NCTM, even at the primary grade
              level children should be conducting data-based investigations and reflecting on
              ideas of statistics and probability (NCTM, 1989). Although more groups are
              involved in developing recommendations for elementary science education reform
              and there appears to be less consensus concerning realistic educational
              objectives (American Association for the Advancement of Science, 1993; National
              Academy of Sciences, 1995), the science education community shares with the
              math education community the long-term goal of developing independent and
              skeptical inquirers who hold rich visions of their respective intellectual
              enterprises --of what it means to think scientifically or mathematically.   
              The project will develop science curriculum prototypes where children design
              research and subsequently analyze and interpret their data. Grounded in current
              concerns to have math curriculum more applied and to have both math and science
              curriculum reflect the discipline's way of constructing and evaluating
              knowledge, the model of science underlying the curriculum encompasses
              preliminary explorations of the domain, fommation of questions, planning of
              experiments, subsequent collection, representation and interpretation of data,
              theory development, and revision and extension of research. In order to support
              children's data analysis and eventual independent inquiry, the curriculum
              prototypes will incorporate instructional support in fundamental statistical
              concepts, such as randomness, chance variation, the Law of Large Numbers and
              sampling. Since several cognitive literatures have identified domain-specific
              knowledge as a key detemminant in adequacy of reasoning, the project will
              concentrate the children's investigations in two interrelated domains: (a)
              animal behavior (such as insect s, rodents, and birds) and (b) child behavior.
              As technological tools can empower researchers in their access to
              domain-specific knowledge-bases and the task of data representation and
              analysis, the project reaming environments will provide technological tools and
              scaffold the children's strategic capitalization thereof.    The project will
              closely examine the data-based research that instruction based on these
              principles supports among children at the primary and upper elementary levels.
              Project research will take place in two contexts: (a) intact elementary school
              classrooms at the second and fifth grade levels, and (b) the laboratory. This
              combination of contexts allows the project research to reflect the richness of
              the classroom and the rigor and control supported by the laboratory. Analysis
              will be conducted at both the macro and micro levels across the longitudinal
              context of the school year, in order to examine the dynamics of children's
              developing data-based research, in interaction with their emergent scientific
              and statistical knowledge.    The project is designed to make contributions to
              both cognitive theory and educational practice. It integrates and advances the
              research literatures of children's reasoning about chance and children's
              reasoning about causality, through study of children's application of
              uncertainty, chance and causality in their scientific data analysis. It
              advances children's mathematics education, through design and investigation of
              children's practice of mathematics in a context of rich meaning and purpose.
              Finally, it narrows the gap between children's and scientists' inquiry, through
              scaffolding children's research design and data analysis.    NSF FORM 1358
              (1/94)
