Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science: High-Strength and Wear-Resistant Nanocomposite
               Al-Base Alloys by Rapid Solidification Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a0196195

Award Number: 0196195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheun-Lan Liu                           
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18708              (Estimated)
Investigator: Challapalli Suryanarayana csuryana@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5942,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9910531
Suryanarayana 

This award supports a 3-year collaborative research
              project between Dr. Challapalli Suryanarayana, Colorado School of Mines, and
              Professor B. S. Chun, Chungham National University, Korea.   The proposed
              research aims to develop high-strength and wear-resistant nanocomposite Al-base
              alloys by rapid solidification processing.  Al-Si alloys have been
              traditionally used in the industries for wear resistance purposes because the
              high volume fraction of the Si phase imparts good wear resistance of the Si
              phase, and this can be achieved by rapid solidification processing (RSP)
              techniques.  

This project will be performed in conjunction with Professor
              Chun's group at Chungham National University, Korea under the U.S.-Korea
              Cooperative Science Program.   Excellent facilities exist for rapid
              solidification at the Chungnam National University in Taejon, Korea where rapid
              solidification processing (RSP) of Al-Si-base alloys will be conducted on a
              variety of Al-Si-based alloys containing transition metals like Fe, Cr, Zr, and
              Ni.  Aluminum alloys containing essentially Si and transition metals will be
              subjected to RSP and their microstructural and mechanical properties will be
              evaluated.  Attempts will also be made to test these alloys in an industrial
              environment.

This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
              Cooperative Science Program, which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
              between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
              scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
              on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean participation is supported by the Korea
              Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).

