Title       : High-Performance Switch Architectures for CC-NUMA Servers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0196102

Award Number: 0196102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: A. Yavuz Oruc                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laxmi N. Bhuyan bhuyan@cs.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald K. Friesen  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Cache-Coherent Non-Uniform Memory Access (CC-NUMA)  architectures are
              rapidly becoming a standard for scalable  multiprocessor design. The main
              problem with such  architectures lies in the large remote memory access time. 
              This project deals with designing novel switch architectures  for the  CC-NUMA
              machines to alleviate the memory latency problem.  Custom switch designs are
              being developed based on  dynamically allocated combined buffer and wormhole
              routing  with virtual channels. The switch arbiter is redesigned to  provide
              different priorities for different type of messages  as applicable in a shared
              memory environment. A new switch  cache architecture is being developed which
              uses the buffers  as a cache inside the switch to support data sharing between 
              the processors, as a prefetch or  victim buffer, and as distributed directories
              to maintain  cache coherence. Hardware and software support for processor  and
              memory management is also being investigated. Study of  the behavior of shared
              memory applications forms an integral  part of the project. The new designs are
              incorporated in to  an execution-driven simulator and the performance 
              improvement of various scientific and commercial  applications is being
              measured.
