Title       : The Earth and Space Science Standards Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0196082

Award Number: 0196082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward E. Geary egeary@csmate.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan L. Aivazian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Frank W. Ireton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melanie Magisos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9978346
Geary

Many states and school districts have recently developed and
              adopted new science content standards for grades K-12 containing one-third each
              life, physical, and earth and space science.  This is the first time in decades
              that the earth and space sciences have received such prominent attention in
              K-12 science programs.  To take advantage of this new opportunity, the Earth
              and Space Science Standards Project (ESSSP), will bring together a broad
              spectrum of science, education, business, and policy organizations to create a
              five-year Earth and Space Science Standards Action Plan.  This Action Plan will
              assist school districts across the country with the integration of high
              quality, standards-based, earth and space science curricula into their
              secondary science education programs.  The Action Plan will be based on the
              specific needs of teachers and administrators with respect to student learning
              and proficiencies in the earth and space sciences.  During the next twelve
              months, the project will identify and bring together key people in the areas of
              professional development, teaching, curriculum and materials, assessment,
              teacher preparation, education policy, and science education reform.  Many of
              these people will be experts from within the earth and space sciences, but many
              individuals will be experts from organizations outside of the earth and space
              sciences.  The culmination of these initial planing efforts will be a three-day
              "Earth and Space Science Standards: Action Plan Development Conference" that
              will occur in fall, 1999 in Boulder, Colorado.  Approximately 80 secondary
              science educators, administrators, scientists, business leaders, and policy
              experts will be invited to participate in this conference.  At this fall, 1999
              conference, participants will create a five-year plan of action that will: (1)
              unite the earth and space science communities around a common set of
              standards-based, educational goals and objectives, (2) bring together key
              science education resources, (3) guide the development of new earth and space
              science education initiatives, and (4) provide the basis for Phase Two of ESSSP
              which will focus on funding and implementing the Action Plan.

