Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Highly Parallel Branch- and-Bound Algorithms
               for Solving Optimization Problems (with INRIA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a0196185

Award Number: 0196185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shantanu S. Dutt dutt@ece.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vipin Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5918,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in numeric
              computation with researchers Shantanu Dutt, Vipin Kumar at the University of
              Minnesota and Catherine Roucairol at the Rocquencourt campus of INRIA (the
              French National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Applied
              Mathematics).  The objectives of their research are to develop highly parallel
              branch-and-bound algorithms for solving combinatorial optimization problems
              (COPs) and software for optimization computations on parallel computers. 
              Branch-and-bound algorithms are used widely in solving combinatorial
              optimization  problems that appear in a variety of applications  like computer
              vision, robot motion planning, and integer programming and computer-aided
              design of very large scale integrated circuits.  These problems take a long
              time to solve.  The U.S. investigators propose to develop time and memory
              efficient techniques for solving these problems using parallel processing.  The
              U.S. investigators bring to this research their expertise in parallel computing
              and techniques for solving COPs using distributed memory machines and
              workstation clusters.  This is complemented by the French investigator's
              expertise in operations research and her work on branch-and-bound algorithms
              techniques suitable for shared-memory multiprocessors.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
