Title       : Effective Internet Education for Everyone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0196118

Award Number: 0196118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry L. Kurtz blk@cs.appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald O. Burnham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Micheal B. O'Neal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jenna P. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project supports the establishment of an Institute for Educational
              Technology (IET) dedicated to the development of effective Internet-based
              distance learning materials.  The project 's activities fall into three
              categories: 1) the development of a strategy for the design of pedagogically
              based Internet courses, 2) the establishment of a faculty development and
              resource institute to sustain the quality and overriding strategy of the
              project, and 3) the implementation of an outreach program targeting populations
              that are underrepresented in science and engineering.  For the model courses of
              pre-calculus mathematics and computer science web-based CourseBooks are in
              development and testing.  CourseBooks combine "classroom lectures", "chats with
              the professor", and an "ask your classmates" feature all via streaming video
              embedded in web pages. To encourage students to pay attention to the virtual
              lectures, questions are asked by the virtual professor at appropriate times. A
              collection of web-based hands-on activities that strengthen the student's
              problem solving skills are also be included. Finally, a hypertext version of
              the class notes (or textbook) is provided as well. All of the components (video
              and otherwise) are tightly interwoven with cross-links between appropriate
              sections.  Formative and summative evaluations are used to refine these course
              materials.  The materials developed under this project will be disseminated
              nationally via the website, CD / DVD ROM, and published textbooks. Regional
              dissemination includes tests at minority high schools.


