Title       : Genetic Analysis of Crassulacean Acid Metabolism in Mesembryanthemum
               crystallinum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0196070

Award Number: 0196070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357250             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Cushman jcushman@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9109,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9722285  Cushman  Most higher plants assimilate atmospheric CO2 through the C3
              pathway of photosynthesis using ribulose bis-phosphate carboxylase/oxygenase
              (RUBISCO).  However, when environmental-stress conditions reduce the
              availability of CO2, increased photorespiration reduces the efficiency of C3
              photosynthesis.  To overcome the wasteful process of photorespiration, about
              10% of higher-plant species have evolved two alternative strategies for
              photosynthetic CO2 assimilation.  These alternative carbon-fixation pathways,
              C4 photosynthesis and Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM), employ a CO2 pump to
              concentrate CO2 within plant tissues near RUBISCO.  This process improves the
              competitiveness of C4 and CAM plants under environmental-stress conditions such
              as high light intensity, high temperatures, or low water availability.  Unlike
              C4 plants, however, CAM plants assimilate CO2 mostly at night, limiting daytime
              water loss through transpiration and greatly improving water-use efficiency.   
              The goal of this research is to identify and characterize key structural and
              regulatory components of the CAM pathway by isolating mutants defective in CAM
              using the common ice plant (Mesembryanthemum crystallinum) as a model system. 
              To complement this approach, a non-redundant database of expressed-sequence
              tags (ESTs) will be established by sequencing randomly selected complementary
              DNA (cDNA) copies of expressed genes.  This EST collection will provide a rich
              source of sequence information for identifying novel genes or gene-family
              members and expression patterns peculiar to CAM plants.  The mutant and EST
              collections generated by this research will provide an indispensable resource
              for researchers worldwide investigating CAM plants.    The availability of
              large amounts of nucleotide-sequence information from EST and genome-sequencing
              projects in a variety of model organisms is rapidly changing the way in which
              biological research is conducted and has generated a pressing need to educate
              scientists in the  analysis and study of biological information
              (Bioinformatics).  To exploit biological-information resources effectively, an
              integrated educational and research program will focus on instructional and
              training opportunities in Bioinformatics.  A semester-long Bioinformatics
              course, an abbreviated "hands-on" Bioinformatics workshop, and a series of
              instructional modules (with computer lab) will be developed where graduate,
              undergraduate, and high-school students will learn how to use informatic tools
              and resources through active participation in the M. crystallinum
              EST-sequencing effort.  In this way, the research on the genetic basis of CAM
              will be integrated with a series of unique instructional opportunities that
              combine research-based experiences with cutting-edge training in
              Bioinformatics.
