Title       : Code IC, Design of Computer Optimized Trading and Information Systems for
               Pollution Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0196571

Award Number: 0196571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299344             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Olson molson2@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vernon L. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Rassenti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   The idea that environmental quality management can be more efficiently
              accomplished through the use of pollution permit trading systems is not new.
              However, the implementation of such systems is new. The design of pollution
              permits being exchanged and the market in which the permits are traded requires
              the integration of environmental economics, game theory, operations research
              and experimental testing. To date only a few major attempts at trading
              pollution rights have been implemented; for example, lead reduction in
              gasolines, Emissions Trading Program (ERC), S02 emissions trading, and the
              Southern California's Regional Clean Air Incentives Market (RECLAIM) program.
              In general, the trading volume in these emissions trading programs have been
              significantly below the predictions made at the beginning of these programs. At
              least two studies have pointed out that the market design has been a factor in
              the low volume of trade in these markets.

     This proposal is intended to
              examine variations in institutional trading rules in pollution permit
              environments. There are specific difficulties in the trading of pollution
              permits which need attention. Due to temporal persistence and spatial
              dispersion non-trivial external effects result from trading in one market on
              adjacent markets. Wind and water flows constrain how permits should be traded,
              as do local ambient standards. Permits are also often required to be purchased
              in packages; for example, a firm might need to acquire permits over a five-year
              period to plan production. Also, the markets currently being used are not
              designed to handle 'thinly' traded assets.

     A series of laboratory
              controlled experiments will employ cash motivated human subjects to trade
              pollution permits, under realistic economic and environmental constraints.
              These agents will be highly trained in multiple experiments to ensure their
              competence and to allow them to develop any strategic behavior that might
              exploit weaknesses in market design. Institutional variations will include
              computer assisted combinatorial auctions.

