Title       : Middleware Components to Support Mobile Users in Heterogeneous Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2001 
File        : a0196557

Award Number: 0196557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Niki Pissinou niki@eng.fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kia Makki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Birgitta M. Koenig-Ries  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mobile users require a functionality similar to that provided by traditional
              desktop computers. This includes the ability to access distributed,
              heterogeneous information sources. Yet existing approaches to providing
              transparent access to distributed information sources are geared towards fixed
              networks and do not take into account specific needs of mobile users. These
              needs have their roots in two characteristics: mobility and poor connectivitiy.
              But in order to meet these needs, middleware components used to provide
              transparent access to information sources have to be adapted consideralby. In
              view of this, our research we will extend the middleware components of the most
              popular paradigm to providing transparent access to heterogeneous information
              sources, (viz., the mediator architectures) to meet the needs of mobile
              users.

In particular our research will focus on four main topics: (1) the
              introduction of a location-aware trading service that allows mobile users to
              find the appropriate mediator to answer a query based not only on the contents
              offered by the mediator but also on how easily it is accessible from the
              current user location, (2) the introduction of mediators capable of handling
              location-dependent queries, (3) the development of a management strategy for
              mediators that governs the generation and replication of mediators and the
              materialization of results, and (4) the development of an interface agent
              supporting location-dependent and wireless querying.

With these extensions,
              mediator-based systems will fully support mobile users, thus allowing them the
              im-portant transparent access to heterogeneous, distributed information
              sources. Targeted applications include traveling salespersons accessing their
              companies' information sources, scientists working in the field accessing
              internet-based databases, emergency physicians accessing patient information
              and the information needs of emergency personnel handling natural disasters.

