Title       : Scalable Program-Analysis-Based Testing and Maintenance: Infrastructure and
               Experimentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0196145

Award Number: 0196145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anthony B. Maddox                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 31,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1553149            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Harrold harrold@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam A. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Renee J. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg Rothermel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Maintenance and testing of software are expensive.  Program  analysis
              techniques, which analyze source code to obtain  information about software,
              promise to reduce this expense  by providing information that helps software
              engineers  perform specific maintenance and testing tasks such as  program
              understanding, impact analysis, and regression  testing.  However, to be
              adopted or even considered for  adoption, program-analysis-based testing and
              maintenance  techniques must be empirically demonstrated to scale to  large
              software systems.   The primary goal of this reqearch  is to empirically
              investigate the applicability of program-  analysis-based testing and
              maintenance techniques to large-  scale systems.  The research involves three
              overall efforts:  (1) construction of an extensible experimental 
              infrastructure including a software system and repository of  subject systems;
              (2) development of program-analysis  techniques that support testing and
              maintenance  of large-  scale systems; (3) rigorous empirical evaluation of the
               infrastructure, and of the program-analysis-based testing  and maintenance
              techniques. The principal results expected  from this work are an improved
              understanding of, and  improved techniques for, program-analysis-based testing 
               and maintenance -- founded on hard empirical data.  The  work will also
              provide a publicly available infrastructure,  that will support future tool
              development for,  experimentation with, and education in program-analysis- 
              based testing and maintenance techniques throughout the  software engineering
              community.
