Title       : Making New Enzymes from Old
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a0196103

Award Number: 0196103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Viola ron.viola@utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9814455
The goal of this research project is to develop and explore the
              applications of an experimental approach that will allow a systematic
              alteration of the properties of existing enzymes.  Through a method called site
              specific modulation the investigators propose the alteration of selected amino
              acids in an enzyme by an approach that combines the strengths of
              oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis (absolute site specificity) and chemical
              modification (introduction of a wide range of structural analogs).  A range of
              amino acid analog reagents will be prepared to apply this method to several
              specific enzymes.  The kinetics of carbonic anhydrase will be altered by
              modifications in both the zinc ligands and in the identity of the proton
              shuttle group.  The substrate specificity and stereospecificity of malate
              dehydrogenase will be tuned by the selective introduction of unnatural amino
              acids into the active site.  Finally, these investigators plan to use the
              knowledge that has been gained from alterations in the metal binding site of
              carbonic anhydrase to design and introduce a new metal ion binding site and
              commensurate new catalytic activity into malate dehydrogenase.

Enzymes,
              natures' catalysts, control and accelerate all chemical reactions in living
              systems.  Researchers have not yet succeeded in designing completely new
              catalysts that can mimic the remarkable efficiency of enzymes.  These
              investigators will be exploring a method that has the promise of expanding the
              scope of existing enzymes, thus allowing them to catalyze new reactions. 
              Designing altered enzymes that can specifically be tuned to accelerate targeted
              chemical reactions can have broad new commercial and basic applications.



