Title       : Molecular Mechanism of Nickel Hyperaccumulation in Thlaspi goesingense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0196310

Award Number: 0196310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329806             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Salt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Intensive industrial and agricultural activity over the last 150 years has
              imposed a large burden of heavy metals on the environment. Phytoextraction, the
              use of plants for environmental cleanup of pollutants, including toxic metals,
              from soils, holds the potential to allow the economic restoration of these
              contaminated sites. For phytoextraction to be a viable alternative to existing
              soil remediation strategies it will require the existence of high biomass,
              rapidly growing metal-accumulating plants.  Unfortunately, plants do not exist
              at present that have all these desirable characteristics.  There are, however,
              a limited numbers of plants, collectively termed hyperaccumulators, that grow
              on soils naturally enriched in various metals including Zn, Ni and Se. These
              plants have the ability to naturally accumulate these metals to between 0.1 and
              3% of their shoot dry weight; this is at least 1000-fold higher than most other
              plants. This unique ability makes these plants an ideal starting point for the
              development of phytoextraction crops. One way to develop such crops is to
              identify the genes responsible for metal accumulation in these hyperaccumulator
              plants. Once identified and fully characterized these genes could be
              transferred into high biomass, rapidly-growing plants to generate crops ideally
              suited for phytoremediation. This grant will fund the identification of such
              "metal hyperaccumulation" genes from the nickel hyperaccumulator Thlaspi
              goesingense. Once identified, the usefulness of these genes for
              phytoremediation will be rapidly assessed by their transfer to Arabidopsis
              thaliana, a convenient model plant. Genes identified for enhanced metal
              tolerance and accumulation in this model plant will then be selected for
              transfer to plants more suited to phytoremediation applications.  


 



