Title       : Characterization of the Salicylic Acid Signal Transduction Pathway in Plant
               Defense Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a0196168

Award Number: 0196168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel F. Klessig dfk8@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Ann Osley  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Klessig  9723952  Characterization of the Salicylic Acid Signal
              Transduction Pathway in Plant Defense Responses    An ever increasing body of
              evidence indicates that salicylic acid (SA) is an important endogenous signal
              required for activation and/or potentiation of defense responses in both local
              and systemic resistance.  This research will continue studies to identify,
              clone, and characterize the components of the SA signal transduction pathway(s)
              which lead to activation of defense responses, in particular
              pathogenesis-related (PR) gene expression. Two major objectives will continue
              to be pursued:  i)  characterization of Arabidopsis mutants with altered SA
              signal transduction and  ii) characterization of PR-2d promoter binding
              proteins potentially involved in SA responsiveness.   A combination of genetic,
              molecular, and biochemical approaches are being utilized in Arabidopsis and
              Nicotiana tabacum (tobacco). Genetic approaches include isolation and
              characterization of Arabidopsis mutants and construction of transgenic
              Arabidopsis and tobacco plants to identify and characterize cis- and
              trans-acting components of the SA/defense signaling pathway(s). Molecular
              approaches include cloning, DNA sequencing, Southern, northern, and western
              blotting, yeast one- and two-hybrid screening, site-directed mutagenesis, and
              production of recombinant proteins. Protein purification, enzyme analysis, and
              characterization of protein-DNA or protein-protein interactions represent some
              of' the biochemical tools that are being used to further characterize potential
              pathway components. Both viral (tobacco mosaic virus  TMV  and turnip crinkle
              virus  TCV ) and bacterial (Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato, maculicola, or
              tabaci) pathogens are being used to activate the defense pathway(s) and study
              its components.   A key difference between resistant and susceptible plants is
              the timely recognition of the  invading pathogen and the rapid and effective
              activation of host defenses. Thus, one of the  major aims of stu dying plant
              disease resistance is to identify and characterize plant  components which are
              crucial for the signal transduction processes leading to activation of  these
              host defenses. Identification and characterization of these components are
              essential to  our understanding of the mechanisms of disease resistance.
              Furthermore, their manipulation  through genetic and molecular approaches
              offers the exciting prospect of enhancing plant disease resistance.
