Title       : Spatial Language and Spatial Cognition in Williams Syndrome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a0196314

Award Number: 0196314
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220523             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Landau landau@vonneumann.cog.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Hoffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this project is to advance our understanding of the relationship
              between spatial language and spatial cognition, specifically by asking how
              non-linguistic spatial cognition supports the fundamental human capacity to
              talk about space.  Modern theories of cognition and cognitive development
              assume that language reflects thought, and that  understanding of space is
              critical in supporting the ability to talk about objects, their spatial
              relationships, and their motions through space. However, we have only a very
              limited understanding of how these two cognitive systems interact as knowledge
              of space is translated into language and vice versa.  Our research seeks to
              delineate more fully the nature of the interactions, by asking what elements of
              non-linguistic spatial cognition are necessary for the acquisition and use of
              spatial language, and how changes in spatial cognition affect the ability to
              talk about space.  We examine these interactions by studying the emergence of
              spatial cognition and spatial language among children and adults with Williams
              Syndrome (WS), an unusual genetic defect in which spatial cognition appears to
              be severely impaired but language is generally unimpaired.  By understanding
              how spatial language emerges in the absence of normal non-linguistic spatial
              cognition, we will be better able to understand the nature of normal human
              cognitive architecture that permits accurate translation between the two
              cognitive systems as well as the circumstances under which such translation may
              be compromised.  These issues will be addressed in two sets of experiments that
              examine the architecture of the spatial cognitive system and the nature of
              spatial language among WS individuals and normally developing individuals.
              Studies of spatial cognition include examination of how individuals solve
              complex spatial construction tasks, how they represent and remember objects and
              locations, and how they navigate through space to locate objects.  Studies of
              spatial language include examination of how individuals talk about objects
              (using nouns), motions (using verbs), and paths and locations (using spatial
              prepositions).  Comparison of performance on linguistic and non-linguistic
              spatial tasks will advance our understanding of how language typically encodes
              our spatial experience, and the circumstances under which such encoding may
              break down.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
