Title       : Algorithms, Approximations, and Valid Statistical Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0196353

Award Number: 0196353
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313341             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Casella casella@stat.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin T. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971586

New solutions to difficult statistical problems have been found
              through the use of algorithms and accurate approximations.  Sometimes these
              solutions can be extremely difficult to implement and, moreover, the
              statistical properties of the solution, and hence the resulting statistical
              inference, may be difficult to describe and, in the worst cases, even invalid. 
              The general theme of the proposed research is to develop computing algorithms,
              accurate approximations, and other numerical techniques for a variety of
              problems, and do it in such a way that a valid statistical inference results. 
              Some specific projects are the development of algorithms for hierarchical and
              missing data models, including extensions of the EM algorithm to estimating
              equations; using accurate approximations and a synthesis of Bayesian and
              frequentist approaches to provide valid inferences in nuisance parameter
              problems; and computation and inference in discrete data problems, with
              particular attention to numerical alternatives to saddlepoint approximations
              and novel uses of Monte Carlo methods.

Much current research in statistics
              is influenced by the availability of exceptionally fast computing, which has
              led to a reexamination of the approaches to many problems.  These new
              approaches have provided some solutions to previously unsolved problems;
              however, their implementation is often not straightforward so the solutions
              will not be available to more than a few expert users.  Such a situation arose
              in an epidemiological study to estimate the effect of clinical mastitis, where
              implementation of the currently available algorithm was not clear.  The type of
              solution proposed here is straightforward to implement in this case, as well as
              in other applications such as estimating the location of cancer clusters
              relative to toxic waste sites.  This new solution will also result in
              statistically valid conclusions, a property not always enjoyed by
              computationally intensive procedures.  In addition to these algorithms,
              research in new statistical simulation methods is proposed which has
              application in genetics and biotechnology studies (the linkage of locations on
              a chromosome to particular diseases). 


