Title       : Evolutionary Determinants of Host Range in Parasitic Nematodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a0196369

Award Number: 0196369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 6,  2001       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Jaenike joja@mail.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0074141
Jaenike


The proposed research will examine the evolution of
              associations between Drosophila and nematode parasites, encompassing time
              scales of evolutionary change from of millions of years down to changes ongoing
              within present-day populations. Experimental infections will be conducted with
              8 nematode species and 24 Drosophila species.  These experiments, in
              conjunction with molecular phylogenetic analyses, will allow a determination of
              the extent to which a parasite's host range is determined by host phylogeny, as
              well as determination of how host range evolves in these parasites.  Closely
              related Drosophila species will be crossed to uncover the genetic basis of
              interspecific differences in resistance to parasites.  These hybridization
              experiments will also reveal whether resistance to one parasite species is
              genetically correlated with resistance to others.
 
Parasites are ubiquitous
              - but generally overlooked - components of natural communities, often having
              major effects on the individuals and populations of their host species.  The
              potential host range of a parasite is relevant to the issue of emerging
              diseases, the use of parasites in biological control programs, and the effect
              of invading parasites on endangered species.  The proposed studies of the
              evolutionary determinants of parasite host range will contribute to the
              development of a comprehensive theory of host-parasite interactions.

