Title       : Synthesis of Novel Carbohydrate-Based Materials as Scaffolds for Unique
               Structural Motifs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0196482

Award Number: 0196482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacquelyn Gervay-Hague gervay@chem.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the preparation of NeuAc homooligomers and
              NeuAc/alpha-amino acid conjugates to form compounds with unique secondary
              structures.  Amide-linked oligomers will be conjugated with biotin for
              biological screening and to polymerizable lipids for protein screening. 
              Oligomers will be conjugated to form tertiary structures or coiled coils. 
              Circular dichroism and inverse detected nuclear magnetic resonance techniques
              will be used to elucidate structure of the resulting polysialoamides.

With
              this renewal award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
              supporting the research of Dr. Jacquelyn Gervay-Hague of the Department of
              Chemistry at the University of Arizona.  Professor Gervay-Hague will focus her
              work on the synthesis and characterization of new carbohydrate-based materials
              with stable secondary structures in aqueous solution.  This is the first step
              toward engineering artificial proteins.  These materials have potential impact
              for use in drug delivery, as biosensors, as affinity materials and as chemical
              catalysts.   Further, the project provides a diverse and multidimensional
              training environment for human resource development.
