Title       : Operator Theory in the Hardy Space Over the Bidisk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2001 
File        : a0196529

Award Number: 0196529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45290              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Azoff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas N. Clark  (Principal Investigator former)
              Rongwei Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970932
Principal Investigators: Douglas N. Clark, Rongwei
              Yang

Abstract: This project aims to develop a concrete setting in which the
              transition from single operator theory to a multivariable theory becomes very
              natural. In single operator theory, the vector valued Hardy space is used to
              provide canonical models for contractions. Without loss of generality, we can
              identify the vector space with another copy of the Hardy space over the unit
              disk, and the vector valued Hardy space then becomes the Hardy space over the
              bidisk. By stating and reproving some of the classical results in model theory
              in this new context, we can identify some operator theoretically  important
              things in the Hardy space over the bidisk and develop some general techniques
              for further research. The research focuses on the compressions of two shift
              operators, namely multiplications by the two coordinate functions, to quotient
              Hardy modules.

Single operator theory, which originated in the study of
              systems of linear equations, has a wide range of applications, from image
              processing, to robotic design, to financial market predictions. "Operator
              pairs" provide a model for studying interactions between different systems. Two
              simple examples are interactions between different electric networks and the
              effects of one financial market on others. This project aims to develop a
              concrete setting for the study of operator pairs. There are two main advantages
              to this setting. First, it furnishes many computable examples which make the
              study easier to apply. Second, it incorporates single operator theory in a very
              natural way. This feature, in terms of a practical example, means that it will
              allow one to monitor single markets and multi-market systems in a unified
              way.

