Title       : CAREER: On the Assessment of Volume Rendering Algorithms in Visual Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0196242

Award Number: 0196242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raghu K. Machiraju   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The field of visual computing is concerned with the storage, analysis,
              manipulation of sampled definitions of 3D objects and the resulting image
              synthesis.  Given the ubiquitous use of imagery for graphics in architecture,
              engineering design and manufacturing, and entertainment, there is an
              ever-growing need for realism in displayed images.  For serious uses of imagery
              in engineering and medicine, there is an additional need for assurances for
              accuracy and for providing ways to validate the image.  This project will
              increase the level of understanding about the foundational aspects of image
              synthesis, an essential component of visual computing.  Volume rendering and
              visualization algorithms are being increasingly used for image synthesis in
              visual computing systems.  The project plans to specifically address the
              following issues:   * Accuracy in volume rendering algorithms-Lack of concerted
              efforts to define and measure image quality has stymied the widespread use of
              visualization techniques and visual computing.    * Volume Analysis- Given the
              noisy nature of the datasets and large sizes, there is a need to seek minimal
              correlated representations of the volumes and even rendering operators.  * 
              Perceptual metrics - The displayed image should preset meaningful information
              to the end-user.  It would be useful to employ objective numerical tools to
              guide the generation of new images if desired.     One approach to achieving
              this goals will be to use multiresolution methods including the wavelet
              transform.  The work will be initially targeted towards the requirements of
              computational fluid dynamics engineers, marine geologists and medical imaging
              experts, given the access of Principal Investigator (PI) to the ERC, NASA
              Stennis and the University of Mississippi Medical center (UMMC) respectively.
