Title       : Computational Problems in Multicomponent Materials and Multiphase Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0196436

Award Number: 0196436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Lowengrub lowengrb@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of this proposal is to investigate processes 
fundamental to
              the behavior of multicomponent fluids and
multiphase materials. We will do
              this by (1) developing and applying 
state-of-the-art numerical methods to
              large scale computation and (2)
analytical, numerical and modelling studies of
              important constituent 
processes. More specifically, our focus will be on
              developing, 
implementing and analyzing  successively more realistic models of
              the
 diffusional evolution  of microstructure in solid/solid phase
              transitions. 
Our investigation of multiphase fluids includes a study of
              ternary fluid 
flow where only two of the components are immiscible. These
              projects 
involve fundamental physical processes whose phenomenology is basic
              to 
understanding the behavior of real fluids and the material properties of
              
solids. Both are characterized by the presence of multiple constitutive
              
components, complex pattern formation and/or singularities (i.e. spatial
              
complexity). Although these processes arise in very different physical
              
phenomena (fluids versus solids), both involve free boundary problems
where
              the motion of a bounding interface, separating the different 
components, is
              driven by a competition between surface energy and either 
an instability or
              multi-body interactions. As such, they can be treated 
using a common set of
              analytical and computational tools. The highly 
nonlinear nature of these
              problems makes fast, accurate and robust 
numerical methods essential to their
              study.

In this proposal, we bring together mathematical and
              numerical
analysis, modelling, and large-scale scientific computation to
              study
certain fundamental problems in fluid dynamics and materials
science. 
              Our focus will be on developing, implementing and analyzing
successively more
              realistic models of the diffusional evolution  of 
microstructure in
              solid/solid phase transitions.  These transformations
are an important method
              of processing multicomponent metallic alloys such
such as steels. The result
              of this process is the formation of a multiphase
microstructure, which is a
              key variable in setting the macroscopic
mechanical properties (i.e. stiffness,
              strength and toughness) of the
alloy. The microstructure is characterized by
              regions of different metallic 
components separated from one another by
              interfaces. The goal of our 
research is to accurately model and simulate the
              formation of microstructure 
in alloys in order to provide metallurgists with
              a recipe for generating new 
alloys with desirable material properties. Our
              investigation of multiphase 
fluids involves modelling liquid/liquid
              extraction processes that are widely 
used in chemical production and waste
              processing. In these processes, two 
(or more) fluids are placed in contact
              and a contaminant in one of the fluids 
diffuses preferentially into another.
              The first fluid thus is cleaned and is 
then extracted. In these processes,
              two (or more) fluids are placed in contact
and a contaminant in one of the
              fluids diffuses preferentially into another.
The first fluid thus is cleaned
              and is then extracted. If the contaminated 
fluid is broken up into small
              droplets, the interfacial area and hence mass 
transfer is increased. We will
              use analysis, modeling and large scale 
scientific computation to study
              reaction and mixing rates within these 
systems. The ultimate goal of this
              work is to provide a theoretical 
foundation for improving the performance of
              liquid/liquid extractors.
Although the two problems described above arise from
              very different physical 
processes (fluids versus solids), they are similar in
              the sense that the 
relevant phenomena is strongly influenced by surface
              tension at the 
respective interfaces. Consequently, they can be studied using
              common 
analytical and computational tools. The highly complex nature of these
              
problems makes fast, accurate and robust numerical methods essential to their
              
study.

