Title       : Inventing to Prepare for Learning: Instruction that Increases Student Readiness
               for Deep Understanding in Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0196238

Award Number: 0196238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 7,  2000   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Schwartz daniel.schwartz@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joyce L. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gautam Biswas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to explore an innovative model of statistics
              instruction and assessment that prepares students to learn more effectively
              from many styles of instruction, including traditional lectures.  Many children
              have difficulty learning to use and understand mathematical representations. 
              One of the reasons for this difficulty is that children often do not understand
              the work a given representation has been designed to accomplish.  For example,
              they tend to view symbolic formulas as rules that make life harder, not easier.
               This project will study classroom environments that help middle-school
              students appreciate the work that statistical representations need to perform,
              and in this way, it will prepare them to learn about those representations.  A
              central feature of these environments is that students invent their own
              procedures and representations for solving problems about quantitative
              situations.  For example, if students are learning about variability, very
              simple situations might include the sets of numbers {2 4 6 8} and {4 5 5 6}. 
              The students are reminded that there is a procedure for determining a single
              value that captures what is the same about the sets; namely, the average.  The
              students' task is to build a method for determining a single number for each
              set that can characterize what is different, in this case, the variability. 
              After they create their own methods (often a range formula), they receive new
              sets that draw their attention to other properties of distributions (e.g., the
              middle numbers -- {0 2 4 6 8} vs. {0 0 0 0 8}).  After several cycles of
              inventing, assessing, and revising, the students are prepared to learn about
              and use conventional approaches to variability (e.g., standard deviation).  The
              goal is to help students notice important quantitative properties, and to
              prepare them to learn how conventional representational solutions elegantly
              capture those properties.



