Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Polymeric Electroactive Materials Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2000   
File        : a0196040

Award Number: 0196040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Berger pberger@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Galvin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research program allows the
              University of Delaware to establish a state-of-the-art laboratory for the
              preparation and characterization of polymeric light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and
              polymeric thin film transistors (TFTs). Both LEDs and TFTs have tremendous
              commercial potential for applications in the display industry. However, the
              rapid progress that has occurred in this field, has left many fundamental
              questions unanswered. The goal is to investigate the structure/property
              relationships in electroactive polymers for polymer LEDs and TFTs. The
              instrument will support an NSF funded project to investigate structural
              property relationships in polymers used in LEDs and TFTs as well as the
              optimization of polymeric devices. The awardees interact closely with
              scientists who are researching electroactive polymers at the DuPont Company.
              Progress is at present, however, hampered by a lack of state-of-the-art
              equipment necessary for the production of polymeric TPT's and TFTs.
              Specifically, glovebox systems will be purchased for the manufacture and
              testing of polymeric devices under inert atmosphere conditions. The equipment
              will be utilized by the research groups of the two Pls, scientists from DuPont
              and other faculty. The instruments will be used by students faculty and
              postdocs from physics chemistry, materials science and electrical engineering
              departments.

This award from the Instrumentation for Materials Research
              program allows the University of Delaware to establish a state-of-the-art
              laboratory for the preparation and characterization of polymeric light-emitting
              diodes (LEDs) and polymeric thin film transistors (TFTs). Both LEDs and TFTs
              have tremendous commercial potential for applications in the display industry.
              However, the rapid progress that has occurred in this field, has left many
              fundamental questions unanswered. Progress is at present, however, hampered by
              a lack of state-of-the-art equipment necessary for the production of polymeric
              TPT's and TFTs. Specifically, glovebox systems will be purchased for the
              manufacture and testing of polymeric devices under inert atmosphere conditions.
              The equipment will be utilized by the research groups of the two Pls,
              scientists from DuPont and other faculty. The instruments will be used by
              students faculty and postdocs from physics chemistry, materials science and
              electrical engineering departments.

