Title       : Knowledge-Based Speech Signal Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0196491

Award Number: 0196491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 31,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204144             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Y. Espy-Wilson espy@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this study is to use a recently developed automatic optimization
              procedure to further the design of a knowledge based speech signal
              representation based on phonetic features, the message bearing components of
              the speech signal. The knowledge based signal representation consists of
              acoustic parameters that are exact measures performed on the speech signal or
              its time frequency representation to target the linguistic information in the
              speech signal. Such a representation can serve as the front end of a speech
              recognition system, or it can be used as a speech training for those having
              difficulty producing natural sounding speech (whether due to a speech
              impairment, hearing loss or learning of a second language). A comparison of the
              APs and the traditional cepstral based parameters in an HMM speech recognition
              system shows that the APs are better able to extract the phonetically relevant
              information from the speech signal and reduce speaker dependent effects.   In
              previous research, APs were designed for the manner of articulation phonetic
              features using acoustic phonetic knowledge and histogram analysis to eye ball
              the data, a time consuming and subjective process. In contrast, the
              optimization procedure we developed is efficient and uses the objective Fisher
              criterion and classification trees. Furthermore, the optimization procedure
              allows us to explore many parameters to determine the one(s) that best
              characterizes a phonetic feature and separates it from its antonym(s). A
              comparison of the hand designed manner of articulation APs and the optimized
              ones in a speech recognition system shows that they yield comparable results.
              In this project, we plan to complete the knowledge based speech signal
              representation by using the optimization process to develop APs related to the
              place of articulation phonetic features and the remaining manner of
              articulation phonetic features.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
