Title       : SGER: Investigation of Microwave Components on CMOS Substrate for a Wireless
               Chip-to-Chip Interconnect System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2001      
File        : a0196376

Award Number: 0196376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48813              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioannis Papapolymerou papapol@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0095245
Papapolymerou

Microwave and mm-wave circuit technology that offers
              high-performance, low cost, small size and high profit is essential for today's
              cost driven commercial and military industries.  In order to meet the above
              requirements, the research community during the last five years has been
              focusing on entire system-on-a-chip solutions, where both passive and active
              components are monolithically integrated on a single semiconductor substrate
              (Si, GaAs, SiGe) for dense, miniature lightweight and highly reliable microwave
              systems.  The above solutions will also lead to analog, digital, MEMS and
              microwave circuits co-existing on a single chip that is capable to sense,
              think, act and communicate.  This concept can be used for the development of
              microwave/mm-wave circuit-to-circuit interconnects that overcome many of the
              problems associated with traditional interconnect techniques and address future
              demands for feature sizes less than 100 nm.

Currently, wire bond and flip
              chip interconnects are large compared to dimensions used in microelectronic
              fabrication technologies and cannot meet the signal delay and clock speed
              requirements beyond the 100 mn node.  Guided-wave interconnects using metal
              traces also pose serious limitations due to propagation delay, signal
              distortion, noise and losses.  Furthermore, they impose a serious limitation on
              circuit density and cost and can introduce parasitic reactances that degrade
              circuit performance.  Wireless interconnects, on the other hand, eliminate the
              need for increased wire density and do not suffer from loss related to finite
              interconnect conductivity.  Parasitic effects, such as crosstalk, are reduced
              and time delays can also be minimized if a fast conversion scheme that
              translates the base signal to an RF one is used.  In this project, the PI
              proposes to investigate both theoretically and experimentally the basic
              microwave components of a wireless chip-to-chip interconnect system operating
              between 30 and 35 GHz.  These components will reside on top of a low
              resistivity (CMOS) silicon wafer covered with a thin dielectric layer such as
              polyimide.  The microwave circuits will be designed with Finite Ground Coplanar
              (FGC) line elements that can support TEM mode propagation and have a loss that
              is predominantly ohmic.  The philosophy of the system is the following: An
              oscillator at 30-35 GHz will feed a planar phase shifter that utilizes MEMS
              bridges to change the phase of the microwave signal that is then transmitted by
              a slot antenna.  The digital bit stream is applied as a positive modulating
              voltage to the MEMS phase shifter producing a microwave signal with BPSK
              modulation.  At the receiving chip the phase of the incoming microwave signal
              (received with a slot antenna) will be compared to a reference signal via a
              phase detector (mixer) that will demodulate the BPSK microwave signal.  A
              bandpass filter is used right after the receiving slot antenna to isolate the
              frequency of interest.  Due to the high risk nature of the proposed research,
              the study of three passive components (slot antenna, MEMS phase shifter and
              bandpass filter) on CMOS silicon wafers will be pursued under an SGER grant. 
              The three microwave circuits will be characterized experimentally with on-wafer
              measurements and theoretically with full-wave simulations.  The main research
              effort will focus on understanding the properties and performance implications
              and limitations of the three passive microwave circuits residing on top of a
              low resistivity silicon substrate, with a goal to optimize their response.  For
              the phase shifter, the characteristics of the MEMS switches on top of a CMOS
              wafer will also be explored and their interaction with it will be analyzed.  It
              is anticipated that the proposed research will result in significant
              contributions to the area of integrated microwave and digital systems-on-a-chip
              and wireless interconnects, as well as provide valuable insights for the design
              of FGC microwave circuits on CMOS substrates used for digital circuitry.

