Title       : Topics in Dynamics, Competition, Contracts, and Voting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2000   
File        : a0196026

Award Number: 0196026
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Maskin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9278,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The project has several distinct parts.  Each component addresses a
              fundamental problem in an important area of economics.  In the first part, we
              propose a game-theoretic solution concept called  a Markov equilibrium. 
              Economists use dynamic games to make predictions about how  economic actors
              interact strategically over time.  Markov equilibrium is a tool for making
              sharper predictions in these dynamic games.  We extend the notion of a Markov
              equilibrium to include situations in which actions of agents cannot be
              observed, and situations in which agents learn by experimentation.  We use
              these tools to examine dynamic inequality and segregation.  In the second part
              we propose to examine the efficiency of auctions.  Auctions are a commonly-used
              mechanist for allocating goods across buyers.  We plan to investigate which
              auctions do the best job of ensuring that the complex goods end up in the hands
              of the buyers who value them the most.  Third, we plan to study the extent to
              which the difficulty of foreseeing or specifying future contingencies may
              interfere with contract negotiations between two economic parties.  In our
              model, we address the difficult problem of agents who cannot make contracts
              contingent on every state of nature, but can make contracts contingent on
              future payoffs.    Finally, we propose to investigate which voting rules (e.g.,
              majority rule or plurality rule) are robust in the sense that they work `well`
              (satisfy certain standard desiderata) in as wide set of circumstances as
              possible.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
