Title       : Markets with Imperfect Information Transmission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a0196201

Award Number: 0196201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135240             (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis R. Taylor CRTaylor@econ.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              When a prospective home buyer discovers a house that appears to him to be
              flawless but that has been on the market for some time, he is naturally
              suspicious about the reason it did not sell earlier.  (The analysis proposed
              here can be applied to the sale of a variety of items such as a durable piece
              of equipment, a business, or a work-of-art.  The discussion is set in the
              context of a housing market merely for concreteness.)  There are three possible
              explanations (two good and one bad).  First, he may be the first potential
              buyer to have discovered the house.  Second, the house simply may have been
              over-priced given the tastes of earlier potential buyers.  Third (and most
              worrisome), earlier potential buyers may have detected a flaw in the house not
              apparent to him. The weight he ascribes to each of these possibilities depends
              upon the characteristics of the market such as the overall level of demand, the
              distribution of buyer tastes, and whether he can observe the history of
              previously posted prices. Also, the seller of the house may be able to
              influence a potential buyer's quality assessment through her pricing strategy
              and disclosure of information.  This project studies these issues of imperfect
              information transmission in a model of two-sided asymmetric information and
              consumer learning with the following structure. The seller is presumed to know
              the quality of her house, but posts asking-prices over time without knowing the
              realization of consumer tastes.  Consumers know their own idiosyncratic 
              preferences when making offers, but do not know the quality of the house.  The
              consumer who makes the highest offer commits to buy the house subject to a
              favorable inspection on quality.  In addition, consumers who discover the house
              on the market late in the selling season use time-on-the-market to update their
              assessments of quality.  Preliminary findings suggest several intriguing
              phenomena.  First, when inspection outcomes are not publicly recorded and
              consumers observe the history of asking prices, the seller has an incentive to
              post inordinately high prices early in the selling season in order to
              ``dampen'' the signal transmitted to prospective buyers who may discover the
              house for sale late in the season. If a potential buyer who arrives late in the
              season knows that the seller's initial asking price was relatively high, then
              he is apt to believe that the house did not sell earlier due to lack of a
              suitable buyer (i.e., one who liked it enough to pay the high asking price). 
              Conversely, if a potential buyer who arrives late in the season knows that the
              seller's initial asking price was relatively low, then he is apt to believe
              that the house did not sell earlier due to detection of low quality. Another
              way of saying this is that a prospective buyer who walks away from a
              high-priced house conveys little information concerning quality to subsequent
              buyers, but a prospective buyer who walks away from a low-priced house
              transmits a very strong signal regarding his assessment of quality.  In the
              case when inspection outcomes are not publicly recorded and consumers do not
              observe the history of asking prices, the seller has an incentive to post
              inordinately low prices early in the selling season in order to make an early
              sale and thereby avoid the transmission of unfavorable information.  The
              essence of this finding is captured in the often-heard folk wisdom that a
              seller should beware of setting her initial price too high. The danger from
              over-pricing in early periods is that a buyer who arrives late and who does not
              observe the price history will naturally be suspicious about the reason the
              house did not sell earlier.  The cost of correcting the initial over-pricing at
              this juncture is high as compared with the cost of posting a lower initial
              price to begin with.  Indeed, a seller who posts too high an initial price may
              be tempted to continue over-pricing in later periods resulting in a vicious
              circle of rejected offers and falling prices.  Ultimately, the seller may be
              forced to remove her house from the market or to make a sale at a very low
              price as compared with what she could have secured in early periods. 
              Preliminary findings also suggest theoretical support for laws that require
              inspection outcomes to be publicly filed and for the use of reputable brokers. 
              Such measures can ease potential buyers' concerns about quality and the
              concomitant inefficiency.  Several extensions to the basic model are also
              proposed for study. First, it is natural to investigate the impact of
              inspection costs. It is conjectured that higher inspection costs will generate
              more inefficiency but that problems involving the transmission of information
              will be ameliorated to some degree. Second, environments in which the seller of
              a high-quality home can signal the value of her house by posting a high
              asking-price are proposed for study.  An intriguing possibility here is that
              the price of a house might actually rise between periods as the seller of a
              high-quality house switches from a `pooling` to a `separating` phase of the
              equilibrium.  Such anomalous pricing behavior is sometimes observed in real
              estate and other markets.  A final extension of the basic model proposed for
              study is to consider environments in which the seller has less commitment and
              bargaining power.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
