Title       : CAREER: Interfacial Flow in Surfactant Monolayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a0196119

Award Number: 0196119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel K. Schwartz Daniel.Schwartz@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9161,9178,9251,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT   CTS-9733281  D.Schwartz/Tulane     Single layers of amphiphilic
              molecules can be formed on the surface of water contained in a "Langmuir
              trough," which allows control of two-dimensional (2D) density and surface
              tension.  Such monolayers have traditionally been used to study the phase
              behavior of liquid-crystalline materials.  This project aims to extend the
              usefulness of these systems to the area of rheology.  Recent work has
              demonstrated that monolayers of particles can also be formed.  The rheology of
              surfactant and colloidal monolayers will be studied using a combination of
              specialized optical microscopy techniques (Brewster angle and fluorescence
              microscopy) and interfacial rheometric measurements.  These experiments will
              lead to a better understanding of processes where monolayer flow is important,
              such as foam coarsening and emulsion coalescence.  They will also serve as
              valuable tests for theories describing the behavior of colloidal suspensions
              under shear.    Performing flow experiments in 2D has several unique
              advantages:  the theoretical description of the flow is simplified, the entire
              flow field is directly observable, and the thermodynamic variables can be
              varied to control the orientation and conformation of the surfactant molecules
              to a greater degree than is possible in 3D fluid phases.  This project will
              utilize these advantages to study several important issues in the rheology of
              complex fluids for the first time.  The experiments will include both
              rod-shaped and disk-shaped surfactant molecules and will encompass a variety of
              liquid-crystalline phases, including nematic (and polar nematic), discotic, and
              hexatic.  The recent discovery of the first 2D small molecule nematic phase (by
              this research group) will make these experiments possible.  Also, since hexatic
              phases are peculiar to quasi-2D systems, the rheology of such phases are not
              understood.  Studies of rod-shaped particles under shear will lead to a 
              particle-level understanding of the effect of interpartic le interactions and
              proximity to a wall. Monolayers of spherical particles will be examined as a
              model system with which to study intriguing behavior in colloidal suspensions
              including shear thickening/thinning and the connection to shear induced melting
              and re-entrant solidification.    The simplifications afforded by 2D studies
              will permit detailed comparisons between the experiments and relevant theories,
              such as Leslie-Ericksen theory for nematic flow, and allow the development of
              new theory for hexatic phase hydrodynamics.  Since liquid-crystalline behavior
              is ubiquitous in 2D systems like monolayers, fundamental understanding of the
              rheology of 2D liquid crystalline phases will be directly relevant to processes
              involving surfactant monolayer flow.  For example, the coalescence of oil
              droplets in emulsions is the basic process regulating emulsion stability and is
              partly controlled by rheological properties of the surfactant monolayer. 
              Stability may be desirable, as in paint and coating technologies, or
              undesirable, as in some surfactant-based oil recovery schemes.  A basic
              understanding of surfactant monolayer rheology will permit the design of
              appropriate surfactants for these applications. Similar issues are involved in
              the stability and collapse of foams.  The rheology of colloidal suspensions is
              not only scientifically interesting but directly relevant to materials
              processing in a vast array of industries.  The studies are aimed at making the
              connection between particle-level structures and processes and macroscopic flow
              behavior. The simplification of 2D and the ability to observe individual
              particles over the entire flow field will allow such connections to be made.
