Title       : Fast, High Order Vortex Methods Based on Deforming Basis Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0196356

Award Number: 0196356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis F. Rossi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9971800

This project expands and enhances existing knowledge of a new
              category of vortex method based on deforming basis functions.  Vortex methods
              approximate the vorticity field of a flow as a linear combination of localized
              basis functions.  These basis functions move with the flow velocity at the
              basis function centroid, and the velocity field is calculated from the
              vorticity field through a Biot-Savart integral.  For flows dominated by
              isolated regions of vorticity, vortex methods offer considerable advantages
              because they are naturally adaptive in the sense that computational elements
              are dedicated exclusively to regions that have vorticity.  Most vortex methods
              use rigid, axisymmetric basis functions though there are some exceptions.  This
              project studies vortex methods that use basis functions which deform with local
              flow deviations, and builds upon the recent development of a high spatial order
              vortex method based on deforming elliptical Gaussians.  Elliptical Gaussians
              are special in the sense that they represent self-similar, exact solutions to
              the relevant advection-diffusion equation.  To implement such a scheme, one
              must develop methods for evaluating the Biot-Savart integral for an elliptical
              Gaussian and identify the relevant convergence parameters for the method as a
              whole.  Though a two-dimensional scheme has already been developed, the
              Principle Investigator will enhance this method by developing a fast summation
              algorithm.  The Principle Investigator will extend this method to three
              dimensions, providing a crucial link between vortex stretching and the geometry
              of vortex filaments.  The new method will be used to perform careful
              calculations of a variety of problems including vortex dipole collisions and
              jet transients.  Finally, the Principle Investigator will extend this approach
              to moisture transport through unsaturated porous media.

This work provides a
              means of quickly and accurately calculating fluid flow properties on a wide
              range of problems including but not limited to aerospace applications,
              industrial processes, ocean currents and atmospheric flows of all sorts.  The
              Principal Investigator will also extend these concepts along new lines to
              develop methods that can accurately calculate the motion and diffusion of
              moisture and contaminants in unsaturated soils.  This type of method, called a
              "vortex method", is unusual in that these schemes are naturally adaptive.
              Naturally adaptive methods dedicate computational resources exclusively to the
              dominant regions of the flow.  These methods simulate flows by calculating the
              evolution of the local angular momentum in the fluid.  Often, the angular
              momentum is restricted to a small fraction of the total volume of the fluid. 
              For instance, weather systems are driven by a collection of storm systems that
              represent concentrated regions of angular momentum.  Using such a method, one
              can reconstruct the entire flow field based solely on the evolution of the
              angular momentum which means that the computer only need perform calculations
              over a small area to capture the entire flow field.  Vortex methods have the
              added advantage of being easily parallelized on multiple processor computers so
              that one can take full advantage of supercomputing facilities and networks of
              connected computers.  Also, the Principal Investigator will apply these
              techniques to an entirely new type of problem involving flow through
              unsaturated porous media such as dry soils, clays or concrete.  Similar to
              vortex methods, this new technique takes advantage of the fact that the
              movement of moisture is dominated by narrow "preferred paths" occupying a
              relatively small fraction of the total domain of interest.  These paths are
              created by moisture-media interactions, and the computer need only dedicate its
              resources to those regions containing moisture.  Finally, many aspects of these
              activities make excellent undergraduate research projects.  These research
              activities will enhance students' interests and knowledge in mathematics,
              environmental science and high performance computing.  Thus, in addition to its
              scientific merits, this project will give students at the University of
              Massachusetts Lowell meaningful research experiences and enhance collaboration
              across several disciplines.

