Title       : POWRE: Hysteresis, Domain Switching and Phase Transformations in Ferroelastic
               Perovskite Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2001    
File        : a0196062

Award Number: 0196062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74851              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina Orlovskaya orlovsk@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses mechanical performance of perovskite ceramics using a
              combination of methods such as bending techniques, micro- and nano-indentation
              tests coupled with X-ray phase analysis, Raman spectroscopy and electrical
              conductivity measurements. The project seeks fun-damental knowledge about
              relationships between hysteresis effects (domain reorientation, phase
              transformations, etc.) and mechanical behavior of perovskite ceramics, improved
              understanding of perovskite strength, hardness and fracture toughness and
              discovery of new toughening mecha-nisms. The approach involves the study of
              different first or second order phase transitions, such as nonmetal-metal
              transitions, martensitic transitions, order-disorder transitions, accompanied
              by volume changes, leading to toughening of perovskites during loading. A
              paramount goal is to determine the presence of domain reorientation or phase
              transformation during indentation and bending tests. Studies of reversible
              transitions that occur upon unloading of samples are also ex-pected to be
              feasible. New knowledge about domain reorientation, phase transformation,
              metalli-zation in perovskites will be gained. Key properties relevant to
              structural performance will be measured within a feedback loop to
              microstructural and phase composition optimization.
%%% 
This is a research
              enhancement grant made under the Professional Opportunities for Women in
              Research and Education (POWRE) program. The project provides support at a
              critical time, helping the PI to re-establish her career after a brief
              interruption as she moved from Europe to the US, and will enhance the PI's
              ability to succeed in an area where women are underrepresented, allowing her to
              serve as a role model for other women in mechanical engineering.  The proposed
              research will also have an educational impact, training students with a breadth
              of experience.  The research is expected to contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level of special relevance to the behavior of
              ceramic materials, and to assist with the integration of re-search and
              education. The project is co-supported by the Division of Materials Research,
              and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities). 
***

