Title       : Magnetic Interactions in Mesoscopic Transport Studied by Millikelvin Scanning
               Probe Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0196382

Award Number: 0196382
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey Nunes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9623847 
              Nunes    Scanning probe microscopy techniques will be applied to the study  of 
              magnetic  interactions  in quantum transport  at  milliKelvin  temperatures. 
              Force  microscope  tips  with  deposited  magnetic  impurities will be used to
              place defects of a known type at known  positions  in a mesoscopic sample. The
              effect of spin  scattering  from  these  artificially introduced defects will
              be studied  via  conductance fluctuations and Aharonov-Bohm oscillations in
              narrow  wires  and  rings.  These experiments will provide  insight  into 
              inelastic  scattering  processes  in  small  devices,  and  offer  sensitive
              tests of universal conductance fluctuation theory.  The  ability  to  probe and
              manipulate the defects in nanoscale  wires  and  devices will ultimately allow
              the investigation of  disorder  in quantum transport at the single defect
              level.  %%%  This  research  program will apply techniques  from  the  rapidly 
              growing  field  of  scanning probe microscopy to  the  study  and  manipulation
              of defects in nanoscale electronic devices.  In  the  past,  electrical 
              measurements have only been sensitive  to  the  average  properties of a
              device, rather than  to  the  individual  defects  out  of  which the average
              behavior  is  built  up.  The  ability   of  scanned  probe  microscopes  to 
              provide  spatially  resolved,  local  information will allow us to look 
              beneath  the  general  properties  to  the underlying behavior  on  the  atomic
               scale.  This  information  will  provide  new  physical  insights 
              unobtainable by any other means---insights which will be required  for 
              predicting  and  understanding the nano-electronics  of  the  future   in 
              which  the  atomic-scale  disorder  will  inevitably  influence the behavior of
              nominally "identical" devices.  ***
