Title       : Nuclear Receptor and Co-Repressor Function in Eye Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0196138

Award Number: 0196138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. McKeown micheal_mckeown@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Nuclear receptor complexes have long been known as ligand-activated
              transcription factors.  Recent cell culture work strongly suggests that nuclear
              receptor dimers can act negatively as well as positively on a single promoter. 
              Nuclear receptor-mediated repression depends on nuclear receptor co-repressors
              which bind to ligand free nuclear receptor dimers.  These co-repressors are
              displaced by ligand, removing repression, and allowing activating factors to
              bind.

In order to study the in vivo role of nuclear receptors and their
              co-repressor partners, experiments will examine the role of RXR-containing
              dimers in the regulation of cell fate, differentiation and the coordination of
              development, using the Drosophila eye as an experimentally amenable system.  To
              allow genetic, developmental and molecular approaches to the problem, in the
              context of otherwise normal development, experiments focus on the role of
              ultraspiracle (usp), the Drosophila RXR, in control of morphogenetic furrow
              movement and the earliest stages of cellular differentiation in the eye.

The
              developing Drosophila eye offers an excellent model to study an RXR-mediated
              activation/repression system.  The eye primordium is marked by a visible
              constriction, the morphogenetic furrow, separating the posterior and anterior
              regions.  The morphogenetic furrow moves from posterior to anterior across the
              primordium.  Cells in the anterior region are undifferentiated and have not
              committed to any particular fate.  In the posterior cell commitment and
              differentiation occur in a reproducible and stereotypical manner.

Normal
              movement of the morphogenetic furrow and normal differentiation posterior to
              the furrow require the function of ultraspiracle.  In the absence of
              ultraspiracle, the furrow moves more quickly than normal and cell commitment in
              the posterior occurs more rapidly.  These phenotypes suggest repression by
              ultraspiracle-containing dimers and the possibility of both relief of
              repression and activation near or within the morphogenetic furrow.  A candidate
              co-repressor is expressed in the eye.

Work will be directed at the role of
              usp, its dimerization partners and co-repressor partners in the control of
              furrow movement and post-furrow differentiation.  Experiments will test the
              independence of pre-furrow and post-furrow functions of usp as well as
              specifically addressing the mechanism of anterior repression and the
              possibility and mechanism of ligand-induced activation within the morphogenetic
              furrow.  The most likely nuclear receptor partner for repression and activation
              by usp will be tested for function in this system using in vitro produced
              dominant mutations.

The high degree of similarity between the regulatory
              systems operating in the Drosophila eye development and in mammalian limb,
              heart, eye and nervous system makes it extremely likely that the results of
              these studies will give insight into multiple processes in other organisms.
