Title       : Topological Methods in Representation Theory and Automorphic
Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0196077

Award Number: 0196077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 4,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kari K. Vilonen vilonen@math.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9803862  Vilonen       This research program consists of three separate, but
              intimately  related, projects.  The first one, joint with Wilfried Schmid,
              concerns  one of the important remaining questions in representation theory of 
              reductive Lie groups: determining all of their unitary representations.  They
              will attack this problem using the geometric techniques they developed  to
              prove the Barbasch-Vogan conjecture.  The second project, joint with 
              E.Frenkel, D.Gaitsgory, and D.Kazhdan, deals with the Langlands conjectures. 
              They will continue their work on the geometric Langlands conjecture and the 
              geometric theory of Whittaker functions.  The purpose of the third project, 
              joint with Mirkovic, is to develop geometric techniques for representation 
              theory of algebraic groups.  This project has also turned out to be  important
              for work on the geometric Langlands conjecture.  The goal is to  apply their
              methods to representation theory of algebraic groups in  positive
              characteristic as well as over the integers.       One of the most interesting
              aspects of mathematics is to discover and  understand connections between
              objects that from the outset seem unrelated.  A very deep such connection has
              been proposed by Langlands and has become  known as the Langlands
              correspondence.  A fundamental theme of this  research program is to establish
              such connections by using geometry.  The  situation is most interesting when
              the objects themselves are not geometric  but the connection between them is
              established by geometric means.  The  joint work with Wilfried Schmid on the
              Barbasch-Vogan conjecture has this  flavour.  The other two projects of this
              research program are directly  related to the Langlands correspondence.  ***
