Title       : Prototyping a Software Engineering Educational Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a0196219

Award Number: 0196219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew P. Bernat                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74681              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Horton horton@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Knight  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Software Engineering (34)

This project establishes an active and productive
              software engineering education community in which universities will cooperate
              to share ideas, artifacts, materials and experience. As a proof-of-concept
              project, it prototypes such a community to evaluate the feasibility of the idea
              by establishing joint activities in this area between Florida Atlantic
              University and the University of Virginia. To achieve the stated goal of
              providing educational experiences in software engineering to undergraduate
              students in order to better prepare them to develop large and complex systems
              in industry and government, the project is seeking better ways to allow
              educators to collaborative develop and test educational materials. The focus is
              on community building by a) developing curricular materials and techniques for
              sharing them and b) developing methods whereby expensive hardware components
              can be shared across the internet, thus improving accessibility of such
              equipment to more students. Existing teaching artifacts at both universities
              are being studied to see how they can be successfully adapted for use by other
              members of the software engineering education community. 

Existing classroom
              artifacts and exercises previously developed by the PI's will be enhanced for
              shared use. Mobile robot hardware and software configurations used at the
              University of Virginia will be modified so that students at Florida Atlantic
              University an develop software to operate the robots remotely over the network.
              Similar experiments with networked video cameras (webcams) are being used in
              software development courses at both universities. This project builds upon an
              existing collaboration between the two universities to help determine how
              multi-institution efforts can be expanded to make a national impact. It
              directly addresses the themes of faculty development and the integration of new
              technologies into undergraduate education. 

