Title       : Intelligent Data Analysis for Identifying Protein Disorder
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a0196237

Award Number: 0196237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219910             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoran Obradovic zoran@joda.cis.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Keith Dunker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1339,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Despite reported examples of proteins with natively disordered regions, their
              commonness and function in nature is unknown. Solutions to these problems
              cannot be found by searching existing protein structure databases since they
              are likely to be strongly biased against natively disordered proteins. The
              approach proposed in this project consists of disorder estimation  from primary
              sequence information through an intelligent data analysis. Preliminary results
              indicate that disordered regions can have crucial function and that such
              regions are evidently very common in nature. If confirmed by an in depth study,
              this represents a major shift in the world view of protein structure and
              function. The aims of the current study are to further investigate this problem
              by:  a) enlarging and improving a preliminary data set of proteins with
              disordered regions; b) improving the preliminary protein disorder prediction
              system accuracy, interpretability, and accessibility; c) testing the validity
              of the obtained knowledge. The techniques for analyzing massive volumes of data
              are likely to serve as stepping-stones towards the development of sophisticated
              prediction systems  for some important problems in biochemistry.  Possible
              biological applications include studies aimed at understanding  protein
              structure and function, as well as improving protein crystallization  process
              efficiency.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
