Title       : PGE/SEP: Science is for Us: An after-school program for junior high school girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0196499

Award Number: 0196499
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99218              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anita Roychoudhury   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerri Susan Mosley-Howard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project in Ohio and Georgia aims to improve girls' attitude, interest,
              content knowledge, and career awareness regarding science.  In addition,
              teachers, parents and school counselors will become knowledgeable about
              female-friendly ways of teaching and fostering girls' interest in science.
   
               Sixty girls from the seventh, eighth, and ninth grades of two schools serving
              many low-income families will participate in after-school science clubs.  They
              will meet once a week for two hours after school.  During this time, the girls
              will engage in scientific inquiries on various topics that require them to make
              connections between science and their own lives.  The girls will visit two
              female scientists in their laboratories once every month to become familiar
              with their research programs.  They will discuss their science club projects
              and careers in science with scientists.  All girls in the program will develop
              personal career goal maps gradually as they go through the science club
              experience.
     The teacher component of the program will focus on educating
              teachers so that they can create and foster an equitable environment in their
              classrooms, and compensate for subtle textbook biases.  The parent and school
              counselor component will focus on educating them so that they can nurture the
              interest of girls that will be generated by the science clubs.

