Title       : Why De-Industrialization Increased AFDC Caseloads: A Comparison of Family
               Structure and Earnings Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a0196113

Award Number: 0196113
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $388450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan A. Black dablac01@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Seth G. Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terra McKinnish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The U.S. economy has undergone tremendous restructuring over the last 40
              years.  Throughout the 1950s, manufacturing was the largest sector of the
              economy and consistently employed more than one-third of the nation's workers. 
              By 1996, the manufacturing sector employed less than 16% of all workers in the
              country, as international competition and technological change eroded job
              opportunities.  These job losses have tended to be permanent, to involve
              low-skilled men disproportionately, and to severely hurt the local economies
              affected.   However, the possible effects on low-skilled women and their
              children have been largely ignored. In the proposed research, the investigators
              consider how the decline in economic opportunities for low-skilled men in the
              steel and coal mining industries ultimately affected low-skilled women.
    
              The employment shocks in these industries could not have had strong direct
              effects on the earnings of women as only 8% of workers in primary metal
              manufacturing were women and less than 3% of workers in coal mining were women
              in 1970.  However, participants in the AFDC program are overwhelmingly poor,
              single women and their children.  Did employment shocks to these industries
              alter women's AFDC participation?  The objective of the proposed research is to
              explore this question and expand the investigation to employment shocks in
              manufacturing more generally.
     By definition, women enter and exit the
              AFDC program either through changes in family composition or through changes in
              earnings opportunities. Since these economic shocks substantially altered the
              economic prospects of low-skilled men, they would have affected the
              attractiveness of these men as marriage partners. Therefore, an economic boom
              would presumably increase men's attractiveness as husbands and increase
              marriage rates. This would reduce the number of women eligible for AFDC. An
              economic bust would, by the same logic, decrease marriage rates, leaving more
              women unmarried. To the extent that these unmarried women are poor and have
              children, more of them would be at risk for AFDC.
     Because AFDC is a
              means-tested program, changes in women's earnings also affect AFDC
              
participation.  It is very likely that these large shocks to employment of
              low-skilled men created a spillover effect that changed the earnings
              opportunities of low-skilled women. This is particularly true in the small
              towns that developed around single manufacturing plants. In 1970, there were
              counties with as up to 38% of their men employed in the primary metal industry.
              This suggests that job losses in manufacturing would have substantially lowered
              the demand for services from sectors employing low-skilled women. In addition,
              the men that were displaced by the loss of manufacturing jobs would presumably
              have then competed for jobs previously held by women.
     This project
              examines the mechanisms by which large, permanent shocks to male-dominated
              industries affected women's AFDC participation. As a result of these employment
              shocks did women become more likely to bear children out-of-wedlock and less
              likely to become and remain married? Or did the spillover effects lower the
              employment and earnings prospects of low-skilled women?
     The project uses
              confidential data on the location and timing of plant closings, and on changes
              in employment, earnings, marriage and fertility by demographic group at the
              county level. These data enable the researchers to investigate the impact of
              manufacturing job destruction on the local community in ways that were
              previously impossible.


