Title       : Nonparametric and Consistent Empirical Welfare Analysis Using Functional Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0196372

Award Number: 0196372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory N. Price                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220271             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Donald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recently there has been a renewed interest in the measurement of social welfare
              and inequality. Of particular interest have been comparisons of poverty and
              inequality across countries. At the same time economists have been interested
              in the evolution of a nations well being across time. There is a great need for
              methods that can be used to examine both the extent to which recent economic
              booms have improved overall well being, as measured by social welfare, as well
              as the way in which improvements have been distributed, as measured by
              inequality indices and Lorenz curves. Moreover it is of interest to examine the
              extent to which welfare and inequality have changed over time within different
              segments of the population. Most of the statistical tools that have been
              developed for examination of welfare and inequality do not consider the
              complete distribution of income, instead focusing on only a small set of income
              levels. Thus, for instance, the changing circumstances of the poorest would
              generally be ignored in such measures. Additionally, most currently used
              methods impose strong assumptions when considering inequality within segments
              of the population. The aim of the research in this proposal is to develop a
              complete set of statistical tools for measurement of welfare, inequality and
              poverty. The new methods will be such that all features of the distribution
              will be taken into account. This will be achieved by using methods for
              statistical functionals which allow one to consider the whole income
              distribution when measuring and comparing welfare and inequality. A second
              feature of the proposed research is the development of methods that allow one
              to measure welfare and inequality within segments of the population in a
              relatively flexible fashion. This is achieved by employing non-parametric
              methods that are quite flexible and easy to use in practice. The methods would
              then permit one to compare welfare, inequality or poverty across different
              segments of the population in a flexible manner. The proposed research will
              develop the theoretical properties of the proposed techniques mostly relying on
              large sample approximations such as the law of large numbers and central limit
              theorem. In addition the proposed research will examine the extent to which the
              methods work in artificial situations similar to what one might find with real
              world data. Finally, the methods will be used to examine changes in welfare,
              inequality and poverty across time and across segments of the population in the
              United States and Canada using data from a variety of sources.
