Title       : Residual Finiteness and Negative Curvature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2000  
File        : a0196060

Award Number: 0196060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel T. Wise   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9971511

Principal Investigator: Daniel T. Wise

Abstract: 
              

The investigator will study the relationship between negative curvature and
              residual finiteness. The former is a geometric property which has a substantial
              impact on topology, and the latter is a purely algebraic property. However, the
              investigator has recently developed a surprising connection between these
              seemingly unrelated notions. The investigator will show that in many important
              cases, negatively curved spaces have residually finite fundamental groups.
              Similar methods will often yield the more dramatic result that quasiconvex
              subgroups are separable in the profinite topology. One important consequence of
              this work will be to demonstrate that certain hyperbolic link complements have
              the property that their immersed incompressible surfaces lift to embeddings in
              finite covers. A fundamental problem in topology is to classify the different
              types of 3-manifolds. When a 3-manifold contains an embedded incompressible
              surface, this classification can be achieved. More generally, if a 3-manifold
              has a finite cover containing an embedded surface, then this classification can
              be achieved. Residual finiteness and the related property of separability, are
              crucial ingredients needed to produce these finite covers. The aim of this
              project is to add these ingredients to the arsenal of low-dimensional
              topologists and geometers.  

Nearly all scientific thought concerns itself
              with discovering and understanding patterns. Symmetry is one of the most
              fundamental types of patterns. The study of symmetry ranges from the Platonic
              solids of the ancient Greeks to the groups occurring in modern particle
              physics.  A "group" is the complete set of symmetries of a geometric object.
              The symmetries of the object help us to understand its shape and nature.  For
              example, a ball has infinitely many symmetries, belonging to two classes:
              "rotational" symmetries, obtained by rotating the ball through any axis running
              through its center (just as our earth is now rotating), and "bilateral"
              symmetries, obtained by reflecting the ball through planes passing through its
              center (the northern and southern hemispheres of the earth are interchanged
              when we reflect through the equatorial plane). The easiest groups of symmetries
              to understand are finite groups of symmetries, such as the group of eight
              symmetries of a square. Sometimes an infinite group can be `collapsed' into a
              finite group. This collapse is similar to the projection of a shadow, and by
              examining enough of these shadows, one can glean information about the original
              infinite group. The investigator will study various infinite groups of
              symmetries that arise in conjunction with certain topological and geometric
              objects (3-manifolds and negatively curved spaces), which have recently been
              the focus of major study. The investigator will demonstrate that these infinite
              groups have sufficiently many finite shadows. This will elucidate the structure
              of these infinite groups and in turn will lead to a better understanding of the
              original geometric objects.         

