Title       : Collaborative Research: Group Decision-Making in Strategic Market Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2000   
File        : a0196032

Award Number: 0196032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99506              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Hayne hayne@acm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many important economic, political, scientific, cultural, and military decisions
              are made by groups.  Decision-making groups have many forms including families,
              committees, boards of directors, and legislatures. Many of these group
              decisions, especially the economic, military and political ones, are made in
              risky strategic environments in which the benefits or costs that result from a
              group's decisions depend on the decisions made by opponent groups.

But why
              is decision-making responsibility often assigned to groups, rather than
              individuals? Are important pieces of information possessed by different
              individual members who combine to form a group?  Are groups inherently more
              rational decision-makers than individuals?  Do groups make better decisions
              than individuals in some or all environments?  And if so, does this reflect an
              advantage from having more information available?  These are interesting
              empirical questions.

Research supported by this grant compares decisions
              made by competing groups with decisions made by competing individuals in
              controlled laboratory experiments conducted in a financially risky, strategic
              environment.  The environment is that of a common value auction in which
              bidders do not know the value of the items they are bidding on but have one or
              more estimates of that value.  Many naturally-occurring auction markets are
              characterized by bids for items of uncertain value, submitted by firms in which
              groups have determined the amounts to bid.  In contrast, theory has assumed
              that the bidder is a single rational individual and most previous common value
              auction experiments have involved bids by individual decision-makers.

In
              these experiments, group decision-makers variously have more, the same, or less
              information than individual decision-makers (in different sessions).  Group and
              individual decisions are compared with a quantitative measure of their
              deviation from minimally-rational decisions that yield the decision-maker zero,
              rather than negative, expected profit.

Beyond comparing group decisions with
              individual decisions, the research will include experiments designed to provide
              insight into the processes that competing groups use to arrive at their
              decisions in risky strategic environments.  In one type of experiment, the
              amount of information or size of the market will be changed during experiments,
              group discussions will be video- and audio-taped for subsequent transcription
              and analysis of the reasoning used by groups to respond to these treatments. 
              Previous experiments with individual decision-makers have found that they
              respond to an increase in the number of competing bidders by increasing their
              bids.  This is in sharp contrast to rational bidding theory, which implies that
              bids vary inversely with the number of bidders. How will groups respond to
              these treatments? 

In another category of experiment, computerized group
              support systems will be used to control the content of information that members
              of groups can exchange and to impose alternative decision rules such as simple
              majority voting and unanimous consent.  The experiments of this type are
              designed to reveal whether group decisions in strategic games can be
              rationalized by the use of these systems and whether internet communication by
              groups, rather than face-to-face meetings, could support rational bidding. 

