Title       : Multiplicative Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2001 
File        : a0196551

Award Number: 0196551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynne Walling                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : June 1,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin B. Ford ford@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will continue three projects in multiplicative number theory. 
              The first involves extending a famous conjecture of R. L. Graham on the maximum
              of a/gcd(a,b) over a,b lying in a finite set of integers.  In turn this problem
              has an application to a combinatorial problem on configurations of intersecting
              arithmetic progressions, on which the investigator has made substantial recent
              progress.  The second project deals with questions in "comparative prime number
              theory", the theory of subtle inequities in the distribution of prime numbers
              in arithmetic progressions.  The third investigation is an extension of the
              investigator's work on the distribution of "shifted primes" (sets {p+a: a
              prime} for fixed nonzero a) and related questions about arithmetic functions
              such as Euler's totient function and the sum of divisors function.

This
              project concerns several problems in the the area of number theory, the study
              of mathematical problems involving whole numbers (equations, inequalities,
              distributions, etc).  In recent years numerous applications of number theory to
              information theory have been discovered, such as "unbreakable" cryptosystems
              (RSA), data compression and digital data error detection (important in Internet
              and satellite communications).  Questions about how the prime numbers are
              distributed form one of the central topics in number theory, and play important
              roles in the aforementioned applications.  The investigator and his colleagues
              will study several questions concerning the distribution of primes.  One set of
              problems concerns subtle inequities in the distribution of primes in different
              arithmetic progressions, while another set involves questions about important
              arithmetic functions (functions f(n) defined on the positive integers which
              depend on the prime factorization of n).  The investigator has already made
              substantial progress on such questions, and further advances will contribute
              significantly to the theory of prime numbers.


