Title       : Molecular Mechanisms Regulating Patterning Along the Animal-Vegetal Axis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0196065

Award Number: 0196065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith M. Venuti jvenut@lsuhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LA St Med Ctr New Orleans
	      433 Bolivar St.
	      New Orleans, LA  701122223    504/568-4804

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              b-catenin and other components of the Wnt signaling pathway play an important
              role in the specification of cell fates along the animal vegetal axis of the
              sea urchin.  b-catenin is required for the specification of the micromere
              lineage and for the propagation of the vegetal inducing signal that emanates
              from micromeres. Since members of the TCF/LEF family of HMG box DNA-binding
              proteins are potential nuclear partners of b-catenin, we will explore whether
              they are essential components of the molecular pathway that underlies cell fate
              specification along the animal vegetal axis. We will focus specifically on
              whether TCF mediates b-catenin's effects in skeletogenic specification and
              micromere signaling and address the following questions:

 1) Does TCF
              mediate the specification of the micromere lineage? We will examine whether
              micromeres blocked in their ability to transduce the b-catenin signal by
              overexpressing dominant negative (DN TCF) differentiate as micromeres in situ. 
              We will determine whether the autonomous expression of b-catenin in micromeres
              at the 16-cell stage and in dissociated embryos is altered in DN-TCF expressing
              embryos.  We will also test whether micromere differentiation is potentiated in
              embryos overexpressing an activated TCF (Act-TCF).

2) To determine whether a
              TCF/b-catenin complex is essential for the propagation and/or reception of the
              micromere signal that induces the vegetal territory, we will ask whether DN-TCF
              interferes with the ability of micromeres to induce a 2o archenteron. 
              Micromeres from DN-TCF injected embryos will be transplanted to an uninjected
              host and 2o archenteron formation assessed with multiple markers of archenteron
              differentiation.  To ask whether host blastomeres in which b-catenin signaling
              has been blocked can respond to the vegetal inducing signal, uninjected
              micromeres will be transplanted to DN-TCF injected hosts and similarly
              assessed. 

3) Does the timing of TCF function coincide with the
              specification of the vegetal territory?  We will determine whether the role of
              b-catenin in specifying vegetal cell fates is dependent on its interaction with
              TCF.  We will examine the timing of TCF function and the competence of
              blastomeres to respond to Act-TCF or DN-TCF by overexpressing steroid inducible
              forms whose nuclear entry can be regulated.

4) Since the differentiation of
              oral vs. aboral ectoderm has been shown to be effected by different
              concentrations of b-catenin we will test whether ectoderm specification is also
              mediated by TCF.  We will examine the extent of oral and aboral ectoderm
              differentiation in embryos microinjected with different concentrations of DN-
              and Act-TCF. To further understand ectoderm specification we will also examine
              the effects of different concentrations of DN- and Act-TCF on the
              differentiation of oral vs. aboral ectoderm in isolated animal caps.

