Title       : Lumigraphs and Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a0196213

Award Number: 0196213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 31,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150363             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy Grimm cmg@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Introdurtion and Objectives.  Image-based rendering (IBR) is a relatively new
              computer graphics technique in which multiple images (either computer-generated
              or photographs) of a scene are modified and combined to produce an image
              representing a novel view of the scene.  The resulting images often have great
              detail but are sometimes incorrect, partly because of the lack of an underlying
              geometric model.  Traditional graphics, by contrast, uses geometric and
              lighting models to generate correct views of a scene from an arbitrary
              view-point; but because of modeling costs, they often lack detail.
An ideal
              geometric model would have both the complete geometry of the object plus a BRDF
              (bidirectional reflectance distribution function) at every point on the surface
              to describe how light interacts with the object, allowing computation of any
              view of the object under any lighting conditions.  A simple approximation to
              this ideal is a geometric model with a single color; texture maps improve this
              approximation by mapping an image onto the geometry.  This project is to devlop
              a new modeling paradigm, based on IBR, that extends this idea further by adding
              an approximation to the BRDF at every point on the surface.
This new modeling
              paradigm improves upon the efficiency of generating and storing image-based
              rendering models by combining them with geometric model information, thus
              bridging the gap between the two methods.  The intent is to construct geometric
              models which are visually complex and geometrically faithful, but avoid the
              overhead of geometrically modeled surface detail.
Just as important as
              developing an underlying model is the ability to use real-world objects to
              create the models.  Many of today's complicated geometric models were captured,
              using a laser scan or a 3D digitizer, from physical objects.  One goal of this
              research is a similar mechanism for capturing and rendering objects or scenes
              with complex visual properties.

Methods.  The two disciplines to be merged
              are image-based rendering and geometric modeling.  The project will use the
              lumigraph for IBR, partly because it already incorporates a limited geometric
              model, and will use a manifold-based models for the geometric component.  The
              lumigraph is a very general method for capturing the behavior of light as it
              leaves an object.  Manifold-based geometry supports construction of
              arbitrary-topology surfaces by blending small surface pieces.  The result of
              combining a lumigraph with a manifold is a geometric model that has information
              about how light rays are emitted from it.
With this structure, any local
              constancy in emitted light along the surface is easily recognized, leading to
              considerable data-compression advantages.  Thus, in addition to an interesting
              geometric model, this structure allows for efficient storage of IBR datasets. 
              This same local-constancy can be used as a guide to goodness-of-fit of the
              surface to the actual geometry of the object being modeled.  Each of these
              operations requires a homogeneous representation of the underlying geometry -
              one in which all of the points can be treated equally, rather than, for
              example, the division of the points into the vertices, edges, and faces of
              polyhedra, or the abutting patches of B-spline models.  The manifold structure
              provides exactly this homogeneity.

Impact.  Many image-based rendering
              approaches use some knowledge of geometry, usually depth.  The addition of
              explicit geometry object has two potential benefits; a richer modeling type, in
              which global lumigraph-like data is attached to a geometric foundation, and a
              means for explicitly exploring the relationship between geometry and the
              compression of data gathered from images.
The resulting models will be useful
              in multiple applications, particularly those in which high image quality is
              essential, but where explicit modeling is impossible.  These include
              special-effects production and educational applications (e.g., on-line medical
              models), as well as possible applications in reverse engineering and
              architectural lighting simulation.



