Title       : Collaborative Research: Multivariate Methods for On-Line and Off-Line Quality
               Control and Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2000  
File        : a0196088

Award Number: 0196088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83932              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Woodall bwoodall@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                    This research is a collaborative effort with Georgia Institute of
              Technolog.  This grant provides funding for the development and evaluation of
              new statistical methods to be used to monitor and improve manufacturing
              processes. These methods are to be applied in situations for which quality
              depends on several related quality measurements. The research involves both
              off-line and on-line methods. The off-line methods require the design of
              experiments and the most informative and efficient analysis of the resulting
              data. Emphasis is on the robust design of processes and products so that their
              performance is less sensitive to hard-to-control noise factors, such as
              environmental conditions during and after production.  Robust design improves
              product quality, manufacturability, and reliability. The on-line methods use
              data collected over time to detect changes in the process for which action is
              required. The use of multivariate outputs results in more reliable decisions
              about the process. Also, the methods developed will apply in cases for which
              the usual assumptions, such as multivariate normality, are not valid. Attribute
              data, for example, will be considered.
      The results of this research will
              lead to new statistical methods for improving design of products and
              manufacturing processes. It will also lead to more reliable methods for
              monitoring the quality of processes over time to detect important process
              changes. This will make quality improvement activities more effective in the
              design, development, and  production stages of manufacturing.

