Title       : Molecular Design of Polymer Interfaces at the Nanoscale: An Exploratory Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a0196338

Award Number: 0196338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Balaji Narasimhan nbalaji@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9984022
Rutgers University

The overall of his research
              proposal is to provide a basis to design engineer partially miscible polymer
              interfaces by obtaining meaningful relationships between molecular information
              information (interdiffusion mechanisms) and macroscopic properties (fracture
              mechanisms).  Such knowledge will lead to rigorous and objective design of
              polymer interfaces.  The adhesion of polymeric surfaces is technologically
              relevant in applications such as welding, melt processing, composite
              lamination, compatibilizer and blend technology, co-extrusion, and cracking
              healing among others.

The system chosen is polystyrene/brominated
              polystyrene (PS/PBS), a partially miscible blend, which lends itself to be
              conveniently investigated for both interdiffusion and fracture measurements
              over a wide range of identical physicochemical conditions.  The first phase of
              the research seeks to elucidate the mechanism of interdiffussion by
              quantitative understanding of the dynamics of macromolecular chains at
              interfaces.

The second component of the research will be directed towards
              relating the molecular information obtained from interfacial dynamics studies
              to the strength of the interface.  The fracture energy of PS/PBS specimens will
              be measured using a modified double cantilever beam test interfaced with a
              tele-miscroscope and an electronic speckle pattern interferometer.  The
              knowledge derived from this research will be pivotal to the rational design and
              control of polymer interfaces relevant to high performance materials, such as
              bioadhesives, electronic materials, and high performance nanocomposites. 

