Title       : High Order Boundary Perturbation Methods for Boundary Value and Free Boundary
               Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0196452

Award Number: 0196452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85421              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Nicholls nicholls.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 0072462
ABSTRACT.

The subject of this proposal is the development (both
              numerical and analytical) of a new class of 
perturbative methods for
              estimating solutions of boundary value problems (BVP) and free boundary
              problems (FBP) arising in mathematical physics.  Oscar Bruno and Fernando
              Reitich recently proposed a new class of perturbation methods for approximating
              solutions of BVP and FBP which are based on the ideas of classical perturbation
              theory applied to domains which are small deviations from exactly solvable
              geometries.  These methods are interesting because they are fast, easy to
              implement, and translate into three and higher dimensions without major
              modification.  Of course, such schemes are limited by the extent of their
              domain of convergence, which may be quite small, and the fact that in many BVP
              and FBP of interest, the domain is a large perturbation of a simple geometry. 
              This obstacle has been effectively overcome in recent work of Bruno & Reitich
              in the setting of acoustic and electromagnetic scattering via the introduction
              of analytic continuation techniques, in particular the use of Pade
              approximants.  A second challenge faced by the current class of perturbative
              methods is that they suffer from problems of numerical ill-conditioning due to
              subtle cancellations which take place in their evaluation.  This drawback has
              been overcome by the PI & Reitich, for the problem of computing
              Dirichlet-Neumann operators (DNO) for Laplace's equation, via a straightforward
              change of variables which simply flattens the domain.  The PI proposes to
              extend the above results by developing a general purpose perturbative method
              for solving BVP and FBP which incorporates
both analytic continuation and
              domain flattening techniques.  To date, the techniques have only been applied
              independently to BVP.  The first objective is to first implement them
              simultaneously for the BVP of computing DNO (for Laplace's equation), and then
              extend these methods to the case of a genuine FBP (modeling the motion of the
              interface of an ideal fluid) dimensions.  An investigation of the effects of
              bottom topography and multiple fluid layers on the methods will follow, and
              considerations will be made of other classical FBP (e.g. Hele-Shaw flows,
              Stefan problems, etc.) whose geometries will pose their own challenges. 
              Subsequently a thorough re-investigation of the problems of electromagnetic and
              acoustic scattering will be completed with domain flattening techniques
              implemented to overcome numerical ill-conditioning problems.  Finally, the
              problem of implementing transparent boundary conditions in scattering problems
              via DNO will be considered.

Many important scientific problems are defined
              on complicated domains that may or may not evolve in time.  These problems,
              such as the scattering of electromagnetic radiation from a rough surface or the
              evolution of surface waves on a fluid, pose severe theoretical and
              computational difficulties for applied mathematicians and engineers. When the
              domain of the problem is simple (rectangular, circular, etc.) the problem can
              usually be solved explicitly by classical methods.  One approach to the
              estimation of more general problems is to first consider domains which are
              small deviations from simple geometries.  Many approaches along these lines
              have been proposed, but unless great care is taken, they can result in
              approximations that actually degrade as the approximation is refined.  A new
              technique, developed by the PI & Fernando Reitich, avoids such difficulties and
              provides an exciting new method for the estimation of problems on complicated
              geometries.  However, challenges still remain and these are the subject of this
              proposal.  One challenge is to extend our new methods for small domain
              deviations to problems which are large deviations from a simple geometry. 
              Another challenge is the fast and efficient implementation of these new methods
              on high performance serial and parallel computers.

