Title       : Si-Based Tunnel Diode Integration with CMOS and SiGe HBTs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0196054

Award Number: 0196054
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Berger pberger@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1602,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to integrate Si-based tunnel diodes with CMOS and
              SiGe HBT
technology to demonstrate circuits which exhibit higher circuit
              speed, reduced
component count, and lowered power consumption, and which
              extend CMOS on the
Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA) Roadmap without a
              linewidth reduction.

The proposed project would establish an integrated
              program by involving universities
(Delaware and Rochester Institute of
              Technology) and government research laboratories
(Naval Research Laboratory)
              with the goal of making the first Si-based tunnel diode
integrated circuit.
              The research will focus on simple tunnel diode circuits which combine
Si-based
              tunnel diodes with CMOS and SiGe HBT technology. The work will be
synergistic
              with another project (NSF-ITR) involving Michigan, Delaware, NRL and RIT
which
              proposes to study the new circuits enabled by this technology.

This proposed
              project focuses upon developing integration recipes with CMOS and
HBTs. This
              body of work includes: studying the back-end thermal budget for
unmetalized
              CMOS to withstand tunnel diode processing; finding appropriate
              cleaning
etchants which prepare the surface for MBE overgrowth while being
              benign to the pre-existing
CMOS; develop selective etchants to remove unwanted
              poly-crystalline MBE
growth atop the CMOS; perform MBE overgrowth into
              pre-defined windows atop
source/drain implants; examine possible emitter/base
              junction displacement with tunnel
diode overgrowth; develop selective etchants
              to mesa etch the TD atop the HBT
structure; and realize some simple tunnel
              diode transistor circuits. The Si-based tunnel
diodes have already been
              developed (NSF CAREER- Berger, DARPA- Ultra
Electronics) and are currently
              being optimized (NSF GOALI-Berger, NRL and
Raytheon). SiGe HBT integration
              will be performed by Delaware and by the NRL team,
who have considerable
              experience in the growth and fabrication of SiGe HBTs. For this
proposed
              project, Dr. Phillip Thompson at NRL will perform the MBE growths,
Delaware
              will perform tunnel diode and SiGe HBT fabrication and testing, and RIT
              will
perform the CMOS fabrication.

Strong interaction between the
              University of Delaware, the Naval Research Laboratory
and Rochester Institute
              of Technology will foster open discussion and dialogue. This
proposal seeks to
              bring together circuit designers, semiconductor device engineers and
CMOS
              technologists for the sole purpose of realizing tunnel diode/transistor
              circuits on a
Si platform. Undergraduate research and student training will
              play a significant role at
Delaware through existing and anticipated NSF REU
              supplements and at RIT through
their student-run CMOS factory and RIT's senior
              thesis projects. RIT's budget includes
an undergraduate researcher. The
              cross-disciplinary work and site visits to NRL research
labs will enhance the
              educational process.
