Title       : CAREER: Statistical Signal Processing for Wireless Communication Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0196152

Award Number: 0196152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Barton rbarton@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
This research effort is focused on solving fundamental problems that
              limit the performance of future broadband digitalwireless communication
              systems. The emphasis is on problems within the general area of statistical
              signalprocessing. In recent years, close connections between the fields of
              statistical signal processing and communication systems have been elucidated,
              and many significant problems have been solved by exploiting these connections.
               With the explosive growth of wireless communication networks and the advent of
              new broadband wireless technologies, problems that may have been of secondary
              importance in the past are becoming more fundamentally related to the
              performance limits of communication systems. The following problems are being
              studied in this research. Uncertainty Tolerance. Current and future wireless
              systems will operate in heavily cluttered and mobile environments in which
              channel characteristics vary rapidly over time. This imposes limits on the
              accuracy of estimates of important channel parameters and implies that
              receivers must operate in an environment characterized by a high level of
              uncertainty. To address this problem, this investigation considers the design
              and analysis of low-complexity, adaptive wireless receivers that exhibit good
              performance characteristics in the presence of multiple sources of complex
              structured interference as well as significant uncertainty regarding the exact
              structure of that
interference. Robust adaptive modulation techniques are
              being studied in parallel with adaptive receiver design.  Adaptive Algorithms
              for Ultrawideband Systems. Modern radars and newly proposed impulse radio
              systems rely on transmitted signals of very short duration, correspondingly
              large bandwidth, and relatively low duty cycle. Such signals possess
              statistical properties that can be exploited to improve the performance of
              adaptive channel estimation algorithms. Techniques that exploit these
              properties are known but have not been studied in the context of such
              ultrawideband systems, where they can be expected to be of particular
              importance. In this study, adaptive channel estimation algorithms for system
              identification on impulse radio channels are being investigated. The emphasis
              is on higher-order statistics, as opposed to conventional second-order
              algorithms. Previous work by the investigator clearly indicates that
              higher-order channel  estimation techniques perform extremely well on impulse
              radio systems.  Nontraditional Noise Sources. Additive white Gaussian noise
              (AWGN) has traditionally been regarded as the dominant noise source in
              communication system design. Unfortunately, many sources of interference that
              plague modern communication systems are not well modeled as AWGN. A particular
              characteristic of many
environmentally generated noise sources is strong
              long-term dependence. Although such interference is additive and often well
              modeled as Gaussian, it possesses properties such as fractal sample paths and
              1/f-type spectra that can cause significant performance degradation on systems
              that are not appropriately designed. In this work, the problem of signal
              detection in the presence of an additive, stationary 1/f-type noise process is
              considered. The class of fractional Gaussian noises (FGN) is adopted as a model
              of 1/f noise. Most of the known results on signal detection in FGN were derived
              by the investigator in an earlier study. The current study builds on this
              earlier work to derive performance results for several classes of transmitted
              signals and demonstrate that proper signal selection and receiver design are
              both critical for communication systems operating on additive FGN channels.
              Multipath Interference. Urban mobile wireless networks are corrupted by
              significant amounts of multipath interference, the characteristics of which
              vary rapidly over time. Such channels are ubiquitous and often well
              characterized as fast, frequency-selective Rayleigh fading channels, but good
              general purpose simulators that can be easily tuned to match particular channel
              characteristics do not yet exist. The availability of a generic simulator for
              arbitrary fast Rayleigh fading channels would greatly facilitate the
              development of practical receivers for such channels. New channel simulators
              appropriate for arbitrary spread-spectrum waveforms transmitted over
              arbitrarily time-varying, frequency-selective multipath fading channels are
              being developed and implemented in this study.

