Title       : Strategies to Promote Active Learning in Chemistry Courses: Multi-Intiative
               Dissemination Workshops
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0196527

Award Number: 0196527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1061204            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen L. Lewis eileen@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Moore  (Principal Investigator former)
              Brock Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Arlene A. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Pratibha Varma-Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
The five major projects funded by the National Science
              Foundation through the Systemic Changes in the Undergraduate Chemistry
              Curriculum initiative have developed a wide range of teaching innovations that
              transform traditional passive lecture courses into active learning courses.
              These innovations have in common the goal of making students responsible for
              constructing their own ways of knowing. These projects, ChemLinks, ModularCHEM,
              Molecular Science, New Traditions, and Workshop Chemistry, have spent up to
              five years developing these innovations and have begun a number of efforts to
              disseminate the results. While the impact of various dissemination mechanisms
              is still being evaluated, it has become clear that the single most effective
              dissemination strategy is to hold hands-on workshops wherein faculty can gain
              experience with the diverse range of innovations and choose those which best
              match their individual teaching styles. Only then can they fully appreciate the
              impact such strategies can have on students' learning styles and habits.
              Faculty response to these early workshops has been extremely positive and
              suggests that there is a need for this dissemination effort to continue well
              beyond the five-year grant period of these reform initiatives.

This project
              allows the five projects to continue to offer faculty development workshops for
              an additional three years. The schedule of workshops provides a predictable
              dissemination effort, allows continued evaluation of the effectiveness of the
              workshops, and significantly increases the likelihood that these collective
              efforts will impact the structure and pedagogy of the traditional general
              chemistry curriculum across the United States. The format at these workshops is
              to provide materials and meals at no cost to participants and to require
              participants to cover their travel expenses. We invite teams of faculty from
              participating institutions so that there is local, on-campus support for
              innovations that are adopted/adapted as a result of the workshop exposure, thus
              enhancing the probability that changes are sustained. The budget for each
              workshop includes funds to subsidize the travel for one institution that may
              otherwise not be able to send participants. 

