Title       : Regulation of the Aspartate Pathway of Amino Acid Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a0196107

Award Number: 0196107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Viola ron.viola@utoledo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Toledo
	      2801 West Bancroft
	      Toledo, OH  436063328    419/530-2844

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The aspartate biosynthetic pathway leads to the formation of the amino acids
              lysine, methionine, threonine and isoleucine. In plants and microorganisms, and
              possibly even in higher organisms, fully one-quarter of the amino acids that
              are required for protein synthesis are linked through this pathway. This
              project involves an examination of the mechanisms of regulation of this
              pathway. This will be accomplished by structural and mechanistic studies of the
              enzymes that catalyze the core reactions in this pathway, followed by an
              examination of the interactions that occur between these enzymes. The first and
              third steps in the pathway are catalyzed by two bifunctional isoenzymes.
              Aspartate 13-semialdehyde dehydrogenase catalyzes the intervening branch point
              reaction between the aspartokinase and the homoserine dehydrogenase reactions.
              A wide range of kinetic, modification, and mutagenesis studies will be used to
              examine the mechanisms of these enzymes. X-ray diffraction studies are underway
              to complete the structural characterization of this family of enzymes. Kinetic,
              chromatographic, and cross-linking studies will be used to examine the
              association between the intact enzymes, and between the separated structural
              domains that will be produced and expressed. Newly assembled bifunctional
              enzymes will be created at the protein level by the cross-linking of catalytic
              and regulatory domains, and at the genetic level by gene fusion studies.
              Finally, the possible channeling of metabolic intermediates in this pathway
              will be assessed by kinetic studies, association chromatography studies,
              chemical cross-linking, and structural characterization. The initial metabolic
              intermediates in this biosynthetic pathway, an acyl phosphate and a
              semialdehyde, are both unstable in an aqueous environment. There would appear
              to be some advantage in protecting these reactive intermediates in the
              aspartate pathway from exposure to solvent. Upon completion of this project we
              will have a much clearer understanding of the nature of protein-protein
              interactions between soluble enzymes and of the conditions that favor the
              channeling of substrates between consecutive active sites. The answers to these
              questions will have general applications for enzymes in other metabolic
              pathways.


