Title       : Natural Selection on Continuous Reaction Norms: Thermal Sensitivity of Feeding
               in Pieris Catepillars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a0196132

Award Number: 0196132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel G. Kingsolver jgking@bio.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For most organisms, how well an individual performs vital tasks- eating,
              growing, moving, etc-varies with that individual's body temperature.  The PIs'
              call the relationship between performance and body temperature a thermal
              performance curve.  How do performance curves evolve?  How does natural
              selection act on performance curves for populations in the field?  Is
              infrequent exposure to extreme low or high temperatures more important than
              frequent exposure to 'good' temperatures for natural selection on performance
              curves?  The proposed research addresses these questions, by studying thermal
              performance curves for growth and feeding rates of caterpillars of the Cabbage
              White, a common and widespread butterfly species that feeds on a variety of
              native and agricultural crucifers (including cabbage, collards and related
              vegetables).   The PIs' will measure patterns of genetic variation in thermal
              performance curves in the lab, and determine how variation in performance
              curves affects survival, generation time and fecundity in experimental collard
              gardens.  By simultaneously characterizing caterpillar body temperatures in the
              field, the PIs can assess how patterns of temperature variation relate to
              selection on thermal performance curves for growth and feeding.  The PIs can
              then directly test this relationship by manipulating temperature variation
              (using partial shade cloths) in the garden and measuring the changes in
              selection on thermal performance curves.  These studies will provide the first
              studies of selection on thermal performance curves in the field.  Because
              Cabbage Whites are an agricultural pest with unusually large geographic range
              (e.g. they occur throughout most of North America, Europe, Japan and
              Australia), these studies will also add to our understanding of temperature
              adaptation in this widespread pest species:  How is it able to tolerate and
              adapt to the wide range of temperatures experienced in these different
              geographical areas?
