Title       : Medicago Truncatula as the Nodal Species for Comparative and Functional Legume
               Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  2001      
File        : a0196179

Award Number: 0196179
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3540561            (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Cook drcook@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal K. Van Alfen  (Principal Investigator former)
              Dongjin Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria J. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher D. Town  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel W. Cartinhour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn A. VandenBosch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The legume family is one of the most important groups of plants worldwide, as an
              important source of protein in the human diet, of fodder and forage crops for
              animals, of oil crops, and for available nitrogen in the biosphere.  Moreover,
              several crop legumes are among the best characterized plant genetic systems,
              with numerous classical genetic markers, well developed DNA marker maps, and
              basic tools for genome analysis.  Nevertheless, despite the investment of
              considerable resources from private and public sources, features such as large
              and complex genomes, and difficulties with introduction of foreign genes have
              severely limited the pace of molecular analysis in crop legumes.  In response
              to the need for a simple genetic system in legumes, investigators selected
              Medicago truncatula as a model species for legume biology.  Unlike the major
              crop legumes, Medicago truncatula is amenable to efficient molecular and
              genetic analyses and it is well suited for study of biological issues important
              to the related crop legume species.  

This project will undertake the large
              scale analysis of Medicago truncatula's total DNA, called its "genome".  In
              particular, a map of the organization of genes (comparative genomics), and of
              their functions in plant biology (functional genomics), are the emphases of
              this project.  Recent results from this research team document the first
              indications of conserved genome structure between Medicago truncatula and crop
              legumes and between Medicago truncatula and the well-characterized model plant
              Arabidopsis thaliana.  Conserved genome structure between model plants and
              related crop species is significant because it is expected to accelerate the
              pace of cloning and characterization of agronomically important genes and
              traits.

Research activities conducted under this program will encompass the
              following approaches:  (1) comparative genomics, which will involve comparing
              the organization of genes between Medicago truncatula the crop legumes pea,
              alfalfa, and soybean, and the well-characterized model plant Arabidopsis
              thaliana; (2) functional genomics, which will involve constructing and
              characterizing a library of expressed gene sequences, and conducting large
              scale gene expression analysis to study gene function, and (3) bioinformatics,
              which will involve developing a database and database resources for analysis
              and dissemination of Medicago truncatula genome information.

The long term
              impact of this research will be to integrate genetic and functional information
              across legumes, and thereby expand opportunities for basic and applied research
              in economically important legume species.  This research will allow scientists
              to compare genes of agronomic and scientific interest in Medicago truncatula
              and the related crop legumes.  This knowledge will enable more efficient
              cloning and characterization of valuable genes and traits, such as disease
              resistance and crop productivity, and it will ultimately facilitate the
              development of improved crop varieties.  The database of expressed genes
              generated by this research will enable the detailed analysis of the role of
              specific genes in plant growth and development.  Many of the genes identified
              in the course of this research will become the focus of crop improvement
              strategies and of continued scientific investigation by legume biologists.  The
              proposed work benefits enormously from previous NSF-sponsored research on the
              model plant Arabidopsis thaliana.  Likewise, completion of the project will
              benefit not only research on legumes, but the broader scientific community as
              well.

