Title       : Accomplishment-based Renewal: Ecological Genetics of Daphnia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0196450

Award Number: 0196450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $524000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Lynch milynch@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9903920
Lynch

This study utilizes the microcrustaceans Daphnia pulex and
              Daphnia pulicaria as model systems to characterize the roles of mutation and
              natural selection in limiting the range of phenotypic variation within species.
              To evaluate the properties of spontaneous mutations for life-history
              characters, long-term mutation accumulation experiments are being applied to
              initially identical lines. To evaluate whether the most extreme phenotypes
              observed within species are constrained by the availability of mutations,
              experiments will be performed to determine whether extreme phenotypes tend to
              mutate back towards the mean of the species-wide phenotype distribution. The
              role of natural selection in defining population mean phenotypes will be
              evaluated through temporal collections of clones assayed in a common-garden
              experiment. Comparison of the phenotypic means and genetic variances of these
              collections will reveal: 1) whether the mean phenotypes of populations are
              defined by local selective conditions or by other nonselective events (such as
              founder effects), 2) the extent to which the response to directional selection
              is thwarted by the breakup of adaptive nonadditive gene interactions following
              recombination, and 3) the degree to which selection encourages the production
              of hidden genetic variation.
	
A fundamental goal of evolutionary genetics is
              to understand the mechanisms that define the levels of genetic variation for
              quantitative traits within and among populations. Such variation provides the
              substrate for the operation of natural selection, which in turn molds
              populations in response to local environmental challenges. This work will
              provide an unprecedented level of understanding of the relative and interactive
              roles that mutation and natural selection play in defining the range of
              phenotypic variation at the species-wide level, and should enhance our
              understanding of the genetic flexibility of species in the face of changing
              environments. 




