Title       : The Peritrophic Envelope as a Barrier to Absorption of Ingested Allelochemicals
               in Insect Herbivores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9407128

Award Number: 9407128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond V. Barbehenn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9407128  Martin         The goal of this project is to clarify the role of the 
              peritrophic envelope (PE) in protecting insects from  ingested toxins. The PE
              is thin membranous sheath that lines  the midguts of insects, which is the
              section of the  digestive track where digestion of food and absorption of 
              nutrients occurs. Several functions have been proposed for  the PE: (1)
              protection of the gut lining from damage by  abrasive food items; (2)
              prevention of access to the gut  wall by bacteria  and viruses; and (3)
              compartmentation of  the midgut resulting in improved efficiency of digestion
              and  assimilation. In this study the PI will test the hypothesis  that the PE
              also serves as a barrier to the absorption of  many toxins. The PI has already
              demonstrated that the PEs of  two caterpillar species are impermeable to tannic
              acid,  which is a toxic phenol that occurs in plants. In order to  determine
              whether the failure of common plant toxins to  penetrate the PE is a general
              phenomenon, or one limited to  tannins, we will determine the permeability of
              the PEs from  a selection of species of both caterpillars (Lepidoptera)  and
              grasshoppers (Orthoptera) to a wide range of toxin  classes that include
              compounds with a variety of chemical  and physical properties.       Possible
              mechanisms that might result in the  containment of chemicals within the PE
              include: (1)  absorption on the inner surface; (2) the presence of pores  in
              the PE that are too small for the toxin molecules, either  free or complexed
              within other molecules, to pass through;  (3) association of the toxin with
              lipid aggregates that are  too large to pass through the pores of the PE; and
              (4)  repulsion between negatively charged groups on the toxin  molecule and
              negative charges present in the matrix of the  PE. Results obtained to date
              rule out absorption as the  mechanism in Lepidoptera, and measurements of PE
              pore size  suggest that the pores are too large to restrict the passage  of
              uncomplexed toxin molecules. Additional expe riments will  be conducted to test
              the other possible mechanisms.     This study will advance our understanding of
              the basic  physiological and biochemical adaptations of insects to  natural and
              synthetic toxins. Our findings might have  practical significance in the area
              of pesticide development  and in efforts to produce pest-resistant crops by
              plant-  breeding programs or by genetic engineering.  ***
