Title       : Recognition of RNA Sequences During Pre-mRNA Splicing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9407272

Award Number: 9407272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Siliciano pauls@lenti.med.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9407272  A central challenge driving research on pre-mRNA splicing is
              to  understand how splice sites are recognized with consummate specificity.  We
              have recently identified a novel interaction between the first and  last
              nucleotides of a pre-mRNA intron that is involved in the  recognition of the 3'
              splice site. This /G-G/ interaction (where /G  represents the 5' splice site
              and G/ represents the 3' splice site) is  essential for the second step of
              splicing. This project is designed to  characterize the /G-G/ interaction and
              place it in the context of the  other RNA-RNA and RNA-protein interactions in
              the spliceosome. The  /G-G/ interaction takes place in the mature spliceosome,
              which contains  more than 50 proteins and at least 3 snRNAs. One of these
              splicing  factors could participate directly in the interaction or could
              function  indirectly to assist, stabilize, or proofread the interaction. The 
              snRNAs are excellent candidates for such roles. Of special interest is  the U5
              snRNA, which base pairs with exon sequences at both splice  sites, placing it
              in a position to facilitate the interaction. Roles of  snRNAs in the /G-G/
              interaction will be identified by screening banks  of mutant snRNAs to isolate
              mutant snRNAs that increase the efficiency  of this interaction. Alternatively,
              a protein splicing factor could be  involved. Candidates for such proteins
              include the products of the PRP  genes (pre-mRNA processing), several of which
              are required exclusively  for the second step of splicing. These PRP genes will
              be mutagenized in  vitro and screened for the ability to affect the /G-G/
              interaction.  We will also obtain biochemical evidence for the interaction
              using the  yeast in vitro splicing system. First, we will induce random RNA-RNA
               crosslinks in spliceosomes formed in extracts from prp mutant strains  that
              are defective in step ll of splicing. These spliceosomes are  "frozen" in the
              second step of splicing, and should allow observation  of crosslinks between
              RNAs involved in th e interaction. To test for a  direct interaction, synthetic
              pre-mRNAs will be synthesized that  contain crosslinkable nucleotide analogs at
              the 5' and 3' splice sites.  These RNAs will be incubated in prp mutant
              extracts and crosslinked.  The sites of crosslinking will be mapped using
              primer extension and  RNase T1 analysis We will also use UV crosslinking to
              determine the  timing of the /G-G/ interaction relative to other interactions
              in the  spliceosome. Ordering the /G-G/ interaction relative to other splicing 
              events will tell us which other splicing factors are present when the 
              interaction occurs, allowing us to generate more detailed models for  the
              second step of splicing.  %%%  Intervening sequences, also called introns, are
              regions of DNA that do  not belong to the gene, and which must be removed in
              order for the gene  to function properly. Introns are removed by the process of
              RNA  splicing, which takes place after the DNA has been copied into  messenger
              RNA. During this process, the messenger RNA is cut, the  intervening sequences
              removed, and the RNA rejoined to produce a  functional copy of the gene.
              Introns must be recognized with consummate  specificity so that only sequences
              of the intron, and not of the real  gene, are removed. A major unsolved
              challenge is to determine the means  by which the beginning and end of the
              intron are identified. More than  50 proteins and 5 RNA molecules are required
              for splicing, but the  precise functions of these factors in intron recognition
              remain  unknown. These studies seek to understand the mechanism by which the 
              ends of the introns are recognized. We have previously demonstrated  that RNA
              sequences at the end of the intron interact with the RNA  sequences at the
              beginning of the intron, and that this intron-intron  interaction is essential
              for RNA splicing. In this work, we will  demonstrate the exact chemical means
              by which this interaction takes  place. We will use ultraviolet light to form
              chemical crosslinks  between the different RNA  sequences that recognize the
              end of the  intron. This information will allow us to build precise models of
              the  intron-intron interaction. In a complementary strategy, we will use 
              genetic screens to identify additional RNA and protein molecules that  affect
              this interaction. Such molecules could participate directly in  the
              intron-intron interaction, or could function indirectly to assist,  stabilize,
              or proofread the interaction. Identification of these  molecules is essential
              for a complete understanding of intron  recognition. Our long term goal is to
              understand how RNA sequences  interact with other RNAs and with proteins to
              carry out the splicing  reaction with high specificity. The studies in this
              grant represent an  important step towards that goal by defining the means by
              which the  ends of introns are recognized.  ***
