Title       : Studies on the Role of Adenovirus E1B Oncoprotein in Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9407333

Award Number: 9407333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne D. Vales   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9407333  The adenovirus 21 kDa E1B protein has been reported to assist
              the  adenovirus E1A protein in cellular transformation, increase gene 
              expression, stabilize DNA, and abrogate apoptosis induced by E1A.   The
              mechanism whereby E1B functions in these phenomena is presently  unclear.  Our
              earlier findings showed that E1B protein led to  increased gene expression from
              another adenovirus gene that encodes  the capsid protein, polypeptide IX (pIX).
               Our present  investigations of the pIX gene show that E1B protein does indeed 
              increase gene expression by offsetting transcriptional repression.  
              Recombination signal sequence binding protein, RBP, acts as a  transcriptional
              repressor of the pIX gene.  This repression does  not entail displacement of
              the activator SP1 or TATA binding  protein from their respective sites on the
              pIX promoter or by  competition with another activator. These findings
              represent the  first reported function of RBP, other than DNA binding.  This
              novel  function appears to pertain directly to at least one of the many  roles
              E1B exhibits in the cell.  We will now investigate the  molecular mechanism of
              RBP-mediated repression using the adenovirus  pIX gene.  The positioning of RBP
              at the pIX promoter will be  analyzed with respect to perturbations in assembly
              of the general  transcription factors and steric hindrance to activation. The
              RBP  functional domain(s) responsible for repression will be  investigated
              using analyses performed in vivo and in vitro.  Since  E1B protein offsets RBP
              repression, the mechanism of RBP repression  should bear on E1B activity, as
              well as contribute to understanding  gene regulation, in general.  We will also
              initiate studies on the  anti-RBP repressive affect of E1B protein.  E1B
              protein will be  tested for direct interaction with RBP and affects on
              complexes  containing RBP and the pIX promoter.  The ability of RBP to repress 
              activation of the viral pIX gene is crucial to its regulation.  The 
              participation of E1B in relieving th is repression may provide the  unifying
              property to this multi-functional protein.  %%%  The cellular protein RBP is
              present in many different cell lines.   Originally, RBP was thought to be a DNA
              recombinase.  However,  recent studies have shown that RBP is actually a
              repressor that  binds to DNA and inhibits transcription.  This newly discovered
               activity associated with RBP will be explored during the time  period of this
              award.  Using an adenovirus gene, experiments will  be performed to understand
              how RBP silences gene expression.   Remarkably, recent studies have revealed
              that RBP repression is  absent when an oncoprotein is present.  Adenovirus
              produces an  oncoprotein during cellular infection and this function may be 
              important to the means by which the virus participates in loss  of cellular
              growth control.  The protein exhibits a number of  properties which currently
              appear to be unrelated: participation in  loss of cellular growth control,
              increased gene expression, and  stabilization of DNA. Thus far, the means by
              which this protein  elicits these effects is unknown. The protein provides an
              excellent  model for exploring cellular processes. The goal of this award is 
              to understand how RBP represses transcription to provide the basis  for
              understanding how the EBI protein offsets this repression.  ***
