Title       : Densification Mechanisms During Drying and Sintering of Sol-Gel Derived Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9407958

Award Number: 9407958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114556             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kieffer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                      ABSTRACT  Proposal No. CTS-9407958  University of Illinois
              Urbana-Champaign  P. I.:  John Kieffer      The investigation of the
              densification behavior of gels, using a combination of experimental and
              computational techniques is proposed.  The objective of the proposed research
              is develop a better understanding of the molecular scale mechanisms of
              densification, particularly during the drying and sintering phases of sol-gel
              derioedceramics.  Brillouin light scattering will be used to measure the
              high-frequency complex mechanical modules of the equilibrium gel structures,
              prepared under different chemical conditions, and at different stages along
              their densification path.  The elastic component of this modulus assesses the
              structural rigidity of the gel skeleton, and allows one to monitor structural
              developments along the densification path.  The loss component predominantly
              reflects the viscous dissipation between the gel backbone and the solvent which
              flows throughout its pores.    The interpretation of the experimental findings
              will  be accomplished by means of molecular dynamic computer simulations.  With
              simulations, models of the gel-solvent systems will be generated which allow
              one to study their properties on the same time and length scales as the
              inelastic light scattering, and to establish the relationship between the gel
              structure and is dynamic behavior.  The relative contributions of network
              relaxation and solvent-network friction will be assessed by complementary a.c.
              conductivity measurements of samples containing salt-doped solvent.    The
              expected outcome of the research is a fundamental understanding of the
              molecular scale mechanisms that control the drying and densification of gels. 
              This permits a better control of this processing method.  Furthermore, a
              technique for the direct measurement of gel viscosity and permeability,
              parameters which are difficult to access otherwise, will be devised.
