Title       : Mechanisms and Evolution of Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9407988

Award Number: 9407988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Pruett-Jones aspj@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9183,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                              This research involves ecological and behavioral studies of  a
              group of passerine birds native to Australia.  Species in  this group exhibit a
              variety of interesting patterns of  behavior, the study of which will aid in
              understanding  evolutionary processes and social behavior in non-human 
              species.  Individuals live in large social groups, and the  offspring from one
              generation remain in the territory and  help the parents raise young in
              successive breeding  attempts.  Despite the close social ties among individuals
               in the same group, females generally mate with males outside  their social
              group.  By testing hypotheses for the evolution  of this type of social
              organization, Dr. Pruett-Jones hopes  to elucidate the factors important in the
              very general  problem of mate choice by both males and females.  In his  study
              of reproductive patterns, he is using the technique of  DNA fingerprinting and
              other molecular techniques.  One of  these techniques, microsatellite analysis,
              has not been used  before in such studies.  Thus apart from the topic under 
              study, this research will contribute to the field of  molecular genetics and
              the development of new techniques of  analysis that may have applicability in
              human research.  Two  of the species under study, the striated grasswren and 
              mallee emu-wren, are endangered and restricted to mallee  scrub habitats,
              perhaps the most limited and endangered  habitat in Australia.  In their
              ecology, these two species  share many characteristics with other vertebrate
              species  restricted to mallee habitats.  This study will contribute  to the
              conservation of mallee habitats and provide  information critical to the
              management of endangered mallee  species.
