Title       : The Isolating Potential of a Post-Insemination Barrier to Fertilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1996        
File        : a9407229

Award Number: 9407229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Howard dahoward@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Cain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Howard  9407229   Achieving an understanding of the evolution and the nature of
              reproductive isolation (lack of successful interbreeding between closely
              related species) is a fundamental goal of biologists.  The goal has been
              elusive, reflecting the difficulty of identifying and characterizing the
              trait(s) responsible for the onset of reproductive isolation.  Only long term
              studies focusing on closely related species that have been well characterized
              ecologically and evolutionarily are likely to provide important new insights. 
              A large amount of previous work on the ground crickets Allonemobius fasciatus
              and A. socius indicates that these sister species are reproductively isolated
              by a barrier to fertilization that operates after mating.  Although described
              for the first time only recently, this type of reproductive barrier has begun
              to attract a great deal of attention from biologists as an increasing number of
              studies indicate that many closely related terrestrial animals are isolated in
              such a way.  In the work proposed here, the barrier to fertilization  between
              A. fasciatus and A. socius will be further characterized by studying patterns
              of mating in both species, the strength of the barrier to fertilization, and
              the genetic basis of the barrier.  The  results of these studies will be used
              to construct computer simulation models of the reproductive isolating potential
              of a post-mating barrier to fertilization.  A laboratory test to the isolating
              potential of the fertilization barrier will provide an important check on the
              computer simulation results.   The work described in this proposal explores a
              new area in speciation research--the role played by post-mating barriers to
              fertilization in the reproductive isolation of closely related species.  At the
              same time, the work will have bearing on an old debate in biology, whether
              reproductive isolation arised through mutations of small effect
              (micromutations) at many genes, or through mutations with large effects
              (macromutations) at one or a few  genes.  The proposed work has important
              implications in two applied fields--agriculture and conservation biology.  The
              family Gryllidae (crickets) includes some very serious agricultural pests.  The
              proposed research will provide badly needed information on reproductive biology
              of crickets--information that can be used to help develop biological control
              programs.  In conservation biology, the integrity of rare species is often
              threatened by hybridization with more common sister species.  Hence,  achieving
              an understanding of how reproductive barriers operate is critical for
              preventing the loss of biological diversity.
