Title       : Effects of Consumers on Spatial Heterogeneity in Their Resources in Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1995    
File        : a9407591

Award Number: 9407591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott D. Cooper scooper@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9407591  Cooper   Although recent theoretical and empirical investigations have
              indicated the profound influence of spatial heterogeneity on the dynamics of
              populations and communities, there have been few examinations of the effects of
              consumers on spatial heterogeneity of their resources. In this research, the PI
              will apply spatial statistics to the analysis of large experiments manipulating
              grazers, predators, and nutrients to quantify the effects of consumers and
              nutrients on spatial heterogeneity in lower trophic levels in streams. The PI
              will also quantify the distributional responses of consumers to different
              aspects of patchiness in their resources. The design incorporates both a budget
              approach, so that we can determine the mechanisms responsible for direct
              predator effects (prey emigration vs predator consumption), and multi-trophic
              level interactions,  so that the PI's can examine the direct and interactive
              effects of different predators (trout, stoneflies) on their prey
              (invertebrates) and their prey's resources (algae). Subsidiary investigations
              will determine scales of patchiness and overlap in consumers and their
              resources in natural streams. This research will be guided by trophic chain
              models for open systems that incorporate spatial heterogeneity.  %%%  The
              proposed research is the first to explicitly use spatial statistics to address
              the effects of consumers on the spatial heterogeneity of their resources. This
              approach will greatly expand our understanding of how top-down forces effect
              community structure and dynamics within a spatially-explicit context.
