Title       : Effects of Lateral Shading on the Long-Term Dynamics of Tropical Rainforest
               Canopies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9407853

Award Number: 9407853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taber D. Allison                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley R. Herwitz sherwitz@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Slye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen M. Turton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1325,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9407853  Herwitz  Height differences of neighboring canopy tree crowns are
              responsible for the characteristic roughness of tropical rainforest canopies. 
              If the three-dimensional form of such a canopy was known, the differential
              interception of direct solar radiation by the more prominent canopy trees and
              the lateral shading of their less prominent neighbors could be determined. 
              Crown asymmetry, which increases canopy tree susceptibility to windthrow  and
              toppling because of the crown's uneven weight distribution is believed to be
              the best result of lateral shading.  The objective of proposed study is to test
              the hypothesis that differential interception of solar radiation has a
              predictable influence on the long-term survivorship and growth patterns of
              tropical rainforest canopy trees.  This hypothesis will be tested by: (1)
              three-dimensional modeling of a tropical rainforest canopy in Queensland,
              Australia using data derived from large-scale aerial stereophotographs taken in
              July 1976; (2) determining the annual daily courses of solar radiation for the
              selected site; (3) applying a 3-D model to simulate light interception over the
              course of a year; (4) computing the light-intercepting crown area/total crown
              area; (5) using the direct solar radiation model survivorship probabilities and
              growth potential; and (6) analyzing the predicted compared with actual  derived
              from large-scale aerial steropairs to be taken in a proposed overflight
              sequence in July 1994.  To our knowledge, no study has previously examined
              tropical rainforest canopy dynamics over a comparable time period with the same
              resolution that will be obtained using our proposed combination of large-scale
              aerial photogrammetry and computer modeling.  Identification of some of the
              factors contributing to the spatial patterns of mortality, survivorship, and
              growth of neighboring plants competing for sunlight will allow a clearer
              understanding of the interactions among canopy trees and more accurate models
              of carbon and water exchanges i n tropical rainforests.
