Title       : Protein Interactions of ptGRP1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9407991

Award Number: 9407991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Condit   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Higher plants, like their animal counterparts, follow a  specific developmental
              program that leads from a single cell  to a complex, functional multicellular
              organism composed of  a myriad of cell types, tissues, and organs.  In animals,
               the interaction of the cytoskeleton-extracellular matrix  complex in
              development, cell morphogenesis and gene  expression is well documented, while
              in plants the exact  role comparable proteins (including those of the cell wall
               and periplasm) play in development and cell morphogenesis  has yet to be
              elucidated.  It is likely that cytoskeleton-  extracellular matrix proteins in
              plants will also be found  to play a significant and dynamic role in
              development and  morphogenesis.  Recently, this investigator has shown that 
              petunia glycine-rich protein 1 (ptGRP1) can be isolated as a  member of a large
              protein complex that is located either in  the periplasmic space or just
              internal to the plasma  membrane.  Preliminary in vitro translation studies
              indicate  that ptGRP1 possesses a true signal sequence; therefore, it  is
              likely that the ptGRP1 complex is located in the  protoplasm.  The investigator
              hypothesizes that it may  function as an organizer of the periplasmic space or
              as a  cytoskeleton-cell wall connector.  Consistent with this  hypothesis,
              immunocytochemical studies show that the  expression of ptGRP1 correlates
              directly with expansive  growth and that this protein is most highly expressed
              within  the vascular system.  Moreover, the presence of ptGRP1  antisense RNA
              results in aberrant development of the plant.  Cytological studies show that
              all ptGRP1 antisense  morphological mutants have an inability to form a normal 
              coherent vascular system.  In addition, decreased expression  of ptGRP1 in
              these mutants correlates directly with the  severity of the mutation.  These
              experiments indicate that  normal GRP expression is necessary for correct
              formation of  the vascular system.
