Title       : Gene Expression in the Pneumocystis Life Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1994       
File        : a9407810

Award Number: 9407810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Saundra L. Stringer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,9221,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407810  Stringer     This project is being funded as a Research Planning 
              Grant.  The work centers on Pneumocystis, an exotic fungus  which was for many
              years thought to be a protozoan, and  which may represent a new order of fungi.
               The organism  exists in morphologically distinct developmental forms,  cysts
              and trophic forms, and very little is known about its  life cycle.  The project
              will address a single fundamental  and important question: can genetic markers
              be identified  which are specific to the different forms of Pneumocystis?  The
              specific aims are to separate the cysts and trophic  forms of Pneumocystis from
              natural isolates, prepare mRNA  from the different forms, compare them by a
              PCR-based  technique called differential display to identify cDNAs that  appear
              to be differentially expressed in the different  forms, use standard analytical
              techniques to verify that the  mRNAs detected by differential display are
              present in  different amounts in the different forms, and determine the 
              sequences of these differential cDNAs.  In addition, in situ  hybridization
              will be used to define expression of the mRNAs  in the various forms of the
              organism.  %%%  Pneumocystis is an unusual fungal pathogen that is commonly 
              found in mammalian lungs and which causes pneumonia in  immuno-compromised
              mammalian hosts.  It is difficult to  study because to date it has not been
              cultured successfully  in vitro.  Taxonomically, it appears to be only
              distantly  related to other known fungi, and in fact for many years was 
              mistakenly believed to be a protozoan.  Because of the novel  taxonomic status
              of this organism, the significance of  studies of it extend well beyond merely
              learning more about  an important pathogen.  Molecular research on Pneumocystis
               and organisms like it has only recently begun.  The proposed  work will be an
              important contribution to the evolutionary  and general biological
              understanding of fungi in general.  ***
