Title       : Realistic Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Proteins in Mixed Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9407903

Award Number: 9407903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie D. Daggett daggett@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407903  Daggett    This is a Research Planning Grant Award.  The overall goal 
              of the proposed research is to pursue realistic molecular  modeling studies
              relating to protein stability, structure,  and folding.  Specifically, mixed
              solvent systems will be  developed to better mimic experimental conditions in 
              molecular dynamics and simulations.  With these more  accurate solvent
              representations, current studies in the  area of protein folding will be
              extended by simulating the  unfolding of ubiquitin in denaturant.  The molten
              globule  state of ubiquitin has been characterized in 60% aqueous  methanol
              solution at low pH independently by three research  groups.  The results are in
              opposition, with one study  suggesting that the molten globule conformation is
              almost  completely native-like (by hydrogen exchange), while the  others
              identify native-like and random coil regions of the  protein (by 2- and
              3-dimensional NMR).  In this project,  simulations under these conditions will
              be performed to  model the molecular details of the molten globule state of 
              this protein.  These simulations should shed light on the  experimental
              discrepancies.  In addition, by comparing the  detailed solvent-protein
              interactions occurring in pure  water versus an aqueous methanol solution, it
              should be  possible to address how the solvent affects the stability of 
              proteins in various conformations (e.g., native, partially  unfolded and fully
              unfolded).  Furthermore, the question of  how the unfolding pathway differs as
              a function of  temperature, pH and solvent conditions will be investigated. 
              %%%  A knowledge of the structural and mobility properties of  proteins is
              essential to understanding their properties and  functions.  For globular
              proteins, internal motion is  important to stability, catalysis, ligand
              binding,  macromolecular recognition and protein folding.  The solvent 
              environment necessarily plays a critical role in these  processes. 
              Computer-assisted simulations can provide  detailed information in th ese areas
              that often cannot be  obtained experimentally, especialy in the case of protein
               folding where it has proved difficult to characterize  proteins during the
              folding process.  Protein folding is one  of the fundamental unsolved problems
              in molecular biology  and can no longer be considered an esoteric scientific 
              topic.  To quote Science magazine on the subject, "Why are  the stakes so high?
               One reason is that the payoff isn't  merely theoretical ... The right answer
              is going to make a  difference not only to protein chemists but also to all of 
              biotechnology." (Hoffman, 1991).  Protein folding is an area  where experiment
              actually needs theory, as it is unlikely  that experimental studies will ever
              be able to provide  structural information about protein folding in comparable 
              detail to that available for native proteins.  Computer  power has now reached
              the stage where protein unfolding can  be simulated in water with all atoms
              present.  The next  logical step is to perform simulations with more accurate 
              representations of the environment, focusing on proteins for  which structural
              experimental data of folding intermediates  are now available.  ***
