Title       : Molecular Genetic Dissection of Haustorium Development in Parasitic Angiosperms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1996  
File        : a9407737

Award Number: 9407737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John I. Yoder jiyoder@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Studies examining the molecular mechanisms of plant-plant  interactions have
              been impeded compared to those in plant-  microbe interactions in large part
              because simple laboratory  based model systems are lacking.  The interaction of
               parasitic Scrophulariaceae with their host plants offers one  of the best
              opportunities for integrating modern  biochemical, physiological, and genetic
              methodologies to  understand how plants communicate in the environment.  The 
              overall objectives of this research are to learn how plant  parasitism
              originates and evolves, to understand how  chemical signals initiate the
              development of parasitic  organs and mediate their functions, and to discern
              how  parasitic plants recognize and distinguish hosts, non-hosts,  and self. 
              These studies are focused on the defining organ  of plant parasitism, namely
              the haustorium.  This  specialized multi-functional structure recognizes the 
              distance and direction to the host, penetrates host vascular  tissue through a
              combination of enzymatic and invasive  growth, and forms a conductive bridge
              through which the  parasite robs nutrients from the host.  While well 
              characterized at the morphological level, almost nothing is  known about the
              genetic mechanisms controlling haustorium  initiation, development, or
              function.  The experiments in  this proposal make use of parasitic members of
              the  Scrophulariaceae family as model organisms to study  haustorium
              development because:  all stages in the evolution  of plant parasitism, ranging
              from complete autotrophs to  obligate non-photosynthetic heterotrophs, are
              represented by  contemporary species; the biochemistry of haustorium  induction
              and histology of haustorium ontogeny are most  advanced for this family;
              facultative parasitic  Scrophulariaceae are readily grown in the presence or 
              absence of host in both soil and axenic culture; haustoria  of these species
              can be synchronously induced by in vitro  treatment of seedlings with purified,
              host encoded  compounds; one of the best devel oped model systems for  studying
              plant development (Antirrhinum) is a member of this  family; and parasitic
              species of this family are among the  world's most devastating weed pests. 
              These experiments take  two complementary approaches to examine haustorium 
              development in parasitic Scrophulariaceae.  (1) Haustorium  specific genes are
              being isolated and analyzed to obtain  clues about their origin, their function
              in parasitic  plants, and their role in non-parasitic relatives.  Expression
              studies will indicate their specificity for  heterotrophic plants and in situ
              hybridizations will  determine their specificity for haustoria.  (2) A model 
              system for defining the genetic determinants of haustorium  development is
              being developed.  In particular, different  hemiparasitic Scrophulariaceae are
              being evaluated for their  amenability to genetic analyses including ease of
              growth in  the presence and absence of host, amenability of both  parasite and
              host to genetic analysis, and the fidelity of  haustorium induction in vitro. 
              Genetic colinearity  relationships between selected parasitic Scrophulariaceae 
              and Antirrhinum will be examined as a shortcut to developing  the genetics of
              the parasitic member.  Finally, the genomes  of parasitic species will be
              examined for containing  endogenous Tam-like transposable elements that can be
              later  incorporated into mutagenesis experiments.
