Title       : Verification of Computer Database for the Ichthyological Collection of the Field
               Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9407568

Award Number: 9407568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Westneat mwestneat@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Chernoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9189,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407568  Westneat    The collection of fishers at the Field Museum of Natural
              History contains more than 1.7 million specimens in about 125,000 lots
              representing more than 9,000 species and 320 families.  The Collection and its
              supporting facilities are recognized as an International Center of Ichthyology.
               The fish collection serves as a major depository for historically important
              collections, including type specimens for more than 1,420 nominal species, the
              collection is world-wide  in scope and in recent years has been enriched by the
              addition of major collections from South America, the Western Atlantic Ocean,
              and the Western Pacific Ocean. Many of these collections come from previously
              unsampled localities and may never be duplicated.  The holding of the
              collection are extensively used both nationally and internationally.  They
              constitute an important source of primary research materials for professional
              scientists and students engaged in the studies of systematics, biodiversity,
              morphology, molecular genetics, and conservation biology.    The accessibility
              and exchange of information regarding the holdings of natural history
              collections are critical to both basic and applied research.  Therefore, the
              institution is engaged in a long-range plan to create and manage an accurate
              computerized database containing the records of all fish specimens housed in
              the FMNH collections.  This plan consists of three major stages:  (1) data
              entry and proofing, (2) verification of computer records and holdings, and (3)
              cataloging and shelving of our enormous backlog.  The initial state of data
              entry into the database software system MUSE has bee completed.  Updated of the
              computer records and verification of their accuracy must be continued.  This
              project will support the second major stage of establishing the database for
              our collection: verification of the accuracy of all computer records by
              comparing the computer records with the physical holdings of the collection. 
              The hardware of the local area compu ter network will be upgraded to increase
              the speed of retrieval of information, and bring the system closer to the goal
              of connection with the Internet computer network.  At the conclusion of the
              project period, the FMNH fish collection records will be among the most
              accurate specimen databases available and will be accessible to biological
              researchers worldwide.
