Title       : Craft Production and Sociopolitical Hierarchy in Southern Mesoamerica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9407751

Award Number: 9407751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward M. Schortman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Urban  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      
	      Gambier, OH  43022    614/427-2244

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Schortman    With National Science Foundation support Drs. Schortman and Urban 
              will continue their archaeological work in the 96 km2 Naco valley  which is
              located in NW Honduras. Their prior research has  revealed over two millennia
              of continuous occupation predating  the Spanish Conquest. This span was
              characterized by changes in  political centralization and the extent to which
              the valley was  integrated within a single polity. The team will focus their 
              attention on one of the most marked centralizing episodes, the  Late Classic
              period (AD 600-95) when Naco and its immediate  environs were administered from
              the site of La Sierra. Although  concentration of power at La Sierra is
              strongly indicated by the  archaeological record, it is much harder to identify
              the factors  which underlie this political process. Evidence suggests that La 
              Sierra's rulers monopolized the production and distribution of a  limited range
              of generally needed items. These goods, the  researchers hypothesize, were
              fashioned using complex, difficult-  to-learn skills on materials localized in
              the capital. In effect,  control was achieved through the imposition of an
              economic  monopoly. However, data also indicate that this monopoly was not 
              complete and that outlying areas manipulated the system to obtain  varying
              degrees of autonomy. The goal of the present research is  to evaluate in detail
              how this system worked. The research team  will excavate a series of sites, not
              only in the capitol of La  Sierra, but also in a number of outlying areas which
              are located  at different distances from it.    This research is important
              because it will shed new light on how  complex societies emerge and are
              maintained. The level of  effective political centralization observed in the
              Naco valley is  widely replicated in many parts of the third world today. 
              Archaeology offers the possibility to gain unique insight into  such political
              mechanisms because it permits them to be followed  over extended time periods.
              The work is also import ant because it  will involve a large number of
              undergraduate students and  encourage them to pursue careers in science.  ***
