Title       : Reorganization of the Collections of the Paleontological Research Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9407364

Award Number: 9407364
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $459864             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren D. Allmon wda1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Paleontological Res Inst
	      1259 Trumansburg Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9407364  Allmon   The combined collections of invertebrate fossils and Recent
              mollusks of the Paleontological Research Institution (PRI) and Cornell
              University (CU) contain almost two million specimens, including the fifth
              largest collection of invertebrate fossil type and figured specimens in the
              United States, and constitute a major potential resource for research and
              education in paleontology and systematics.  These collections, however, have
              been almost completely inaccessible to potential users.  In September 1992, PRI
              embarked on a program of renovation of staff and facilities that included
              reorganization and preliminary inventory of its collections.  As result, these
              collections are now usable by staff and visitors.  Yet they are still
              inadequately housed and curated.  The CU collection of Recent mollusks is
              fairly well curated and inventoried, but inadequately housed in an out-of
              -the-way location.  The CU collection of invertebrate fossils is poorly
              curated, largely univentoried, and housed in inadequate facilities without any
              curatorial staff in an out-of-the-way location.  Funds will be used to support
              the first phase of a complete reorganization of the PRI and CU collections of
              invertebrate fossils and Recent mollusks, involving moving the CU facilities,
              together with approximately half of the existing PRI collections.  This will
              allow these important collections to be curated properly and cared for in a way
              that will make them fully available to the research and educational
              communities, and that will prepare them for eventual computerization.
