Title       : CAA: Analyses of Chemical Defenses in Young Leaves of Tropical Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1994       
File        : a9407835

Award Number: 9407835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55521              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis D. Coley coley@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9222,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9407835  Coley   In tropical rainforest, most predation on plants by herbivores
              occurs on young leaves.  Rates of damage are 20 times higher than on mature
              leaves, and 70% of the lifetime damage takes place during the short period of
              leaf expansion.  Damage is high because young leaves are tender and rich in
              protein.  Toughness, the most effective defense, is not possible during leaf
              expansion.  This suggests that other defenses, including secondary chemical
              metabolites, may be particularly important in young leaves.  Theoretical
              considerations of sequestration, reclamation and turnover rates of compounds
              also suggest that young leaves should contain a diversity of chemical defenses.
               However, previous studies that quantified total phenolic or tannin
              concentrations were unable to explain variation among species in rates of
              herbivory.  Thus a more detailed perspective of chemical defense in young
              leaves is needed in order fully to understand plant-herbivore interactions in
              the tropics.   The PI proposes to examine the secondary metabolites in young
              leaves by isolating and identifying as many compounds as possible from each of
              a few species.  The deterrent or toxic activity of isolated compounds will be
              tested using a suite of natural enemies ranging from viruses, bacteria and
              fungi to insects.  These sophisticated chemical analyses will allow the PI to
              address a variety of ecological and evolutionary questions about
              plant-herbivore interactions, including: 1) are current theories correct in
              predicting a great diversity of secondary metabolites in young leaves?  2)  Why
              does a single species have a variety of secondary metabolites?  Is it an
              adaptive response to the occurrence of a diversity of natural enemies?  3) It
              has been argued that synthesis of secondary metabolites may be physiologically
              incompatible with another major defense of young leaves, namely rapid expansion
              to shorten the period of vulnerability.  The data gathered in this study will
              shed much light on all these intriguing ecologi cal problems.
