Title       : Structure and Function of the Arabidopsis Phytochrome Photoreceptor Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9407864

Award Number: 9407864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Sharrock sharrock@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,9198,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9407864  Sharrock  This award addresses the general question of how plants
              sense the  environmental light cues that control their physiological and 
              developmental processes.  More specifically, the proposal tests a  model for
              the organization and function of a plant regulatory  photoreceptor system, the
              red/far red light-sensing phytochrome  family.  In this model, covalent linkage
              of a light-absorbing  chromophore to the diverse family of phytochrome (PHY)
              apoproteins  gives rise to a heterogeneous population of photoreceptors which 
              have differential roles in control of photomorphogenesis and may be 
              differentially expressed in various plant cell types.  Work from  the preceding
              grant has shown that five phytochrome apoproteins are  encoded by a PHY gene
              family in Arabidopsis thaliana and that  similar though not identical PHY gene
              families are present in all  flowering plants.  An understanding of the
              individual roles of the  phytochromes in light control of plant physiology and
              development  is clearly an important goal.  In the current funding period,
              major  emphasis is placed on analysis of the functions and the regulation  of
              the recently identified fourth and fifth Arabidopsis  phytochromes, PHYD and
              PHYE, and on the structural determinants of  phytochrome functional
              specificity.  The research directly  addresses basic questions concerning the
              organization of a plant  photoreceptor family and the mechanisms of
              light-activated plant  developmental responses.  Moreover, many
              phytochrome-controlled  responses are components of important agronomic traits
              such as seed  germinatiion, yield, and flowering time.  Hence, the phytochrome 
              receptors are likely targets for future modification in crop plants  via plant
              biotechnology.    ***
