Title       : RUI: Ty Insertional Mutagenesis in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9407612

Award Number: 9407612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119904             (Estimated)
Investigator: Molly F. Mastrangelo mollym@ac.cc.md.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Allegany Community College
	      12401 Willowbrook Road, SE
	      Cumberland, MD  215022596    301/784-5000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9407612  Abstract  The major goals of this project are to increase the general
              utility  of insertional mutagenesis using inducible Ty elements in the  budding
              yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and to gain a better  understanding of the
              mechanism of gene disruption by Ty.  In  addition, the techniques used are
              designed insofar as possible to  involve undergraduate students, to increase
              their understanding of  and interest in scientific research.  This study uses a
              plasmid-  borne Ty element controlled by an inducible promoter, GAL1, and 
              marked with the HIS3 gene.  Disruptions of essential genes on  several
              chromosomes have been isolated by inducing transposition in  a diploid strain
              and screening for cases in which the TyHis+  haploid progeny is non-viable. 
              The predicted rate for lethal  gene disruptions, if the pattern of insertions
              is random, is about  12% of TyHis+ insertions.  The observed rate is 0.3%,
              indicating a  limited number of permissible targets.  Attempts to broaden the 
              target region for Ty insertion will include use of mutant strains  with altered
              chromosome function, and transposition induction in  meiotic cells.  An
              alternate screening technique, to isolate  mutants resistant to
              alpha-mating-type pheromone, produced  insertionsof TyHis+ multimers into HML
              alpha, a normally silent  gene containinginformation for mating-type control. 
              Unlinked  suppressors which restore silencing in hml alpha ::TyHIS3 mutants 
              have been isolated as well.  Characterization of the suppressors,  including
              their interactions with genes affecting chromatin  structure, will increase
              understanding of the silencing mechanism  at HML alpha  and may help to define
              some properties of this  particular target of Ty integration.  %%%  Genetic
              research has given society much of the scientific knowledge  from which society
              has so profoundly benefited.  The production of  mutations is an essential
              element of genetic research.  In this  project, the investigator will attempt
              to broaden the usefulness of  a biologic al tool, the Ty element of yeast, in
              generating new  mutations.  She will also study its mechanisms of gene
              disruption.   The investigator, a professor at a rural community college, will 
              involve her students in this research, thus significantly raising  their
              scientific literacy and possibly inspiring some to pursue  research careers. 
              ***
