Title       : African Wave Disturbances in the GISS GCM and their Relationship to Climate
               Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9407018

Award Number: 9407018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150852             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard M. Druyan ld12@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1303,1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ATM-9407018  Druyan, Leonard  Columbia University  Title: African Wave
              Disturbances in the GISS GCM and their  Relationship to Climate Variability   
              African wave disturbances are wave-like perturbations in the mid-  tropospheric
              easterly circulation of boreal summer over northern  Africa which organize
              distinctive spatial patterns of convergence  and often precipitation.  Although
              Sahel seasonal precipitation is  associated with these waves, GCM studies of
              the interannual  variability of sub-Saharan rainfall have not explicitly
              considered  their influence.  The research is based on preliminary work which 
              found a reasonably realistic representation of African waves in the  GISS GCM. 
              The project will study wave behavior in the model at 4x5  degree and 2x2.5
              degree horizontal resolution, and the relationship  between this modeled
              behavior and the principal circulation  features of the African summer monsoon,
              namely the tropical and  African Easterly Jets.  An archive of GCM simulations
              of some 10-20  summer seasons will be created from model runs forced with
              observed  global SST for selected years during the 1950's through the 1980's 
              (including years of anomalously sparse or abundant Sahel rainfall).   In
              addition, wave characteristics will be analyzed from an ensemble  of three
              equilibrium simulations with doubled CO2 concentration.   For each run, model
              winds and precipitation will be saved as six-  hour averages for grid boxes
              over northern Africa.  These data will  be used to construct wave composites of
              winds, divergence and  precipitation rates for different locations, months and
              years.   Power spectra of meridional wind and precipitation time series will 
              show the spectral peaks that are related to African wave  periodicities. 
              Cross-spectra will document the mutual correlations  of circulation and
              precipitation and spatial mapping of selected  spectral amplitudes will
              highlight the geographical areas of  preferred activity.  Interannual
              variations in the composites,  spectra, cross-spec tra and spatial and spatial
              distributions of  spectral amplitudes will reflect variability of wave behavior
              for  contrasting scenarios of drought and heavy precipitation and for  the
              warmer, double-CO2 climate.  Model results will be compared  with analyses of
              observations in the literature and with analyses  of time series of
              corresponding twice-daily observed ECMWF winds.    This research is import
              because it seeks to increase our ability to  simulate and predict climate
              variability.
