Title       : RPG: Calcium Currents in Hippocampal Inhibitory Interneurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9407579

Award Number: 9407579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17820              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Mynlieff mynlieffm@vms.csd.mu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9407579  Mynlieff                              ABSTRACT                         
                                                                                     
              Regulation of neurotransmitter release into the synaptic  cleft is a primary
              means of achieving synaptic plasticity in  the central nervous system.  Since
              influx of calcium through  voltage-dependent channels is necessary for
              neurotransmitter  release, modulation of the activity of these channels by 
              neurotransmitters is likely to be a common mechanism of  regulating synaptic
              plasticity.  There is currently no  consensus on the identity of the calcium
              channel controlling  excitatory or inhibitory neurotransmitter release, thus 
              raising the possibility that different synapses may use  different channel
              types.  Future studies in Dr. Mynlieff's  laboratory will exploit the
              well-characterized circuitry of  the hippocampus to investigate the identity of
              the calcium  channels by neurotransmitters.  The first specific aim is to 
              develop the techniques necessary to dissociate inhibitory  interneurons from
              the hippocampus suitable for patch clamp  studies.  The second specific aim is
              to pharmacologically  characterize the calcium currents present in different
              types  of inhibitory interneurons using whole cell voltage clamp  recording
              techniques.  A thorough knowledge of the calcium  channel pharmacology in
              various presynaptic cells is  necessary before any studies are performed on the
              identity  of the calcium channel(s) controlling release of  neurotransmitters
              using the hippocampal slice preparation  A  thorough characterization of the
              calcium currents is also  necessary before performing any studies on
              neuromodulation  of these channels which may lead to changes in synaptic 
              function. Many different neurotransmitters are known to  modulate synaptic
              function and also to modulate calcium  currents but it is not clear that these
              two events are  related.  By combining experiments in isolated presynaptic 
              cells where the calcium currents can be easily ident ified  with experiments in
              the hippocampal slice preparation where  specific synapses can be stimulated in
              isolation Dr.  Mynlieff hopes to make the connection between modulation of 
              calcium currents and modulation of neurotransmitter release  stronger. Although
              the future plans in Dr. Mynlieff's  laboratory includes investigating both
              excitatory and  inhibitory synapses in the hippocampus, the experiments 
              outlined in this proposal concentrate on the inhibitory  neurons because much
              less is known about the inhibitory  presynaptic cells than the excitatory
              presynaptic cells in  the hippocampus. Understanding how neurotransmitters 
              regulate specific synapses by modulation of distinct calcium  channel types
              will provide insight into some of the  mechanisms of synaptic plasticity.
