Title       : Regulation of Methane Flux From Freshwater Wetland Sediments By Competing
               Anaerobic Microbial Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1995     
File        : a9407233

Award Number: 9407233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196661             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric E. Roden eroden@bsc.as.ua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Wetzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9407233  Roden  Anaerobic microbial processes in the decomposition of sediment
              organic matter , and methane is typically the dominant end-product of anaerobic
              metabolism in wetland sediments.  Methane is the second-most important
              atmospheric "greenhouse" gas, and it is crucial that accurate estimates of
              current and projected rates of methane production and emission to the
              atmosphere be developed for global climate change evaluations.  Factors which
              control regional variations in methane production and emissions are important
              to process-level ecological research.  Several recent studies of freshwater
              wetlands in the southeastern U.S. have indicated that non-methanogenic carbon
              mineralization processes account a large part of carbon metabolism.   The
              proposed research examines the hypothesis that competition by non-methanogenic
              anaerobic microorganisms for substrates of anaerobic metabolism can divert
              carbon metabolism away from methane production and thereby suppress methane
              release from freshwater wetland sediments.  In particular, microbial iron oxide
              reduction may be an important carbon decomposition pathway in the typically
              iron-rich, sulfate poor freshwater wetlands found throughout the southeastern
              U.S..  A wetland in the Talleasdega National Forest in Alabama will be used as
              a model system to examine this hypothesis.  Microbial iron oxide reduction and
              iron cycling processes will be examined in two locations, the sediment surface
              , where iron oxides are deposited or formed by reaction with oxygen introduced
              from the atmosphere or overlying water;  and the rhizosphere, where iron oxide
              layers form in association with transport of oxygen through aquatic plant roots
              (for respiratory metabolism) into the sediment.  Time course laboratory studies
              of gas exchange, dissolved and solid phase chemical distributions, and rates of
              microbial metabolism will be conducted in artificially constructed sediment
              cores with and without emergent aquatic plants.  The results of these
              laboratory studies will be  compared to analogous field measurements in order
              to assess the significance of iron oxide reduction in anaerobic carbon
              mineralization, and to quantify its influence on methane production and flux to
              the atmosphere directly and through emergent aquatic vegetation.  While
              advancing knowledge of carbon cycling pathways in the Talledega wetland, the
              research will also furnish a base of information to which the studies of
              anaerobic metabolism and regulation of methane release from different types of
              wetland ecosystems can be compared.
