Title       : Isolation and Characterization of Virescent Mutants in Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1994      
File        : a9407920

Award Number: 9407920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Brusslan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9407920  Brusslan     This is a Research Planning Grant.  The objective are to: 
              1, isolate virescent mutants from EMS, fast-neutron, and T-  DNA  mutagenized
              Arabidopsis; 2, characterize the  development of the photosynthetic apparatus
              in these mutants  using absorption spectroscopy, fluorescence emission, 
              transmission electron microscopy, and native Deriphat gel  electrophoresis; 3,
              to analyze mutants with regard to  temperature sensitivity as well as
              sensitivity to differing  light intensities; and 4, to perform a genetic
              analysis.  The genetic analysis will include reciprocal backcrosses to 
              determine if mutations are inherited maternally or through  either parent,
              complementation studies between the different  mutant lines, and crosses
              between mutant lines and a wild  type line of a different ecotype to permit
              RFLP mapping.  The long term goal is to clone and characterize genes whose 
              products are involved in the regulation of chloroplast  development in higher
              plants.  %%%  The chloroplast is the site of photosynthesis and carbon 
              fixation, and its development is critical for plant  survival.  The chloroplast
              originated as an endosymbiont of  photosynthetic bacteria, and over time many
              regulatory  functions of the bacterial genome wre taken over by the  nucleus. 
              Although many mutations that alter the chloroplast  have been isolated from a
              large number of different plant  species, none so far have led to clear
              understanding of the  molecular events that regulate chloroplast development in
               higher plants.  The model plant system, Arabidopsis  thaliana, offers an
              opportunity to understand this process  because genes involved in plastid
              development that are  identified by mutation can be cloned.  The objective of
              the  work proposed in this research planning grant is to isolate  mutants in
              Arabidopsis that display a delay in greening  phenotype (termed virescent) in
              order to evaluate mutations  most likely to be involved in the regulation of
              chloroplast  development.  Several mutants have alr eady been obtained,  and
              more will be obtained.  These will be characterized  biochemically,
              structurally, and genetically in order to  identify those of the greatest
              potential for understanding  chloroplast development.  The long term goal of
              this work is  to clone the genes responsible for these mutations and to 
              understand their functions.  ***
