Title       : Theory of Solids/Electronic Structure and Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1993    
File        : a9308011

Award Number: 9308011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter Kohn kohn@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              9305092  Little  Treatment of E. coli by agents that damage DNA or inhibit 
              replication triggers the SOS response to the damage that promotes  cell
              survival by a variety of means.  This response involves the  action of two
              regulatory proteins: LexA, which represses about 20  SOS genes during normal
              growth, and RecA, which is activated by  inducing treatments to a form that
              catalyzes the specific cleavage  of LexA repressor, inactivating it and leading
              to induction of the  SOS genes.  Hence, specific cleavage plays a crucial role
              in the  SOS response.  In addition to this central regulatory role of LexA 
              cleavage, this reaction is of considerable biochemical interest.   Its
              mechanism is unusual, in that LedA cleaves itself in an  intramolecular
              reaction termed autodigestion, and activated RecA  acts to stimulate LexA
              self-cleavage under physiological  conditions.  In these conditions, LexA
              cleavage is designed to  proceed slowly, but at the same time to be capable of
              large rate  increases.  This view raises two related questions: What is the 
              mechanism of LexA autodigestion, and how can RecA protein  facilitate this
              reaction? Three complementary approaches are  proposed to address these
              questions.  The first is to continue to  isolate and characterize mutations
              that influence the rate of LexA  cleavage.  The second approach is to continue
              to develop the  bimolecular LexA cleavage reaction, in which one molecule of
              LexA   or lambda repressor acts as an enzyme to cleave other molecules of 
              LexA.  The third approach is to look for physical evidence that  LexA can exist
              in two different conformational states.    %%%  An increasingly large number of
              biologically important reactions  are being discovered that are intramolecular.
               These include self-  splicing RNA introns, autophosphorylation and
              autophosphatase  activity of chemotaxis proteins, and autophosphorylation of 
              oncogeny proteins, growth factor receptors, and other important  proteins. The
              proposed work is of general significance for the  ins ights it is expected to
              yield regarding the properties of  intramolecular self-processing reactions,
              and the means by which  the rated of these reactions can be regulated by
              interactions with  other effector molecules.  ***
