Title       : A Proposed Study of the Late Neolithic in the Egyptian Sahara
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1996  
File        : a9308078

Award Number: 9308078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred Wendorf fwendorf@sun.cis.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angela E. Close  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9308078  Wendorf    With National Science Foundation support Drs. Fred Wendorf
              and  Angela Close will continue their study of the prehistory of the  Eastern
              Sahara Desert of Egypt. They will focus their work on the  Late Neolithic
              period, which dates from approximately 6,500 to  5,000 years ago and
              investigate two areas. The first is Nabta where  a large megalithic complex of
              standing stones has been located.  These are associated with a very large and
              deeply stratified site  which will be excavated. Through the recovery of faunal
              and floral  materials it will be possible to reconstruct subsistence patterns 
              and determine the extent of reliance on domestic vs. wild plants  and animals.
              The investigators will also conduct a survey of the  Nabta and adjacent basins
              and record all Late Neolithic  occurrences. A second area near Safsaf has
              yielded evidence of  herding camps which date to the same time range. By
              collecting and  refitting artifacts between sites, the investigators hope to
              trace  herders' movements and determine how they used this area.     Egypt is
              extremely important to our understanding of human  prehistory because it marked
              the cradle of one of the world's great  prehistoric civilizations. While much
              is known about the Pharonic  period, the roots of this civilization are not
              well understood. In  particular archaeologists wish to learn whether this
              culture  developed largely independently or whether, as many believe, it is 
              largely derivative from Southwest Asia. Drs. Wendorf and Close  believe that
              important cultural developments along the Nile were  strongly influenced by
              those in the desert to the West and this  research will provide relevant data.
              It will also increase our  understanding of how people at a relatively simple
              level of  technology adapted to the harsh fluxuating conditions in the  Sahara.
                 This research is important for several reasons. It will provide  data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will also increase our  understanding of
              how complex society develo ped and how humans adapt  to environmental stress.  
              ***
