Title       : Monitoring Heat Transfer Across the Active Layer Above Permafrost in Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1996   
File        : a9308334

Award Number: 9308334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194913             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Hinkel Kenneth.Hinkel@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
              9308334  HINKEL       Rising concentrations of carbon dioxide and other gases in
               the atmosphere are expected to cause global warming.  The effects  of warming
              are expected to be amplified and observable first in  high latitudes.  Current
              models predict that rapid warming will  combine with increases in summer
              rainfall and winter snowfall in  northwestern North America, conditions that
              may result in rapid  degradation of permafrost throughout large parts of Alaska
              and  northwestern Canada.  Similar conditions may also persist in  northern
              Eurasia.  Although permafrost is not in direct contact  with the atmosphere,
              seasonal snow cover, surface vegetation, and  an organic mat serve as an active
              layer that buffers heat  transfer.  Energy passes through this active layer
              through  convection and through non-convective processes (including 
              evaporation and condensation, freezing and melting, and  volatilization and
              sublimation), which consume or release latent  energy.  High-frequency
              measurements of temperature and water-  ionic concentrations in soils conducted
              by the investigator in  discontinuous permafrost regions covered by boreal
              forests in  Alaska have indicated that the non-conductive processes can,  under
              some circumstances, dominate heat transfers in freezing and  thawing soils. 
              This project will continue this line of research  in both areas of
              discontinuous permafrost and expand it into  Arctic areas where permafrost is
              continuous.  Data will be  collected at two different scales, with
              high-frequency monitoring  of near-surface processes conducted at three sites. 
              Measurements  also will be taken in the upper levels of permafrost at the same 
              sites in order to refine methods for observing changes in crucial  variables in
              this critical zone.       This research will make contributions from both
              substantive  and methodological perspectives.  It will add to general 
              knowledge about the role of non-conductive processes within the  buffering
              active layer above permafrost, especially as that la yer  responds to changes
              in temperature and precipitation.  Expansion  of this line of research into the
              upper layers of permafrost will  increase understandings of processes in this
              zone and will  provide tests of the feasibility for new monitoring procedures 
              that might have utility in many similar locales.  ***
