Title       : A Simplified Approach to Robust Estimation in the Instrumental Variables Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1993    
File        : a9308309

Award Number: 9308309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79551              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie Flavin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308309  Flavin    While robust regression estimation has been an active area of
               research in the statistics literature for the past twenty years,  robust
              estimators have not been fully exploited in applied  econometric work, despite
              the widespread recognition that  economic data sets are very likely to contain
              highly influential  observations or outright data errors.  The first part of
              this  project is to encourage the use of formal robust methods in  applied
              econometric research by evaluating a robust estimator  suitable for
              simultaneous equations settings, which is both  extremely intuitive and very
              simple to implement computationally.   In essence, the first part of the
              project is designed to convince  applied econometricians that robust estimation
              is easier than  they may have thought.      The second part of the project is
              designed to convince the same  audience that robust methods are more necessary
              than they may  have thought.  Instead of looking at the implications of using 
              robust estimators in place of conventional ones in several  isolated or
              unrelated applications, the proposed research would  first replicate the
              published results of a set of three papers  which addressed the same set of
              economic issues.  Considered as a  whole, the striking, and unsettling, feature
              of this group of  papers is that even though each used the same data set, 
              comparable estimation techniques, and addressed the same set of  issues,
              essentially no consensus on the substantive economic  questions emerged from
              these studies.  After replicating the  original, highly divergent results, the
              proposed research would  reestimate the models, maintaining any differences in
              the  specification, but using formal robust methods.  If robust  estimates are
              in much closer agreement across the different  studies, then this would show
              that currently accept econometric  practice is not an adequate substitute for
              the systematic and  objective treatment of data errors and extreme observations
               provided by robust estimation.     More specifically, this project analyzes
              the properties of the  Krasker-Welsch robust simultaneous equations estimators
              and the  instrumental variables(IV) version of the Huber estimator as a 
              simpler alternative to Krasker-Welsch.  By comparing the  estimates, and the
              corresponding economic implications, which  result when one applies a
              conventional (nonrobust) estimator, IV-  Huber, and Krasker-Welsch, the
              research will demonstrate the  extent to which the choice of conventional vs.
              robust methods can  make an important difference to the economic conclusions
              which  are drawn from the data.     ***
