Title       : Eyewitness Identification Confidence and Ecphoric Judgments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9308275

Award Number: 9308275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Wells glwells@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9308275  WELLS  This project tests methods for determining the accuracy of 
              eyewitness identifications.  Eyewitnesses to crime often must  attempt to
              identify crime culprits from line-ups or photospreads,  and this is an
              important form of evidence for police investigators,  judges and juries. 
              Unfortunately, scientific studies indicate that  mistaken identifications (of
              an innocent suspect) are not easily  distinguished from accurate
              identifications (of the actual  culprit).  Especially problematic is the fact
              that the confidence  of the eyewitness in response to a question such as "How
              confident  are you that the person you identified is the person you saw steal 
              the money?" shows little or no consistent relation to the accuracy  of the
              identification.  This causes considerable difficulty for  crime investigators
              and for triers of fact (such as jurors), who  must decide whether the
              eyewitness is accurate or mistaken.    The project will undertake a series of
              five experiments designed to  discover better ways to determine whether an
              eyewitness has made an  accurate versus inaccurate identification.  Thefts will
              be staged  repeatedly before groups of unsuspecting people (totaling 
              approximately 1,500 subjects for the five experiments) who will  then be given
              photospreads and asked to identify the thief.   Various conditions will be used
              across these five studies to test  whether eyewitnesses' direct judgments of
              resemblance between their  memories and the appearance of the identified person
              better predict  accuracy of identification than do eyewitnesses' confidence in 
              their accuracy, and whether the former are less vulnerable to  extraneous
              influences than the latter.  These studies will make an  important theoretical
              contribution to our scientific understanding  of eyewitness confidence
              stability.  The results will also provide  useful tools for determining the
              accuracy of identification  evidence in actual criminal cases.  ***
