Title       : The Federal Funds Rate and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9308301

Award Number: 9308301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128119             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Hamilton jhamilto@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9308301  Hamilton    There is currently no consensus whatever among
              macroeconomists on  the effect of monetary policy on the economy.  Keynesian
              models  suggest that faster monetary growth would lower the nominal  interest
              rate by expanding the supply of credit, whereas  classical models would predict
              that faster monetary growth could  well raise the nominal interest rate as a
              result of inflationary  expectations.  The confusion and disagreements among
              academic  economists notwithstanding, the people who work for the Federal 
              Reserve's trading desk have the daily responsibility for using  open market
              operations to keep the Federal funds rate trading  within a narrow range.  This
              project is designed to develop a  convincing scientific measure of the effects
              that anticipated and  unanticipated open market operations by the Federal
              Reserve have  on nominal interest rates and real economy activity at horizons 
              from one day to two years.      This project has five components, each of which
              would comprise a  separate and major research effort.  The first step is to
              develop  a statistical description of daily fluctuations in the Fed funds  rate
              that is consistent with profit maximization by banks.  The  second step uses
              this description of the daily Fed funds market  along with an analysis of
              banks' incentives for borrowing at the  discount window to arrive at a
              prediction of the dynamic effects  of open market operations on the Fed funds
              rate.  The third step  weeks independent verification of the predicted
              multipliers based  on a biweekly vector autoregression (VAR); if the VAR proves
              to  be inconsistent with the theoretical analysis, the framework will  need to
              be modified accordingly. The fourth step uses term  structure relations to
              predict the effects of open market   operations on interest rates other than
              the Fed funds rate.   Again it is possible to corroborate these predictions 
              independently with vector autoregressions.  The fifth step will  use these
              results to assess the dynamic conseque nces of open  market operations for
              unemployment, output, and inflation.  ***
