Title       : RUI: Gonadotropin Hormone-Releasing Hormone Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1995       
File        : a9308952

Award Number: 9308952
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo S. Demski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New College
	      5700 North Tamiami Trail
	      Sarasota, FL  342432146    813/359-4320

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9308452  Demski     Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) is a decapeptide that
              was  isolated from brain in 1971.  This hormone is released from  neurons of
              the anterior basal forebrain which project through the  ventral hypothalamus to
              the median eminence and act upon the  pituitary to regulate the control of
              luteinizing hormone and  follicle stimulating hormones.  Thus, GnRH plays a
              pivotal role  in ovulation and testosterone production.  However, with the 
              development of sensitive and specific antibody techniques, it has  now become
              clear that GnRH neuronal network is a complex,  heterogenous system, comprising
              three or more discrete neuronal  groups and spanning vastly different regions
              of the brain.   Besides the hypothalamic area, the peptides are produced in
              cells  in the terminal nerve ganglia and the midbrain tegmentum near the 
              oculomotor complex.  Little is known of the physiological roles  that these two
              other neuronal systems may play.  Using state-of-  the-art neuroanatomical
              techniques, Dr. Demski and his  undergraduate students will map the functional
              connections of  GnRH system in these brain regions.   They will provide a 
              detailed anatomical examination of developing brains.  A special  retrograde
              neural tracer will be used to identify cellular  connections between
              GnRH-containing neurons and cerebral blood  vessels.  In addition, Dr. Demski
              will lesion the terminal nerve  at different stages of development and
              determine the effects on  the physiology and development of specific behaviors.
                The  results should provide new insights into the organization,  function and
              mechanisms of action of the GnRH systems lying  outside the endocrine
              hypothalamus.  Moreover, many reproductive  dysfunctions in humans result from
              a disorder in the GnRH system.   For example, Kallman's Syndrome, a congenital
              disorder  characterized by sterility and anosmia, is caused by a defect in  the
              migration of GnRH neurons and hypogonadism, characterized by  delayed puberty
              and sterility, results from Gn RH deficiency.   Fundamental information gained
              from this work may help facilitate  the development of effective treatments for
              patients suffering  from GnRH dysfunctions.    ***
