Title       : Conserved DNA Synthesis Gene Transactivators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1994  
File        : a9308014

Award Number: 9308014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Todd M. Martensen                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary F. Merrill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9308014  Merrill  In building yeast, virtually of the genes encoding proteins 
              involved in DNA replication contain multiple copies of the sequence  ofAOGCGTNA
              in their 5' regions.  This sequence, termed a Mlu1 cell  cycle box or MCB,
              confers late G1 activity on heterologous  promoters and specifically binds a
              complex called DSC1 in band  shift assays.  One components component of DSC1 is
              Swi6.  In Aswi6  antibodies binds DSC1 in band shift assays.  An as yet
              unidentified  protein in DSC1 is thought to be the primary DNA recognition 
              polypeptide.  Swi6 is also present in another complex that binds a  related
              sequence, CACGAAAA, termed in SCB element, that occurs  upstream from the HO
              and G1 cyclin genes.  In the SCB complex, a  second protein, Swi4, is thought
              to be the primary DNA recognition  polypeptide.  Given the sequence similarity
              of MCBs and SCBs and  the fact that both complexes contain Swi6, it is likely
              that the  DNA recognition polypeptide of the MCB complex resembles Swi4  In 
              preliminary work several yeast and human genes involved in  regulating DNA
              synthesis gene expression were isolated from yeast  expression vector libraries
              using a genetic screen based on  activation of reporter genes containing an MCB
              element upstream  activation sequence.  One of the novel yeast genes, termed
              DSA3,  for DNA synthesis gene activator 3, is a particularly strong  activator.
               DSA3 may encode the protein that directly recognizes  MCB elements or may
              encode an upstream regulator of the MCB-binding  complex.  During the proposed
              1-year project period, the role of  DSA3 in controlling late G1 DNA synthesis
              gene expression will be  investigated as follows.  The primary structure of the
              activator  will be completed to see if it contains domains homologous to 
              regions of other known proteins.  The function of the activator  will be
              investigated by determining the effect of deleting the  activator gene on cell
              viability, DSC1 activity, and DNA synthesis  gene periodicity; by assaying the
              MCB binding activ ity  of the  activator protein when if is produced by in
              vitro transcription and  translation; and by identifying proteins that
              physically interact  with the activator protein.  Results of the analysis will
              set the  stage for future studies designed to identify other components of  the
              MCB element activation mechanism, and to determine whether  similar DNA
              synthesis gene activators are operative in higher  eucaryotes.  %%%  The gene
              encoding enzymes required for genome replication are  turned on shortly before
              DNA synthesis begins,  Human tumor  suppressor proteins have been implicated in
              DNA synthesis gene  regulation, but the overall regulatory mechanism is
              unresolved.   Studies in yeast have contributed greatly to our understanding of
               how these genes are regulated, but two important question remain  unanswered:
              1) what protein specifically recognizes the DNA  synthesis genes and targets
              them f or activation; 2) what protein  senses that the cell has decided to
              replicated its genome and  triggers the DNA synthesis gene activation
              mechanism.  Using a  genetic screen, a novel gene that strongly and
              specifically  activates yeast DNA synthesis genes has been isolated.  During
              the  proposed project period, the novel gene will be sequenced and its  gene
              targeting protein or triggering protein.  ***
