Title       : Modeling Constraints in Travel Destination-Choice Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9308394

Award Number: 9308394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85078              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Claude Thill   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel Horowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308394  THILL       The importance of constraints in spatial choice by 
              individuals is widely recognized in geography and related  disciplines, but
              relatively little attention has focused on the  development of empirically
              verified models of spatial choice that  effectively incorporate constraints.  A
              potentially fruitful line  of inquiry is the identification of destinations
              selected by  travelers when travel time and other constraints are imposed on 
              the spatial decision-making process.  This project will examine  the impacts of
              constraints on destination choice through  development and testing of models
              based on random-utility theory.  Tractable specifications of random-utility
              models that include  the effects of travel time and other constraints will be 
              identified, with special attention given to analysis of the  effect of
              constraints on formation of the sets from which  travelers choose their
              destinations.  The models developed in  initial phases of this project will be
              tested using detailed data  on non-work travel behavior taken at ten-year
              intervals over two  decades in the Minneapolis-St. Paul metropolitan area.     
               This project will contribute to development of models of  destination choice
              that more realistically account for behavioral  variations among individuals,
              especially with respect to the role  of constraints in the selection of
              destinations.  Through model  development and empirical testing, general
              knowledge of spatial  decision making will be advanced.  The results of this
              research  also will have practical advantages for transportation planning.  ***
