Title       : U.S.-Czech Joint Fund Research on Catalytic NOx Abatement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1993       
File        : a9308783

Award Number: 9308783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : May 1,  1996         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Blanka Wichterlova   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Heyrovsky Inst Phys Chem &
	      Dolejskova 3 18223 Prague 8
	      ,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
              12        Chemistry                               
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Czech Joint Fund research project between                              
              Dr. Blanka Wichterlova, Heyrovsky Institute of                                 
              Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry, Czech                                 
              Academy of Sciences, and Dr. Kamil Klier, Lehigh                               
              University, is in the field of structure and                                   
              activity of heterogeneous catalysts.  The                                      
              researchers propose to study catalytic NOx                                     
              abatement, primarily in non-reducing atmosphere                                
              exhaust gases and emissions of stationary sources                              
              such as power stations.  The goal of decomposing                               
              NO in a neutral or oxidizing atmosphere presents                               
              a well-recognized scientific challenge with                                    
              practical impact for the world environment.  The                               
              researchers will examine the relations between                                 
              the structure and activity of metal oxide -                                    
              zeolite based catalysts.  Both theoretical and                                 
              experimental studies of sophisticated models and                               
              real catalyst structures will be carried out.                                  
              Results may be helpful in designing a catalyst                                 
              with the optimum activation of the NO molecule                                 
              and exhibiting sufficiently fast oxygen                                        
              desorption.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research in chemistry and catalysis fulfills                              
              the program objective of advancing scientific                                  
              knowledge by enabling leading experts in the U.S.                              
              and Czech Republic to combine complementary                                    
              talents and pool research resources in areas of                                
              strong mutual interest and competence.  Funds for                              
              the project are awarded through the US-Czech                                   
              Joint Fund, Prague, in accordance with                                         
              established guidelines.
