Title       : Cognitive Control of Movement Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1994   
File        : a9308671

Award Number: 9308671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44612              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Rosenbaum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9308671  ROSENBAUM    Understanding how limb movements are controlled can have
              great  theoretical and practical importance.  Theoretically, it can  integrate
              findings about motor performance from such fields as  experimental psychology,
              human factors, and neurophysiology.   Practically, it can benefit robotics,
              medicine, and the training of  perceptual-motor skills.  Despite the need for
              an understanding of  limb-movement control, little is currently known about how
              such  movements are chosen and performed by normal adult humans.  This 
              research project will help fill this void by extending and  evaluating
              Rosenbaum's recent model of motor control.  The aim of  the model is to
              describe the computations underlying the selection  of coordinated motion
              patterns among the limb segments, especially  in reaching tasks.    The central
              idea in the model is that there are stored posture  representations in human
              memory.   When a spatial target is  selected as an object to be reached, each
              stored posture is  evaluated for the contribution it can make to the task. 
              Weights  are assigned to the stored postures based on the evaluations they 
              receive, and a single target posture is found by taking a weighted  sum of the
              stored postures (using their weights and treating the  postures as vectors in
              joint space).  Movement occurs from the  starting posture to the target posture
              by reducing the distance  between the starting angle and target angle of each
              joint.  The  model allows for the selection of movements when infinitely many 
              movements permit an object to be reached, it explains how joints  can
              compensate automatically for reduced mobility of other joints,  and it accounts
              for a large number of facts concerning practice,  speed-accuracy tradeoffs,
              performance errors, and movement  kinematics.    The research will evaluate and
              extend the model through further  computational work and behavioral
              experiments.  The computational  work will examine such issues as the use of
              more joints and joints  other than tho se that have been modelled so far, the
              hierarchical  versus nonhierarchical nature of posture space, the necessity for
               evaluating all stored postures, and obstacle avoidance.  The  behavioral
              experiments will test predictions of the model and  provide data about human
              reaching that can inform the model's  future development.    ***
