Title       : RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD: System Modeling with Closed Loop Performance
               Odjectives in a Robust Control Framework
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1993 
File        : a9308917

Award Number: 9308917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy Smith roy@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308917  Smith  This work addresses the problem of modeling systems in a robust 
              control framework.  Analysis and synthesis in this framework are  relatively
              well developed.  However, the lack of a compatible  modeling and identification
              theory is slowing the practical  application of robust control.      The
              problem to be addressed is the following: How accurately must  a system, or
              component of a system, be modeled in order to  maintain stability and achieve a
              specified closed loop  performance objective?  This problem is generalized to
              the case  where other system components themselves are uncertain (to within 
              known bounds).  This immediately leads to the problem of  connecting the
              required accuracy with the taking of experimental  data.  An iterative
              identification/modeling approach is proposed  for both experimental and
              theoretical study.      The models considered are standard in the robust
              control  framework: linear, time-invariant with Hoo norm bounded 
              perturbations.  Closed loop performance is specified as a general  weighted Hoo
              criterion.    Progress on these problems will provide a more direct connection 
              between the rich theoretical area of Hoo robust control and its  application to
              practical problems.  This will also lead to a  better understanding of what
              types of physical uncertainties can  be usefully modeled as linear fractional
              perturbations.  ***
