Title       : Collaborative Research in Decision, Risk, and Management Science: Utility
               Theories with Joint Receipts and Reference Levels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9308915

Award Number: 9308915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Detlof von Winterfeldt detlof@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0512003   Collective Decision-Making              
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9308915  Von Winterfeldt    Almost forty years of experience with theories about
              rational  decision making on the part of individuals confronting risk and 
              uncertainty -- technically, subjective expected utility theories  (SEU) -- has
              led to two firm conclusions.  One, stressed primarily  by psychologists, is
              that this class of models, while overall  fairly descriptive, fails to describe
              certain crucial aspects of  actual behavior in many experimental and real world
              situations.   The other, stressed primarily by economists and decision
              analysts,  is that the axioms of the SEU model are normatively very compelling 
              and the model has proved useful in numerous applied situations.    Recognizing
              both the descriptive failure and normative usefulness  of the classical model,
              the PIs have explored the common ground  held by both the experimentalists and
              the applied decision  analysts, attempted to discover exactly where the two
              part company,  and sought a prescriptive theory that satisfies both
              experimental  concerns and applied expectations.  Like SEU this new theory -- 
              technically rank- and sign-dependent utility (RSDU) theory -- is  based
              (axiomatically) on fairly simple, quite compelling,  underlying behavioral
              principles, and also like SEU, it results in  a numerical representation as a
              weighted average, but unlike SEU  the weights are not probabilities and their
              values depend not only  on the underlying chance event but on whether the
              associated  outcome is a gain or a loss.  Fundamental to the theory is the 
              differential treatment of an event depending on whether it is  associated to a
              gain or a loss relative to a status quo and the  incorporation of the concept
              of joint receipt -- of getting two or  more things at the same time -- that
              allows an explicit, simple  characterization of the fundamental non-rationality
              of the theory.    This project examines several theoretical, experimental, and 
              applied issues that remain unresolved:  On the theoretical side,  while RSDU is
              a fairly good descript ive theory of choice behavior,  it needs modification to
              accommodate the violations of its axioms  which occur when judged certainty
              equivalents are used rather than  choice procedures.  On the empirical side,
              the project examines,  among other things, Thaler's rule for the utility of the
              joint  receipt of two or more things; the descriptive validity of the 
              quasi-rational assumptions underlying RSDU; the construction of a  reference
              level (local status quo) in terms of the choice set; and  alternative
              combination rules for the aggregation of gains and  losses around the status
              quo. Regarding applied issues, we are  convinced that the status quo plays an
              important role in decision  making and so it is highly desirable to develop
              prescriptive  theories that depend explicitly on it.  In addition, the project 
              will investigate the limitations and potential pitfalls of sign  dependent
              utility as a prescriptive theory.  ***
