Title       : The Modulation of Inhibitory Synapses During Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9308377

Award Number: 9308377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190801             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan H. Sanes sanes@cns.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9308377  Sanes    As the brain matures, the connection between nerve cells are
              gradually modified in response to the environment, similar to the mechanisms
              underlying learning and memory.  Some of the connections between nerve cells
              become stronger, while others are eliminated altogether.  The mechanisms by
              which these changes occur are beginning to be unraveled at one set of
              connections in the central nervous system, called excitatory connections.  This
              set of connections is the sort found between a motor neuron and muscle cell,
              where one cell activates a second.  However, nearly half of the neuronal
              connections in the brain are inhibitory, and we do not yet know whether these
              connection are modified during the development of the central nervous system. 
              Since virtually every task that the brain performs utilizes both excitatory and
              inhibitory connections, it is essential to understand how the latter develop. 
              The proposed study will investigate whether the strength of inhibitory
              connections is dependent upon experience during the course of  brain
              maturation.  In the central auditory system, it is possible to monitor the
              strength of identified inhibitory connections by examining the size of  the
              electrical response when they are stimulated.  This project will determine what
              happens to the electrical activity at these inhibitory connections when they
              are used or not used during the course of development.  At a molecular level,
              it will be possible to determine whether the receptor molecules that mediate
              inhibitory activity are produced in appropriate number when these connections
              remain silent.  A second experiment will  determine whether the strength of
              inhibitory connections can be enhanced over the course of minutes by directly
              stimulating them at very high levels.  Together, these experiments will
              demonstrate how the modification of inhibitory connections may lead to mature
              central nervous system function.  ***    CI  Sound  midimap.drv=MIDI Mapper 
              timer.drv=Timer   rv=Timer  v=Timer   timer.drv=Timer  imer.dr9308377  Sanes   
              As the brain matures, the connection between nerve cells are gradually modified
              in response to the environment                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   !        
              !         !              F                                                     
                                     (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                 
                             "             h     $      EÕ  E  1   #             @    sanes  
               William Proctor, IBN William Proctor, IBN                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
