Title       : Dissertation Research: Mediating Cultures: Shadow Puppet Theater in Cirebon,
               West Java
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9308179

Award Number: 9308179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2980               (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Joseph Errington   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Errington/Cohen  9308179    This project is a detailed study of shadow puppet
              theaters in Cirebon, West Java, Indonesia which combines ethnographic,
              historical, and ethnohistorical research.  These theaters are attended one to
              several times a week by village dwelling Javanese.  Theatrical performances
              incorporate themes from local, national, and international events and juxtapose
              them to Javanese ideas about social relations, morality, and concepts of
              personhood.  To the Javanese, puppet theater is not a trivial form of
              entertainment but rather a way in which local, national, and world events are
              translated to local people in a cultural idiom that is easily understood.  As a
              result, puppet theater can be viewed as a lens or filter that serves to
              interpret events that occur outside the rural villages where most Javanese
              live.  Aside from the interpretation of world events, puppet theater is an
              arena for the active constitution or reconstitution of Javanese ideas of self
              and personhood.  This project will investigate what axioms and assumptions of
              Javanese social structure are represented in shadow puppet theater, how
              performances analyze, probe, and play with normative ideas, and what
              ramifications (if any) theatrical performances have for everyday sociocultural
              life and the domain of ordinary reality.    Data will be gained by interviewing
              theatrical performers and puppet theater audience members as well as
              correlating current performances with national events and correlating
              descriptions of old performances with the historical events that inspired them.
               This project should help us understand how the Javanese perceive  world
              events, how they make sense of them, and relate them to their own cultural
              values.  In a more general sense it will enhance our comparative understanding
              of the forms and forums that non-Western peoples employ to interpret the world.
               ***  erwal@nsf.gov (Internet); tbaerwal@nsf (Bitnet); T.BAERWALD (Omnet)   
              Enclosures: Proposal SBR 9319015    Review form    "Alternated formats" sheet  
               -  PAGE 1  -             v          ` l     SOCIAL, BEHAVIORAL, AND ECONOMIC
              RESEARCH  GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE PROGRAM  1800    Õ                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                Õ                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     !           !           !                F                             e
                          e                 Õ         Õ     (    Times New Roman    Symbol  &
              Arial       *   *         *           "             h     D   R   E            
              ^         r    errington cohen abstract abstract%thesis award abstract
              errington cohen  Raymond Hames Raymond Hames                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
