Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Studies of the X-Ray Emission from SuperNova
               Remnants and Clusters of Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1993     
File        : a9308299

Award Number: 9308299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40369              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Hughes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 5983,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a six month visit to Japan by Dr. John P.              
              Hughes, High Energy Astrophysics Division, U.S. Smithsonian                    
              Institution Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Massachusetts              
              to carry out a collaborative project with Professor Katsuji                    
              Koyama, Department of Physics at Kyoto University.  The                        
              researchers will also be cooperating with scientists at the                    
              Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS), which is                  
              located outside Tokyo and serves as the "hub" for X-ray astronomy              
              in Japan.  The research will be based on information to be                     
              transmitted from the X-ray Astronomy Satellite (ASTRO-D) which is              
              scheduled for launch in February l993.  This satellite is a                    
              collaborative mission between the U.S. and Japan and will be the               
              fourth in a series of X-ray satellites launched in Japan.  This                
              mission has high capability of imaging and spectroscopy in the                 
              hard X-ray band.  The first phase of the mission will be devoted               
              to performance verfication and on-orbit calibration activities.                
              This will be followed by studies and analyses of supernova                     
              remnants and clusters of galaxies.                                             
                                                                                             
              Knowledge provided by this data will develop fundamental new                   
              insights into the nature and emission processes of all classes of              
              astrophysical sources.  The Japanese have been the leaders in                  
              this area of X-ray astronomy.  Professor Hughes has expertise in               
              the areas of verification and calibration of X-ray satellites                  
              which will be valuable to the Japanese.  Both he and the U.S.                  
              scientific community will benefit from very early access to the                
              data.  It is anticipated that the collaboration developed between              
              these researchers will continue for many years.
