Title       : Informational Lobbying, Legislative Instructions and Campaign Contributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1993      
File        : a9308303

Award Number: 9308303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32968              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Austen-Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              There currently exists a huge literature on campaign contributions             
              and spending in legislative elections; and there likewise exists a             
              substantial literature on lobbying activities given an elected                 
              legislature.  Most of this work is empirical and descriptive, but              
              there is a growing theoretical literature that attempts to provide             
              more general explanations for the empirical findings.  For the most            
              part, this theoretical work has treated the giving of campaign                 
              contributions and lobbying as the same activity, yet a main theme              
              in the descriptive accounts is that contributions are made to                  
              secure access to the recipient in order to lobby, conditional on               
              the recipient being electorally successful.  The current                       
              investigation develops a theory that explicitly integrates both                
              campaign contributions and lobbying, considered in informational               
              terms.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              The essential idea is that lobbying is predominantly an                        
              informational activity.  Legislators have to make decisions on                 
              issues about which they often know relatively little.  Interest                
              groups, however, are frequently well-informed about the                        
              consequences of particular legislation for their particular                    
              interests; consequently, legislators would like to become informed             
              by listening to lobbyists.  Unfortunately, interest groups have                
              little incentive to say anything about an issue that might hurt                
              their cause, and so there is a non trivial problem for the                     
              legislator in disentangling useful information from the case any               
              lobbyist might present.  In view of this, some lobbyists are likely            
              to be more informative than others for a given legislator.  This               
              could be because some lobbyists' interests are more closely allied             
              with those of the legislator and so can be expected to offer                   
              information on which lobbyists are likely to be more valuable to               
              the legislator; in general, one expects that interest groups that              
              have most to gain from being able to talk to a legislator and make             
              their case on an issue will be those that are willing to give the              
              most in contributions.  Thus higher contributions might signal to              
              a legislator which groups are likely to prove most important for               
              that legislator during the legislative session.                                
                                                                                             
              Important issues for the research are:  (1) identification of the              
              circumstances in which we can expect the informational role of                 
              contributions to be more important than the purely reelection role;            
              (2) description of the extent to which the access role of                      
              contributions leads to "bias" in legislative decision making as a              
              whole; and, (3) exploration of how details of the legislative                  
              decision making process affect the incentives for donors and                   
              recipients.
