Title       : Dissertation Research: Structure of Bronze Age Chinese Societies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1993      
File        : a9308114

Award Number: 9308114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwang-chih Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. K.C. Chang, Mr. Yang-Jin Pak will                   
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will analyze                    
              materials excavated by Chinese archaeologists at the site of                   
              Yanqing in northeastern China. Preliminary analysis indicates                  
              that they date to the Bronze Age of the first millennium B.C.                  
              More than 500 burials were discovered in three locations along                 
              with many different kinds of rich and distinctive artifacts,                   
              numbering as many as 20,000. All are single burials with no                    
              indications on the surface. In addition to a wide variety of                   
              objects made of bronze, gold, silver, bone and jade, many of the               
              graves contain sacrificed animals such as horses, cattle, sheep                
              and dogs. The richness of these materials provides Mr. Pak with                
              an excellent opportunity to reconstruct the organization of the                
              society of which the deceased individuals formed a part. Mr. Pak               
              will describe the material and conduct a statistical analysis to               
              determine how different types of artifacts are distributed among               
              individuals. On this basis it will be possible to examine the                  
              degree of differential treatment and address questions such as                 
              the extent of social stratification and how this relates to                    
              factors such as the age and sex of the individual.                             
                                                                                             
              One of the world's great civilizations arose in China and found                
              its first expression during the bronze age. To speak of one                    
              civilization however is probably not correct given the size of                 
              the country and the numbers of cultures present. While much is                 
              known about the prehistory of the central region, very little                  
              information is available about the Northern area. Preliminary                  
              evidence indicates that during the bronze age this region was                  
              distinct and what is probably more interesting is the fact that                
              people were primarily nomadic. In a worldwide context, such a                  
              situation is extremely unusual and the data collected by Mr. Pak               
              with shed new light on how complex society can develop within                  
              this subsistence context. This in turn will increase out                       
              understanding of the development of social complexity itself.                  
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light                
              on how complex societies develop and assist in the training of a               
              promising young scientist.
