Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Nonparametric Function Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9308444

Award Number: 9308444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59586              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Speckman speckman@stat.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Paul L. Speckman will investigate several statistical  problems in
              nonparametric curve and surface estimation, the  problem of recovering smooth
              curves and surfaces from noisy data.   There are a number of general methods
              for curve estimation which  have been extensively studied including kernel
              estimators and  smoothing splines.  This project is aimed at applications of 
              these methods in two specific areas, constructing confidence sets  for curves
              and estimating change-points (or breakpoints) in  otherwise smooth curves.  The
              first part of the project is aimed  at developing reliable, practical
              confidence bands for unknown  smooth curves.  The investigator will derive the
              necessary  asymptotic theory to construct confidence bands based on 
              cross-validated or otherwise data-driven smoothers, and he will  study their
              finite sample properties by computer simulation.  The  second part of the
              project will employ related distibutional  theory to develop methods for
              detection and estimation of  change-points and estimation of the magnitude of
              the change.  In  this context, change-points are defined to be points where
              jump  discontinuities in an otherwise smooth response function or its 
              derivatives occur.  These change-point models are useful in a  variety of
              applications including longitudinal studies of  patients in certain kinds of
              clinical trials.  Professor Paul L. Speckman will investigate several
              statistical  problems in an area known as nonparametric curve and surface 
              estimation, the problem of recovering smooth curves and surfaces  from noisy
              data.  Such problems arise in a wide variety of areas  of science such as
              economics, atmospheric sciences, engineering  and medicine.  There are a number
              of methods currently available  for estimating such curves.  The first problem
              to be addressed by  Professor Speckman will be that of giving realistic and
              practical  error bounds for these estimates.  This will enable investigators 
              using nonparametric curve estimators to know how good their   results are. 
              Theoretical results will be obtained and their  applicability will be studied
              through computer simulation.  The  second problem to be studied, known as a
              change-point problem,  pertains to situations where there is a sudden change in
              an  otherwise smooth process. One example is an industrial process  when there
              is a sudden shift in the quality of the output.  Other  examples come from the
              study of certain diseases in humans.  One  specific case in which the new
              methods will be tested is a  certain form of muscular dystrophy where muscle
              strength abruptly  begins to decline at the onset of the disease.  Techniques
              to be  developed in this project will enable researchers to detect when  such
              change-points have occurred and to estimate the size of the  change.
