Title       : Regularities in Large Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1995        
File        : a9308773

Award Number: 9308773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271579             (Estimated)
Investigator: Naftaly H. Minsky minsky@cs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,2880,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9308773  Minsky  Regularities, or the conformity to unifying principles, are 
              essential to the comprehensibility, manageability and  reliability of large
              software systems.  Unfortunately,  regularities are difficult to implement,
              unless they are  imposed on a system by some kind of "higher authority," such 
              as the programming language.  The problem with implementing  regularities stems
              from their intrinsic globality.  Unlike  an algorithm or a data structure that
              can be built into  specific modules, a regularity is a principle that must be 
              observed everywhere in the system, and cannot be localized.  One can, of
              course, implement a desired regularity by  painstakingly building all
              components of the system in  accordance with it.  But such a "manual"
              implementation of  regularities is laborious, unreliable, and unstable and 
              difficult to verify and to change.    The goal of this work is to develop and
              explore an approach  to regularities which greatly simplifies their 
              implementation, making them more easily employable for  taming of the
              complexities of large systems.  This approach,  which is based on the concept
              of law-governed architecture  (LGA), provides system designers and builders
              with the means  for establishing regularities simply by declaring them 
              formally and explicitly as the law of the system.  Once such  a law-governed
              regularity is declared, it is enforced by the  environment in which the system
              is developed.  The efficient  enforcement of such regularities is a central
              objective of  this research.    Although not all desirable regularities can be
              established  this way, the approach should be able to support a wide  range of
              "law-governed regularities"--which can be formally  defined, and efficiently
              enforced--including module-  interconnection frameworks, access-control
              schemes, variety  of object-oriented regularities, various protocols for 
              distributed systems, regularities that help in unifying  heterogeneous systems,
              and others.  ***
