Title       : Coordinates of Multisensory Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1993    
File        : a9308576

Award Number: 9308576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161535             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Alex Meredith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 9308576   Meredith    We interact with objects in the space around our bodies
              by  interpreting visual, auditory, touch, and other sensory signals in  a frame
              of spatial reference.  Each sensory modality has its own  reference system for
              central "maps" in the cortex of the brain,  with vision using a map centered by
              the geometry of the retina of  the eye, hearing head-centered, and the
              somatosensory system  body-centered.  However, generating appropriate behavior
              for  orientation to a stimulus requires some common coordinate system,  so
              that, for example, the eyes turn within the head to look toward  the source of
              a sound from one side.  The superior colliculus is a  complex structure in the
              midbrain that is strongly implicated in  this kind of spatial orientation. 
              This work provides novel tests  for neural mechanisms that could provide a
              reference system for  this sensory to motor integration.  Recording activity in
              alert,  behaving animals will clarify how multisensory neurons in deep  layers
              of the superior colliculus integrate combined auditory and  visual stimuli. 
              Activity of these neurons will be examined during  stimulation of one or more
              of the motor inputs, to further test how  motor commands may shape the
              response.  These experiments will  determine if multisensory collicular neurons
              code sensory space in  terms of motor coordinates, and will clarify the
              relation between  unimodal and multisensory frames of reference.  This novel
              approach  will enhance our understanding of how the brain deals with the 
              complex sensory environment, and so will have a broad impact on  research in
              many sensory fields, in sensorimotor integration, and  in attention and
              cognition.  ***
