Title       : The Effects of Economic Development on Population Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  1997   
File        : a9308836

Award Number: 9308836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1993  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299047             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. Rosenzweig markr@markr2@pop.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jere R. Behrman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew D. Foster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9308836  Rosenzweig    A major and long-standing issue in the study of the
              long-term  evolution of the global economy is the relative importance of the 
              contributions of economic development and specific human resource  program
              interventions to changes in population growth.  This  question not only is
              relevant to the understanding of global  change but has a major bearing on a
              fundamental policy question  of how resources should be allocated between
              programs that  directly affect demographic outcomes, such as family planning 
              interventions, and broader development programs that increase  overall
              resources.  This project will provide quantitative  evidence from the analysis
              of unique source of household data  from India on the relative importance of
              economic growth,  technological change and increased investments in human
              resource  programs in affecting population growth.    In this project newly
              available multi-level and longitudinal  household data from a large national
              probability sample of over  4,000 rural households in India covering the period
              1968-1981,  merged with supplementary area-specific data, will be used to 
              examine comprehensively the effects of economic development and  program
              interventions on population change.  The survey documents  a period of time in
              India which conforms closely to a natural  experiment in which the source of
              economic development, the  introduction and improvement of high-yield seed
              varieties,  exogenously affected the wealth and incomes, the rates of return 
              to schooling and wages and prices in areas of India in which new  seeds could
              be grown.  The data will be used to quantify and  compare across districts in
              India differentially exposed to the  opportunities presented by the new
              technologies the level and  change in rural fertility and mortality within the
              context of a  dynamic model of the household.  Based on econometric analyses of
               the models, the mechanisms by which economic development affects  these
              demographic outcomes, such as by increasing i ncomes,  changing the rates of
              return to schooling or altering the  productive values of children's and
              women's time, will also be  identified.  The data will be used to measure the
              impact of  education, health and family planning programs, net of changes in 
              economic opportunities, on fertility and mortality using methods  that will
              take into account the non-random distribution of the  programs.  ***
