Title       : Familial Antecedents of Adaptation to Peers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1995     
File        : a9308941

Award Number: 9308941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross D. Parke PARKE@UCRVMS  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              Children who experience difficulties in their social                           
              relationships with their peers are at risk for later problems of               
              social and emotional adjustment. However, little is known about                
              the antecedents of these individual differences across children.               
              This research will explore the contributions of the family in the              
              development of social competence with peers. Children and their                
              families (both mothers and fathers) have been followed yearly                  
              since kindergarten and will be evaluated again when they are in                
              grade 3, during the current grant period. The research will                    
              evaluate several aspects of this issue, namely: (1) the impact of              
              parent-child interaction on peer relationships, (2) the impact of              
              the parent as advisor and (3) the role of the parent as a                      
              provider of opportunities for contact with other children. A                   
              multimethod, longitudinal approach will be used involving self-                
              report and observational measures in both naturalistic and                     
              laboratory contexts. The research will focus on emotional processes            
              including children's emotional understanding and cognitive                     
              representations of social relationships. Also to be examined is the            
              role of the social context, the neighborhood, in determining                   
              parental management activities and children's social behavior. The             
              research will permit us to identify (1) the changing role of the               
              three parental influence sources across time (2) the relative                  
              importance of these three sets of strategies as a function of                  
              children's social acceptance and (3) the cross time relationships              
              between changes in these strategies and changes in children's peer             
              acceptance. This research will help identify how families                      
              contribute to the development of children's social behavior with               
              their peers and suggest strategies for the modification of family              
              patterns that would, in turn, lead to improvements in children's               
              social competence.
