Title       : Empirical Studies of Auctions and Bidding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1995     
File        : a9308713

Award Number: 9308713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Porter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9308713  Porter    This project will extend the investigator's prior empirical 
              research on auctions and bidding and consists of three parts.  The  first
              consists of an analysis of the incidence and timing of  drilling activity on
              offshore wildcat oil tracts.  A third of these  tracts are never drilled, and
              there is significant delay prior to  drilling.  A deadline effect is apparent
              at the expiration of the  five year lease term.  Initial work indicates that
              drilling  patterns are inefficient, in that there may be gains from 
              coordination of drilling plans.  This work will further  characterize the
              drilling decision, in order to determine how firms  respond to information that
              becomes available after the lease sale,  and in order to quantify the degree of
              inefficiency.    The second component consists of a study of joint bidding on 
              wildcat tracts.  More than half of the bids submitted are joint,  and in 1975
              Congress banned joint bids involving two or more of  eight large corporations. 
              The goal of this research is to  determine the role played by joint bids.  They
              may foster  competition, by pooling capital or by spreading risk, but they may 
              have anti-competitive effects by allowing firms to agree to bid  less
              aggressively.  The project will attempt to discriminate  between these
              alternative explanations, in order to inform policy  decisions.    The third
              component will gather data on procurement auctions from  the Justice Department
              and antitrust trial records.  Previous work  analyzed bid patterns in highway
              paving contracts let by New York  State in the early 1980s, in auctions where a
              subset of firms  allegedly engaged in a bid rigging scheme.  This work will
              examine  other data sets, in order to determine the incidence and 
              characteristics of bid rigging in other auction markets.  The  empirical
              techniques employed will differ from those used  previously, as bid rigging
              schemes depend on the auction rules and  the nature of the goods being sold,
              and because more detailed data  on the co sts of meeting the contract are
              available.  The new data  sets will probably include bidding on school milk
              contracts.    ***
