Title       : RIA: The Power of Inexact Timing Information in Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9308103

Award Number: 9308103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94598              (Estimated)
Investigator: Soma Chaudhuri chaudhur@cs.iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9264,
Abstract    :
              9308103  Chaudhuri  The time and space complexity of a variety of problems that
              arise in  distributed systems where processors have inexact timing information 
              shall be studied. In particular, each processor is modeled to have a  local 
              clock, and to take steps at each tick of its clock.  However,  the local clocks
              of all processors may not be synchronized with each  other,  and  may run at
              different speeds. Also, in a message-passing  system  of communication,
              messages may take varying amounts of  time  to be delivered. Processors
              therefore have uncertain knowledge about  the  time  for  processor  steps  and
               communication.  A  number  of  different  ways in which to model this timing
              uncertainty  shall  be  considered. These models will more closely imitate real
              systems than  either  the  synchronous or the asynchronous models  of 
              distributed  computing.    A  number  of combinatorial problems like consensus,
              set  consensus,  resource  allocation,  and renaming, network problems  like 
              message  transmission will be studied, as well as implementations  of  shared 
              data  objects. Obtaining upper and lower complexity bounds for these  problems 
              is a goal, taking into consideration a variety of failures  and  exploiting
              different timing assumptions. In most cases,  robust  algorithms  that  perform
               well whenever the  system  satisfies  the  timing  restrictions specified will
              be of interest, but  correctness  shall not be compromised in case they are
              not.    The  main goal of this research is to understand the power of making 
              inexact  timing assumptions in solving these canonical  problems  in 
              distributed  computing. Some of the same questions  that  have  been 
              previously  studied will be examined, but in the context of  certain  timing 
              assumptions. One goal of the research would  be  to  develop  general 
              techniques which permit simulation of arbitrary synchronous  (possibly  
              round-based)  fault-tolerant  algorithms   for   various  problems  in  the
              model with timing uncertainty. At a mo re  abstract  level, developing novel
              techniques for exploiting timing assumptions  in   both  algorithm  design  and
               in  obtaining  lower  bounds  and  impossibility results is desired. A second
              goal will be to develop a  complexity hierarchy of shared objects in a
              timing-based distributed  system.  The  ultimate objective will be to
              understand in  a  formal  sense  the  advantage that can be gained by
              considering timing-based  models  for distributed computing over asynchronous
              models, and  the  disadvantage they represent in relation to fully synchronous
              models.  ***
