Title       : Money, Credit, and Deposit Insurance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1995       
File        : a9308819

Award Number: 9308819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monique C. Williams                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Williamson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9308819  Williamson    The main goal of this research is to advance
              understanding of  government intervention in monetary and financial affairs. 
              The  research consists of three projects.  The first will be a study of  the
              quantitative importance of monetary policy for economic welfare  and business
              cycles in the United States.  This topic has been  neglected in macroeconomics
              over the last ten to fifteen years, as  macroeconomists focused much of their
              attention on the role of  "real" or supply-side factors in business cycle
              behavior.  This  project will answer the following questions.  What is the
              magnitude  of the welfare loss from long-run inflation relative to the loss 
              from uncertainty about monetary policy?  Could the behavior of the  Federal
              Reserve System over the period 1954-1992 be characterized  as "close" to
              optimal?  If the answer to the last question is no,  then how might policy have
              been improved?    The second project will study the role for
              government-provided  deposit insurance and the optimal design of deposit
              insurance  schemes.  Recently, it has become painfully clear that something is 
              dramatically wrong with the system of deposit insurance in the  United States,
              while economists have had surprisingly little to say  about the provision of
              deposit insurance.  The modeling framework  is capable of explaining why U.S.
              deposit insurance appeared to  work well for a long period of time prior to
              failing miserably in  the 1980s, and of showing how the system could be
              improved.    The third project will examine the link between monetary policy
              and  credit.  Recent evidence suggests that "credit crunches" have  played an
              important role in transmitting changes in Federal Reserve  behavior to real
              activity, yet there is little agreement on the  mechanism by which central bank
              actions affect the allocation of  credit.  The modeling framework to be used
              here builds on recent  advances in information economics.  Credit crunches
              arise as period  where monetary policy can interact with f inancial regulations
              to  produce an undesirable allocation of credit.
