Title       : Research Initiation Award: In-situ Impregnation of Polymers and Ceramics in
               Composites Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9308498

Award Number: 9308498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karthik Ramani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9308498  Ramani       Thermoplastic matrix fiber components are predominantly 
              manufactured using intermediate material forms such as prepregs,  tapes or
              towpregs, which reduces manufacturing and design  flexibility, and increases
              the product costs.  Even resins that  are synthesized in powder form are
              converted to pellets and melt  impregnated on glass fibers to manufacture short
              fiber composites.   Several processing steps for the manufacture of the final
              component  are wasteful from both manufacturing time, processing and design 
              flexibility, and energy considerations.  The primary objective of  this
              research is to develop a single continuous process for   impregnating and
              consolidating polymeric powders in continuous  fibers to manufacture components
              to net shape.  This process is  extended to encapsulate ceramic powder with
              polymeric powder on  continuous fibers.  The impregnation is accomplished by 
              electrostatic spray deposition and adhesion to the fiber tow, rapid  heating,
              and consolidation in a filament winding or pultrusion  process.  Process models
              are developed for each sub-process and  integrated during the process
              development cycle.       Development and demonstration of this process will
              directly  lead to minimizing the processing steps and reducing the associated 
              costs.  This process can be used for direct manufacture of filament  wound,
              pultruded components and resin encapsulated glass fibers for  injection molding
              and extrusion processes.  Ceramic powder  encapsulated tows can be used for the
              manufacture of continuous  fiber ceramic composites and composites with ceramic
              particles as  a filler in tribological situations.
