Title       : CAA: Crystal Size and Fluid Flow in Dolostone Aquifers and Reserviors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9308002

Award Number: 9308002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51172              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helene M.C. Danielli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Study of fluid flow through porous rocks is vital to studies of                
              groundwater hydrology and contaminant protection.  Previous work               
              has shown that fluid flow is controlled by factors such as                     
              porosity, sedimentary grain size, interparticle cement and                     
              interstitial mud.  Such factors can be measured easily and are                 
              widely used in modelling porous media.  This project aims to assess            
              the impact of another parameter, CRYSTAL SIZE, on fluid flow in                
              dolostone aquifers.                                                            
              An emerging application of computer-technology, image analysis will            
              be developed and the results shall expand its utility within                   
              engineering and geosciences.  In addition, the project deals with              
              fundamental questions of the controls of fluid flow in natural                 
              materials and the effects that these controls have upon                        
              paleohydrology and diagenesis.  The results will help satisfy the              
              nation's needs for water and petroleum.                                        
              In siliclastic rocks, fluids flow between sedimentary particles                
              that are packed together, commonly leaving large, well-connected,              
              interparticle pore spaces.  Cements may be precipitated into these             
              pore spaces, but the basic control of the fabric is depositional.              
              In dolostones, fluids flow between crystals that are fitted                    
              together in a mosaic; the pore network consists of narrow,                     
              sheetlike spaces.  Fluid flow in dolostones thus depends on the                
              tortuosity and pore width of the intercrystalline pore system,                 
              which are themselves closely related to crystal size.  Crystal size            
              is commonly controlled by diagenetic rather than depositional                  
              processes.                                                                     
              Dolomite aquifers are commonly very finely crystalline, difficult              
              to analyze with a standard dissecting microscope.  Image analysis,             
              using core material and a dissecting microscope with slightly                  
              enhanced magnification, makes it possible to carry out statistical             
              analyses of crystal size ranges and size distributions.  These can             
              be correlated with other textural parameters, and with core                    
              analysis data.  The project will use around 30 lower San Andres                
              cores in a detailed study of crystal size versus permeability and              
              transmissibility.
