Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Trigonometric Series and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9308345

Award Number: 9308345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Bourgain bourgain@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308345  Bourgain       Work on this project will focus on classical problems of
               harmonic analysis in one and several variables. It continues  earlier studies
              of trigonometric series and their applications to  the harmonic analysis of
              higher dimensional oscillatory  integrals, and to exponential sums.  In the
              latter work, special  emphasis on periodic partial differential equations and
              estimates  of Dirichlet sums will be carried out.  Oscillatory integrals  enter
              into mathematical analysis in many ways.  They are  recognized as transforms
              identical in form to the Fourier  transform except that the phase, which is
              linear, is replaced by  a function of two variables, space and phase.  Work
              will also be  done on the so-called lambda-p sets which relate the norms of 
              functions constructed by subsets of orthogonal families with the  norms of the
              coefficients.  In the Hilbert space setting the  questions are trivial, but
              once one goes over to other norms,  even using simple trigonometric functions,
              the problems become  very difficult.  A new thrust involves studies of the
              Cauchy  problem in partial differential equations involving nonsmooth  boundary
              conditions.  Of concern is whether or not certain of the  fundamental partial
              differential equations of current interest  (nonlinear Schrodinger, for
              example) are well-posed in the  presence of rough boundaries.       The
              questions under investigation have direct bearing on  some of the fundamental
              issues facing researchers in harmonic  analysis and partial differential
              equations.  Not so obvious are  applications to such diverse areas as analytic
              number theory and  geometry measure theory.  ***
