Title       : POWRE: Development of Instrumentation for In-Situ Measurement of Bottom Shear
               Stress Over Moveable Beds at LEO-15
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9753174

Award Number: 9753174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly L. Rankin krankin@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                POWRE:  Development of Instrumentation for In-Situ Measurement of Bottom Shear
              Stress over Moveable Beds at LEO-15        The proposed effort involves the
              development of a multi-directional shear plate to obtain in-situ direct bottom
              shear stress measurements over moveable beds at the Long-term Ecosystem
              Observatory (LEO-15) research area located offshore of the southern coast of
              New Jersey in 15 m of water.  These types of measurements are of critical
              importance to ocean scientists and engineers.  Numerical models for sediment
              transport, for the prediction of wave transformation in shallow water, and for
              the circulation of water bodies on meso- and large- scales, all require as
              input estimates of bed shear stress.          At the present time, the direct
              measurement of the time-average bed shear stress,  EMBED Equation.2     , 
              under complex flow regimes remains unattainable; estimates of   EMBED
              Equation.2      used for sediment transport and wave transformation models are
              obtained through indirect methods.  A technique for the direct measurement of
              the bottom shear stress over a moveable bed in the laboratory was recently
              developed by the Principal Investigator (Rankin, 1997).  This technique offers
              direct, real time measurements of the bottom shear stress and does not require
              information about the flow characteristics in the boundary layer above the bed;
               it is thus well suited for complicated flow regimes.  I propose to continue
              the development of a shear plate device for use at LEO-15.  The proposed
              instrumentation development effort will contribute in several significant ways
              to our knowledge of sediment transport and oceanographic field installation,
              and to the nation's academic research infrastructure.  The development of this
              device will be of value to physical oceanographers modeling sediment transport
              and hydrodynamic processes, to environmental engineers studying dredging
              techniques and mapping the fate and transport of contaminated sediments and to
              biological oceanographers examining the patch dynamics of benthic communities. 
                    The POWRE award would have a significant impact on the career of Dr.
              Rankin.  As a new investigator,  this award will provide an opportunity to
              enhance her research activities through the development of new instrumentation
              and access to state-of-the-art oceanographic field equipment.  Through POWRE's
              Visiting Professor program, Dr. Rankin will be afforded the opportunity to
              collaborate with a nationally known team of oceanographers.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
