Title       : POWRE: Topics in Economic Theory: The Timing of Transactions and Firm Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1997 
File        : a9753139

Award Number: 9753139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth E. Allen pukenis@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1320,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on two distinct topics in economic theory: the timing of
              transactions and firm formation.  Both will be approached theoretically,
              primarily using the framework of general competitive equilibrium, although the
              formation of firms also involves the combination of cooperative and
              noncooperative game theory.  For the first topic, the economic question is to
              explain, in a consistent and fully specified model, how both the precise times
              of transactions or payments and the intervals between successive transactions
              or payments are determined endogenously.  The second topic addresses the
              question of how firms arise in an economy, where the concept of firm includes
              sole proprietorships, partnerships, and corporations.  Economic theory lacks an
              explanation of when purchases of goods and services are made, including when
              contracts committing to such transactions are signed and when payments occur. 
              Yet these timing issues are becoming increasingly important as our financial
              intermediation technology changes.  Likewise, microeconomic theory does not
              explain the formation of firms.  Little consideration has been given to the
              question of why firms form, the process by which formation decisions are made,
              and the actual creation of the firm.  This research promises significant
              insights regarding these questions.  This POWRE award will support a completely
              new line of research for the investigator involving different substantive
              questions in economic theory and different techniques.  The investigator, who
              is one of the top female academic economists in the country, will learn new
              skills and methods which will enable her to move her research in a new
              direction.  The topics proposed and the directions she intends to take are
              path-breaking in nature.  Successful completion of this research will move her
              further along the path to academic leadership.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
