Title       : POWRE: Ultrafast Pseudorandom Sequence Generations and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1998   
File        : a9753048

Award Number: 9753048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72461              (Estimated)
Investigator: Agnes H. Chan ahchan@ccs.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9753048  Chan, Agnes Hui  Northeastern    POWRE: Ultrafast Pseudorandom Sequence
              Generations and their Applications    This proposal addresses the design of
              ultrafast pseudorandom sequence generators for high speed networks and outlines
              the approaches to analyze those sequences.  As the technology for 100 Gbps
              local/metropolitan area Time Division Multiplexing optical networks is
              evolving, transfer of very large files become a reality.  Security for many of
              these data transfers is of utmost importance. Current prototype high speed
              encryption systems only operate with throughputs on the order of 2.5Gbps. 
              Nonlinear optics can enable ultrafast generations with data rates much faster
              than electronic speed. However, due to the fact that ultrafast optical
              technology can only support circuits with a small gate count, the classical
              design of an electronic sequence generator cannot be directly translated to the
              optical domain. This work presents a new design, reconfigurable Feedback Shift
              Register, for an ultrafast sequence generator based on both optical, as well as
              electronic technologies. The design makes use of an electronic sequence
              generator to control the choice of feedback functions to be configured at the
              optical shift register at a slower electronic speed, leveraging the speed of
              the optical generator while exploiting the complexity of the electronic
              controller.    This project supports the research activities of the PI as a
              Visiting Researcher at the Laboratory of Information and Decision Systems at
              MIT during her sabbatical leave in 1997-1998.  The PI, in collaboration with
              both theorists and system designers at MIT and MIT Lincoln Laboratory, will
              consider Reconfigurable Feedback Shift Registers as the design of an ultrafast
              sequence generator. This design makes use of an electronic sequence generator
              to control the choice of feedback functions to be configured at the optical
              seedback shift register at a slower electronic speed.  The design leverages the
              speed of the optical Generator, whil e the latter exploits the complexity of
              the electronic controller.    Research will be conducted in studying and
              analyzing in detail the pseudorandom properties of these sequences and their
              resilience to the known cryptanalytic attacks. Proven good design can be
              implemented later on in the laboratory.  The realization of such an ultrafast
              sequence generator not only can serve as an encryption scheme to ensure data
              security and integrity, but also has other applications in coding. Moreover,
              these design principles can be readily applied to a hybrid of complex yet
              slower and simple but faster electronic sequence generators.
