Title       : Florida Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9753546

Award Number: 9753546
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2499877            (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklin D. Hamilton sponsor@ns1.famu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynette P. Padmore  (Principal Investigator former)
              Melvin F. Gadson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

The Florida Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Education Program
              (FCETP)
     is building a state-wide model of interdisciplinary and
              institutional
     cooperation for improving the preparation of future K-12
              teachers.  The
     collaborative is centered at Florida A&M University and
              includes over twenty
     institutions representing many of the state's
              research universities, four-year
     colleges, and community colleges.

   
               These institutions include Florida State University, the University of
    
              Florida, University of South Florida, University of North Florida. the
    
              University of West Florida, the University of Central Florida, Florida
    
              International University, Bethune-Cookman College, Tallahassee Community
    
              College, Miami-Dade Community College, and Florida Community College at
    
              Jacksonville.  In addition, area school districts and educational
              organizations
     which support the preparation of mathematics and science
              teachers support
     the major components of this project.

     This
              inititative focuses on aggessive recruitment of students to teaching
    
              careers, and improvements in pre-service and in-service education.  Program
  
                goals are:

     o increase significantly the number of high-achieving high
              school graduates who
     enroll in and receive baccalaureate degrees from
              science, or mathematics
     teacher education program;

     o establish an
              effective community of SMET faculty from participating
     institutions, and
              work towards increasing the frequency and effectiveness of
     communication
              among these faculty and participating teachers and students;

     o
              implement of develop a core of mathematics and science courses for
    
              pre-service teachers that are inquiry-based and taught in cooperative
              learning
     environments; and

     o create a model of teacher training
              that also incorporates summer mentoring of
     FCETP students and early
              sustained classroom experiences.

     The FCETP Project is being evaluated
              by an external evaluator with assistance from FCETP staff.



