Title       : POWRE: Interaction in Information Retrieval: Successive Searching by Usage Over
               Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9753277

Award Number: 9753277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Caroline E. Wardle                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amanda H. Spink   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9753277  Spink, Amanda H.  University of North Texas    POWRE: Interaction in
              Information Retrieval: Successive Searching by   Usage over Time    The
              proposed study is a pilot investigation in a new and little explored line of
              inquiry in Information Retrieval (IR). The primary goal is to study refinement
              of successive searching in information retrieval, investigating the nature,
              manifestations, and behavior of successive searching in IR, deriving criteria
              for use in the design of IR interfaces and systems supporting successive
              searching behavior. The following objectives will be examined:  --The nature
              and extent of successive IR search episodes by a set of users over time
              characterizing the changes that occur in user situational context, user 
              information problem, cognitive and affective states of the user, and
              consequently in the queries.  -- On the computer side, characterize related
              changes over time in the type   and use of information resources and search
              strategies, particularly related to the capabilities of systems and search
              engines.  -- Examine changes in user's relevance judgments and criteria,
              characterizing   their difference.  -- Characterize progressive changes in
              shifts in successive interactions between users and computers.  -- Develop
              appropriate models for IR interactions in successive search episodes.  --
              Derive a set of design criteria for interfaces and systems supporting
              successive searching.  The research is significant in the following respects.
              First, as the size and variety of information resources in IR systems and the
              Web grow exponentially, the problem of searching becomes The critical problem
              for most users. Second, technologically-driven designs for IR and related
              systems are lacking in many respects when encountered and judged by users.
              Human-driven designs have to be incorporated as well.  This research is
              oriented towards a human dimension of design.
