Title       : Atomistic Theory and Computer Simulation of Grain Boundary Structure and
               Diffusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9753243

Award Number: 9753243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana Farkas diana@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuri M. Mishin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9753243  Farkas  This project is aimed at theoretical investigations and 
              computer simulations of point defects and grain boundaries,  as well as
              diffusion in the lattice and along grain  boundaries in ordered compounds.  The
              focus of research will  be the intermetallic compound NiAl.  The project
              includes  collaborations with groups working on ab initio calculations  and on
              diffusion experiments.    Atomic structure and diffusion along grain boundaries
              in  intermetallic compounds are of great interest in connection  with their
              limited ductility and high-temperature creep  resistance.  Grain boundary
              diffusion in NiAl has never been  studied experimentally or theoretically. 
              Moreover, correct  atomistic calculations of grain boundary diffusion 
              coefficients have only become possible recently due to work  done by the
              proposers on the jump correlation theory and the  development of the respective
              simulation methods.  These  theory and simulation techniques will be further
              improved  and applied to grain boundaries in NiAl.    Angular-dependent
              semi-empirical potentials of the embedded-  atom type will be developed for
              NiAl by fitting to both  experimental properties and to the results of ab
              initio  calculations.  The atomic structure for  001  and  011   symmetrical
              tilt grain boundaries will be calculated using  molecular statics and dynamics.
               The formation energies and  equilibrium concentrations of point defects in the
              lattice  and in the grain boundaries will be calculated.  The atomic  migration
              energies by different mechanisms in the lattice  and in the grain boundary
              cores will also be calculated.  The point defect concentrations and migration
              energies  obtained will be used for the calculation of lattice and  grain
              boundary diffusion coefficients of Ni and Al using  novel methods of jump
              correlation theory and the Monte Carlo  method.  The diffusion coefficients
              obtained will be  compared with the experimental data obtained from 
              experimental collaborators.  NiAl will thus become the first   ordered system,
              probably even the first binary system, where  diffusion of both species in the
              lattice and along the grain  boundaries will be studied by both experimental
              and  theoretical methods.  %%%  This project is aimed at theoretical
              investigations and  computer simulations of point defects and grain boundaries,
               as well as diffusion in the lattice and along grain  boundaries in ordered
              compounds.  The focus of research will  be the intermetallic compound NiAl. 
              The project includes  collaborations with groups working on ab initio
              calculations  and on diffusion experiments.  NiAl will thus become the  first
              ordered system, probably even the first binary system,  where diffusion of both
              species in the lattice and along the  grain boundaries will be studied by both
              experimental and  theoretical methods.  ***
