Title       : POWRE: Parsing Attitudinal Responses and Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9753138

Award Number: 9753138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31838              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendi L. Gardner wgardner@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1332,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Why do some persuasive techniques change attitudes only briefly, whereas others
              may change attitudes on a long-term basis?  Past research has demonstrated that
              attitude change induced through the thoughtful consideration of a persuasive
              message (called central route persuasion) seems to endure across time, whereas
              attitude change induced by other, less thoughtful means (called peripheral
              route persuasion) appears relatively impermanent.  The purpose of the proposed
              body of research is to investigate the mechanisms underlying persistent
              attitude change by examining at which stage in attitudinal processing central
              versus peripheral route messages have their greatest effect.  An
              electrophysiological paradigm will be used to separate an early stage of
              attitudinal processing, evaluative categorization, from later stages in
              attitudinal processing.  This paradigm is applied in two studies designed to
              tease apart the conditions in which persuasion causes lasting versus transient
              attitude change.  It is hypothesized that central and peripheral route
              persuasive techniques impact different stages of attitudinal processing, and
              further, that the most enduring types of attitude change are those that change
              the evaluative categorization itself.  The understanding of how persuasive
              techniques result in lasting attitude change is important for both practical
              and theoretical reasons.  For example, persuasive messages are often used in
              the domain of public health to reduce destructive behaviors (e.g. smoking
              during pregnancy) or promote protective behaviors (e.g. safer sex); the
              efficacy of these messages depends on their ability to produce long-term
              attitude change.  Although the need to examine the way in which a message is
              processed has been recognized for the past decade, the separation of
              attitudinal processing stages has been difficult using traditional measurement
              techniques.  The utilization of event related brain potentials in the current
              proposal represents an advance in measurement that will allow for the parsing
              and assessment of the stages of attitudinal processing.  It is hoped that the
              examination of the stages of attitudinal processing that are affected by
              different persuasive strategies will ultimately increase understanding and
              prediction of successful and enduring attitude change.  The principal
              investigator of this POWRE proposal is an assistant professor in the early
              stages of her career.  The studies in the current proposal represent
              exploratory work in a new line of inquiry.  This award will increase her
              productivity, visibility, and likelihood of achieving leadership in her field. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
