Title       : Puerto Rico Collaborative for Excellence for Teacher Preparation (PR-CEPT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9753543

Award Number: 9753543
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Josefina Arce   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Puerto Rico Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher Preparation (PR-CETP)
              is a joint of faculty from sciences, mathematics and education of the six main
              institutions that prepare over 80% of K-12 science and mathematics teachers in
              Puerto Rico, in partnership with the Resource Center for Science and
              Engineering, the Puerto Rico Department of Education and exemplary K-12
              schools, the Arecibo Observatory and local industry. The goal of the PR-CETP is
              to enhance the conceptual understanding of the disciplines to be taught by
              future teachers as well as their mastery of content specific teaching
              methodology, in alignment with local and national standards. The PR-CETP will
              be articulated with the K-12 systemic reform of the PRSSI and the undergraduate
              reform of science and mathematics education through the Alliance for Minority
              Participation. Key courses in content and teaching methods will be redesigned
              following a constructivist approach, incorporating authentic assessment methods
              and the use of educational technology. Practicum and field experiences in PRSSI
              and other exemplary schools will be established. A capstone course for students
              to engage in school-based curricular materials development will be created as
              well as a course in the principles and methods of scientific research, to
              promote their participation in research experiences in EPSCoR laboratories. A
              degree in natural sciences for elementary and intermediate teachers will be
              pioneered at one of the institutions. Faculty Development will promote the
              adoption of best practices in inquiry-based teaching methods and cooperative
              learning. A Collaborative Action-Research Program will promote joint efforts
              between faculty of science, mathematics and education, teachers and students.
              Student Academic Support activities will recruit students to pursue studies in
              areas of shortage of certified teachers, support students with academic
              difficulties, and provide induction activities to graduates with exemplary
              teachers as mentors. Academic adm inistrators will develop Institutional
              Policies for Excellence in Science and Mathematics Teacher Preparation- to
              recognize and value faculty efforts in the continuous reform of teacher
              preparation programs and institutionalize the collaborative reform. The PR-CETP
              will impact over 5,000 future teachers.
