Title       : Detection-oriented Identification of Nonlinear Systems Using The NARMAX Model in
               Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9753084

Award Number: 9753084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fahmida N. Chowdhury fnchowdh@usl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This proposal is for the enhancement of research/education al activities of
              the PI who is moving from Michigan Technological University (MTU) to the
              University of Southwestern Louisiana  (USL) due to family reasons.  The major
              educational activity will be the development of interdisciplinary  courses. 
              The first step toward this has already been taken: the PI developed and taught
              a graduate-level  interdisciplinary  course on Neural Networks at MTU.  The
              next plan is to: (1) develop an undergraduate version of this course,  (2)
              create a web-based tutorial for this course,  (3) share the tutorial and the
              course outline and other materials with students and faculty  nationwide.  The 
              undergraduate course on Neural Networks would be developed for a broad spectrum
              of students (all engineering and computer science majors). After the initial
              experimental  phase with this course is over, the PI has the long-term plan to
              write an appropriate textbook for it.   The technical research will involve a
              graduate student and an undergraduate student, and focus on the use of neural
              networks for the implementation of NARMAX a models for nonlinear system
              identification.  Neural networks have been used for modeling and system
              identification by other  researchers, but usually with the goal of control
              rather than fault detection.  The main goal of the proposed research is to use
              recurrent neural networks (with successive degrees of refinement) to carry out
              system identification of the specific purpose of generating residuals that can
              be used to design efficient schemes for  detection, isolation, and diagnosis of
              faults.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
