Title       : POWRE: An Experimental Investigation of Abiotic Synthesis of Organic Compounds
               Under Hyrdothermal Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2001       
File        : a9753175

Award Number: 9753175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer G. Blank jen@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9753175  Blank    The questions surrounding the origin of life are the
              most fundamental ones facing scientists, philosophers, and theologians.  Since
              the recognition that species evolve from earlier forms, two of the key
              questions have been:  One hypothetical model is the generation of primitive
              life from an organic molecule-rich substrate.  Abiotic synthesis of organic
              compounds has been proposed as a possible mechanism for the formation of this
              substrate.  Two early earth environments have been postulated as potential
              sites for this synthesis: at the atmosphere-ocean interface, and in
              hydrothermal systems.  This award will address the synthesis and stability of
              key organic compounds under hydrothermal conditions.  The hydrothermal diamond
              anvil cell technique provides a unique opportunity to conduct dynamic
              experiments where reaction products, pathways, and rates can all be monitored
              via continuous in situ measurements.  The combination of research institutions
              in the San Francisco Bay Area provides a unique environment well-suited to the
              interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research.  There is a remarkable
              concentration of potentially relevant expertise and interest at U.C. Berkeley,
              Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
              Stanford University, NASA/Ames Research Center, and the USGS-Menlo Park.  The
              collection of institutions and people in this region is ideally suited to
              bringing new ideas, observations, and expertise to bear on the problems of
              prebiotic chemistry.    This POWRE award will have a critical impact on the
              P.I.'s academic career.  This award will formally mark her transition from a
              postdoctoral researcher to a more autonomous position.  One of the main
              attractions of a career in academia is the freedom to design and pursue
              independent and collaborative research projects.  The financial support from
              this award would allow her to extend her expertise in experimental
              geochemistry, to the realm of abiotic organic chemistry.  She will be able  to
              contribute geological/geochemical perspectives to this interdisciplinary,
              exciting field of study.  Finally, her spouse works in the Bay Area and has
              been situated there while she has been working as a postdoctoral fellow at the
              Geophysical Laboratory in Washington, D.C.  They have lived apart during these
              three years, focusing on professional rather than personal lives.  The POWRE
              award will give her the opportunity to advance her career as a scientist and
              live with her husband.
