Title       : POWRE: Modeling an Engineered Liver Tissue System: Phase I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9753082

Award Number: 9753082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sohi Rastegar                           
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin N. Coger RNCOGER@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 1472,1592,9120,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9753082  Coger  The successful operation of implantable devices (e.g.,  vascular
              grafts, pacemakers) and extracorporeal devices  (e.g., dialysers, blood
              oxygenators) relies on understanding  their impact on the function of the
              designated organism.  Norman function of tissue (and hence organs) is regulated
              by  a complex balance between soluble factors, cell-cell  interactions, and
              cell-matrix interactions.  Understanding  the details of these interactions
              becomes even more  complicated in organs that accomplish multiple physiological
               functions (e.g., the liver).  In these cases, tissue  engineering becomes a
              valuable means for studying tissue  function and morphogenesis in vitro, and
              for affecting cell  growth and function in vivo.  The later application
              includes  the development of bioartificial tissues.  In the specific  case of
              bioartificial liver development, research efforts  are currently underway to
              provide the medical community with  alternatives in treating patients with
              acute liver failure  since less than 4100 (i.e., 4058 in 1996, 3440 in 1993) 
              liver transplants are performed annually in the United  States, although 50,000
              Americans died of liver disease in  1993.  A successful bioartificial liver
              support system must  at least be able to maintain good hepatocyte function
              since  hepatocytes are the major parenchymal cells of the liver and 
              participate in a variety of liver functions including fat,  lipid, and
              carbohydrate metabolism; protein and bile  production, and chemical
              detoxification.  Since hepatocytes  are anchorage dependent cells, the use of
              matrix materials  that are biodegradable and promote attachment, while 
              simultaneously supporting acceptable levels of cell function  are critical. 
              Collagen type I and EHS matrix (e.g.,  Matrigel) are two such extracellular
              matrices (ECMs).  Both  yield good hepatocyte function, yet each promotes a 
              different cell morphology (planar and aggregated,  respectively). 
              Consequently, collagen I and EHS matrix are  commonly employed in in vi tro
              models of the liver.  The  proposed project focuses on the engineering of one 
              particular liver tissue system - hepatocytes on Matrigel,  and uses the double
              gel collagen I system is used as a  comparative.  In addition to the formation
              of aggregates,  Matrigel is of particular interest because its composition 
              resembles that of the basement membrane.  Of the three  processes that direct
              cell aggregation (i.e., soluble  factors, cell-cell, and cell-matrix
              interactions), the  proposed project specifically contrasts aspects of the
              cell-  matrix interaction, with particular cell-cell interactions.  The
              governing hypothesis is that cell-matrix interactions  drive early aggregation,
              while cell-cell interactions  dominate aggregation in time.  In the proposed
              work, the  physical properties of Matrigel are characterized and the  forces
              hepatocytes exert on the ECM are quantified  experimentally.  The experimental
              results are then  implemented in a predictive aggregation model based on the 
              exerted forces (a cell-matrix parameter), ECM deformability,  the density of
              the hepatocyte population, and degree of cell-  cell contact (cell-cell
              parameter).  ***
