Title       : POWRE: Combining Data Mining and Information Visualization Techniques with a
               Molecular Biology Sequence Similarity Database System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1997 
File        : a9753283

Award Number: 9753283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70573              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth G. Shoop shoop@ahc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 1165,1592,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The main objective of this project is to aid genome  researchers with the 
              task of elucidating patterns and clusters in large amounts  of biological 
              data.  For genome researchers who are interested in  comparing gene or  protein
              sequences to the sequences within one genome or  across genomes,  this task
              involves executing hundreds of thousands of  similarity searches  that produce
              text output.  This project involves the  development of two  specific software
              tools for visualizing and exploring the  similarity data  in a database of
              biological sequence similarity results.    The first tool will be an
              Interactive Categorization Tool.  This tool will  display attributes of
              selected similarity database objects  in a 2D scatterplot and enable dynamic
              manipulation of the  display. This will  enable the genome researcher to
              explore the attributes of  similarities  and categorize the similarities based
              on those attributes.  For example,  the genome researcher will be able to vary
              the input  parameters of a  function for computing the strength of each
              detected  similarity and  display a plot with the strength of each similarity
              shown as  the color of  each point, and the points situated in the 2D space
              based on  score and  statistical significance as the X and Y axes.  The tool
              will  enable  genome researchers to dynamically manipulate the generation  of
              higher-  level concepts or categories for detected similarities  (strong,
              marginal,  and weak similarities as opposed to individual similarities  with
              particular values of score and statistical significance  that are more 
              difficult to compare). This will lead to their ability to  categorize hits  as
              orthologous or paralogous, based on various attributes of  the detected 
              similarities. Score and p-value are not the only attributes  that can be  used
              -- the system is general enough that other attributes,  such as  percent
              identity, percent conserved, and length of  alignment, among  others, could be
              used in functions. Thus, genome researchers  can cond uct  exploration at
              different stages of the genome comparison  research process.    The second tool
              will be a Cluster Exploration Tool. Using  the results  from data mining
              techniques that cluster like sequences  together, genome  researchers will be
              able to visualize the similarities among  the sequences in the clusters. For
              example, the tool can be  used for a cluster of new unknown sequences that were
              found  similar to members of a  group of known sequences. The new sequences can
              be  positioned as nodes on  the left in a bipartite graph, and the known
              sequences that  they are  similar to can be positioned along the right. Lines
              drawn  between the  nodes, colored differently based on the strength of the 
              hits, will enable  the researcher to visualize the connectedness of the 
              sequences in the  cluster. Details about each sequence and each similarity in 
              the cluster  can be obtained from the DBMS. This will enable genome 
              researchers to  study groups of orthologous or parologous sequences.    A key
              feature of these tools is that they will be 'thin'  clients (often  referred to
              as applets) that communicate with the underlying  DBMS via  queries formulated
              visually by the genome researchers. The  use of Java-  based components for
              these tools will enable them to be  easily used and  shared by the
              bioinformatics community and the genome  research community.  The development
              of these tools will demonstrate the  feasibility of the  thin-client approach
              that is the hallmark of the network  computing architecture philosophy.
