Title       : POWRE: Spatial Development In 1-To-3-Year-Old Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1997 
File        : a9753110

Award Number: 9753110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janette B. Benson jbenson@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines how young children keep track of and estimate the
              position of nonvisible objects so that they can effectively move through their
              environment without getting lost.  These skills are fundamental to managing
              everyday tasks, but little is known about how they are acquired by young
              children.  Two studies use a task that requires young children to search for an
              object hidden in sandboxes that differ in size and shape.  Children's
              performance in finding the hidden objects in the different sandbox tasks will
              reveal the generality and limitations of their knowledge about space during the
              first three years of life.  The research will generate new knowledge about
              children's spatial behavior, while also seeking points of integration between
              two different theories of spatial behavior.  There is a gap in our existing
              knowledge about spatial behavior in children between 1 to 3 years of age.  This
              is a time in development that includes important advances in the growth of
              movement skills and thinking skills that should influence how children keep
              track of locations while they move through space and how this ability develops.
               The project is guided by two different theories, one that attempts to explain
              adult spatial behavior and another that attempts to explain children's spatial
              behavior.  Specific predictions made by these two theories will be tested.  The
              results of the studies may support an integrated account of early spatial
              development that can explain a wider range of spatial behaviors than either
              theory can now explain.  This POWRE award will permit the investigator, an
              associate professor, to resume her research career after spending the last few
              years on sabbatical leave and assisting in university administration.  These
              activities, while important in other respects, took a toll on her career
              advancement and professional growth.  She will now get back on track to a
              productive research program, which will put her in an excellent position for
              academic advancement and leadership in her field.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
