Title       : POWRE: Structural Constraints on Demographic Heterogeneity in Personal Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9753145

Award Number: 9753145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57235              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela A. Popielarz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1331,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns personal social relationships between people of different
              demographic backgrounds, such as friendships between African-Americans and
              whites.  The investigator presents a partial theory of the social structural
              constraints on demographic heterogeneity in personal networks.  She will
              undertake a visiting professorship at Northwestern University to enable her to
              refine the theory, develop specific hypotheses, and do preliminary data
              analysis in preparation for a full-scale empirical test of the resulting
              theory.  The project broadly addresses one striking regularity about personal
              networks: almost all of our close personal contacts are demographically similar
              to us.  Present theory stresses that a person's involvement in a homogeneous
              organizational setting increases the propensity to form network connections
              with demographically similar others.  A more comprehensive theory of
              heterogeneity in personal networks will take into account organizational
              membership dynamics  and people's participation in multiple organizational
              settings.  The investigator lays out this theory, pointing out new hypotheses
              that will be tested.  The scientific implications of the theory to be developed
              range widely because personal networks are a crucial part of the social
              landscape surrounding individuals.  Networks affect individual outcomes ranging
              from labor market position to mental health.  Personal networks also affect
              diversity within and across organizations, as well as organizational survival. 
              As a result, a theory of personal network formation helps to explain basic
              stratification processes.  Furthermore, this project and its results are
              extremely important to a society whose members differ by race, religion, sex,
              age, and education.  We need a deeper understanding of heterogeneous personal
              networks because the relationships in them cross-cut these cleavages, providing
              the stable foundation for an integrated society.  Network connections between,
              for example, African-Americans and whites, or people with high and low levels
              of education, can ensure that our society, although differentiated by race and
              education, is not divided by them.  This POWRE award will assist the
              investigator in her primary research goal for the next few years.  Taking a
              position as Visiting Assistant Professor will allow her to interact with
              organizational scholars and social network researchers in a new setting.  The
              theoretical and empirical results of this larger project will not only
              contribute to the existing research literature and thus the investigator's
              visibility in her field, but will also assist her in her teaching and mentoring
              roles.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
