Title       : POWRE: Anti-Manipulation Regulations, Bank Powers and the Use of Internet in
               Public Security Offerings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9753142

Award Number: 9753142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manju Puri puri@gsb.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1320,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research proposal consists of three projects that examine issues relating
              to the regulation of public security offerings. Project one proposes a novel
              rationale for allowing price support in initial public offerings (IPOs). The
              project argues that engaging in price support is like giving investors a put
              option, and that underwriters will minimize the cost of the put by bringing
              less risky issues to the market, resulting in reduced underpricing.  The
              project finds empirical support for this reasoning.  This project also develops
              a new method for separating the effect of price support from that of deliberate
              underpricing in explaining the sizable positive initial returns in IPOs. 
              Project two will empirically examine theories of financial intermediation
              through an analysis of direct public offerings (DPOs) over the internet, via
              two sets of tests. One set of tests will examine stock prices of  different
              types of financial intermediaries around the DPO dates, to assess the manner in
              which different intermediaries are affected by this new mechanism of security
              issue. A second set of tests will examine prices at which DPOs are sold and the
              after-market prices at which they trade.  Project three examines how securities
              markets are affected if banks are allowed to enter these markets.  In Japan (as
              in the U.S.) banks were prohibited by law from underwriting corporate
              securities, but recently these restrictions have been relaxed.  Using the
              Japanese institutional environment, this project will test the impact of banks
              entering debt markets on underwriting fees and market concentration.  Vast
              amounts of capital are raised through public security issues (over $500 billion
              in 1996), and the process of issuing securities is one of the most tightly
              regulated aspects of capital markets. Yet, the literature provides surprisingly
              little guidance on the appropriate framework for setting regulations concerning
              the security issuance process.  This research contributes in this direction.
              The first project focuses on the economic impact of price support regulations
              on the security issue process. This study is motivated by the fact that while
              the law allows underwriters to engage in price support -- and thereby cause
              securities to trade at artificially inflated prices in the after-market
              following a security issue - very little is understood about the economic
              impact of this provision on the security issue process. The second project
              studies a new phenomenon, that of direct public offerings (DPOs) made over the
              internet. DPOs are unique in that no intermediaries are involved at any stage
              in the offering, and therefore allow one to directly test alternative theories
              of financial intermediaries' role in the capital raising process and suggest a
              framework for regulating internet based security offerings.  The third project
              examines the implications of allowing banks to enter the securities market
              using data from Japan. Such a study has policy implications for the continuing
              debate of the repeal of Glass-Steagall in the U.S.    The POWRE grant, with its
              accelerated sanctions and flexibility will enable the investigator to actively
              pursue and complete these projects in a timely manner.  These issues are
              important in today's environment since the regulation of securities market are
              currently being debated by regulators and academicians alike. It is hoped that
              these projects will contribute significantly to our understanding of the
              regulation of public security markets and financial intermediaries, and will
              also be relevant to policy makers.  It is likely that these projects will
              significantly enhance this young investigator's professional standing as a
              researcher in the field of financial economics, and add to the contribution
              made by women to finance literature.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
