Title       : POWRE: Dynamic Behavior in Supply Chains: Experimental Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9753130

Award Number: 9753130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50036              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel T. Croson crosonr@wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1321,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to gain an understanding of the behavioral factors
              exhibited by actors making decisions in dynamic systems, particularly those of
              a supply chain.  Previous researchers have looked at the question of supply
              chain management from a purely rational point of view, developing inventory
              models which assume each member acts to maximize a clearly defined (and often
              quite complex) profit function.  Evidence from other settings, like
              experimental economics and psychology, suggests people rarely act so
              rationally.  This research investigates actual behavior in simulated
              (experimental) supply chains and compares that behavior with the theoretically
              predicted behavior.  There are two main contributions of this research.  First,
              increasing our understanding of behavioral and institutional factors which
              affect supply chain coordination.  Second, achieving a better understanding of
              how individuals make decisions in complex systems with difficult dynamics.  On
              the applied front, results will illuminate the effects of institutions and
              behavioral tendencies on supply chain coordination and well as suggest
              recommendations for use in practice.  On the theoretical front, results will
              aid our understanding of how individuals make decisions in complex problems,
              which rules-of-thumb they use, how they update their beliefs, and how they
              learn.  This young investigator already has a record of accomplishment and is
              positioned to make major advances in an important area of research.  The
              investigator's previous research has focused on the experimental testing of
              economic theories.  Funding from the POWRE award will allow her to extend that
              research focus to the experimental testing of operations theories.  This
              extension will enable her to use her experimental skills in attacking a new and
              important problem in operations management.  It also will likely have a large
              impact on the field, enhancing her career and leadership potential.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
