Title       : POWRE: An Arctic Ocean Time-Series of Dissolved Inorganic Carbon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9753170

Award Number: 9753170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Yager   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                POWRE:  An Arctic Ocean time-series of dissolved inorganic carbon        The
              goal of this research project is to evaluate seasonal patterns of biological
              production and respiration in the central Arctic Ocean with an emphasis on
              predicting the direction and extent of air-sea carbon exchange.  This research
              would complement funded research at a year-long field-station (SHEBA)
              established in the perennial ice pack along the eastern edge of the Beaufort
              Sea.  For the first time ever with modern methods, oceanographers will observe
              nearly all major components of the central Arctic marine carbon cycle with at
              least weekly resolution over an entire year.  Funded Principle Investigators,
              Wheeler et al. and Welch et al., will measure dissolved oxygen and nutrients,
              particulate and dissolved organic carbon, autotrophic and heterotrophic biomass
              (ranging from picoplankton to polar bears), and primary and secondary
              production and respiration rates.  These measurements will be made in the
              context of a larger surface heat budget experiment (NSF-SHEBA, DOE-ARM,
              NASA-FIRE, ONR-HLP) where many biogeochemically-relevant physical parameters
              will be monitored throughout the year.  Two key parameters, total dissolved
              inorganic carbon (CT) and alkalinity (AT), needed to complete the carbon budget
              and link the Arctic Ocean ecosystem to the global carbon cycle, are as yet
              missing from the funded plan.  This proposal is designed to provide these
              missing links.        I propose to use weekly depth profiles of CT and AT in
              Arctic surface waters to detect the biological transformations of carbon
              between the dissolved inorganic (DIC) and organic carbon (OC) pools,
              specifically the extent of net primary production during the photic period,
              respiration rates during the dark wintertime, and the effect of springtime ice
              algae on near-surface DIC concentration.  By measuring both CT and AT, we can
              calculate pCO2, needed to estimate gas exchange, and also use alkalinity as a
              tracer for contributions from rivers, sea-ice, and other water masses.       
              While perennially ice-covered seas have been historically considered `net
              heterotrophic` ecosystems, these estimates have typically relied on summertime
              measurements.  With a data set covering an entire annual cycle, we (myself and
              my collaborators) propose to test the following hypotheses: that 1) autotrophy
              exceeds heterotrophy during parts of the year, 2) a seasonal offset exists
              between autotrophic and heterotrophic production, 3) wintertime heterotrophy is
              supported by DOC produced locally during the spring and early summer, and 4)
              local production and respiration balance on an annual basis.  By providing the
              link between biological processes and pCO2, my data would allow us to test
              additionally whether this region of perennially-ice covered Arctic seas (net
              heterotrophic, net autotrophic, or balanced) is, on an annual basis, a source
              or sink for atmospheric CO2.           The POWRE award would have a significant
              impact on the career of Dr. Yager.  As a new investigator,  this award will
              provide an opportunity to enhance her research activities through access to
              state-of-the-art oceanographic field equipment and the opportunity to
              collaborate with an internationally known team of oceanographers.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
