Title       : POWRE: Behavioral Investigations of Nouns and Verbs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9753137

Award Number: 9753137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan A. Sereno   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1311,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The broad objective of this project is to gain a more thorough understanding of
              word recognition processes.  The investigator approaches this goal by
              investigating an often-ignored variable in language comprehension
              studies-namely, grammatical class membership.  Recent research examining
              neurologically damaged populations reveals notable dissociations in the
              processing of nouns and verbs.  Research by the investigator has extended the
              finding of a noun/verb contrast to an unimpaired population.  These data
              indicate a greater left hemispheric involvement in the processing of verbs
              relative to nouns.  The present proposal expands this study to investigate
              localization issues in the brain.  Four experiments will be conducted.  The
              first two represent experimental modifications, using different tasks and
              extending the investigation to the grammatical class categories of adjective
              and adverb.  The last two experiments introduce a new methodology to test the
              claim of grammatical class organization in the brain.  These experiments
              contrast the simultaneous and successive presentation of pairs of
              visually-presented stimuli to trace the origin of interference effects in
              comprehension across the lexical spectrum.  The time course of activation for
              noun and verb stimuli will be explored by delaying input of one relative to the
              other.  Investigations of grammatical category issues are critical to the
              refinement of psychologically and linguistically valid theories of word
              processing.  The research contributes to this discussion by examing the
              interrelationship of lexical representations and processes in the brain.  Its
              goal is to test recent claims made in the neuropsychological literature-namely,
              that there exist separate subsystems for the processing of nouns and verbs.  If
              noun and verb locations are distinct, it is feasible that behavioral effects
              can be uncovered.  The POWRE grant will provide the necessary funds for career
              advancement for the investigator.  She is a non-tenure track Assistant
              Professor, a position she has held for the past five years.  The grant will
              allow her to concentrate on her own research and delineate a long-term research
              program.  It will also allow her to pursue a new methodological approach to the
              study of language processing.  In turn, the pursuit of a new experimental
              technique and subsequent publication of the results could aid the investigator
              in obtaining a tenure-track position.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
