Title       : POWRE: Visiting Professor at MIT: Geologic and Geodetic Constraint on
               Continental Deformation and Mountain Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1997 
File        : a9753190

Award Number: 9753190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Meghan Miller meghan@cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9753190  Miller    This POWRE award supports a Visiting Professor
              appointment at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for Dr. M. Meghan
              Miller, Professor and Chair of Geology at Central Washington University. 
              Bradford Hager, a Professor at MIT, is the faculty host.   Miller will develop
              three inter-related research projects:  1)  model results from seven years of
              GPS measurements in the Eastern California shear zone, in collaboration with
              MIT faculty, 2) geodynamical studies of the Tien Shan, and 3) seed future
              modeling of results from a new, permanent GPS array in the Pacific Northwest.  
               In the first project, GPS observations of plate margin deformation in the
              Eastern California shear zone, data reduction in at CWU is mature, and the
              results are ready for modeling.  In addition, MIT workers have observed a
              smaller, denser array in the Coso Hot Springs area, China Lake, for which this
              network provides regional context.  Modeling and publishing results of this
              project will be a major focus of Miller's year at MIT.  In the second project,
              CWU is partner institution on an NSF-EAR Continental Dynamics project in the
              Tien Shan of central Asia.  Bradford Hager is the Chief Scientist on this
              twelve US investigator proposal.  Miller is a member of the four
              co-investigator field geology team; Hager coordinates the GPS work.  The visit
              will be a critical time for maturation of the collaboration on this
              multi-institution effort.  The POWRE award will facilitate this collaboration. 
              Finally, a visiting professorship would seed new GPS measurement and
              geophysical modeling projects for the study of deformation in the Pacific
              Northwest and the processes which drive it, under the auspices of the Pacific
              Northwest Geodetic Array.
