Title       : An Interactive, Web-Based Materials Characterization Project for Undergraduate
               Education in Analytical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9753237

Award Number: 9753237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne E. Pemberton pembertn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Much recent attention in chemical education has been focused on the need for
              "problem-based" learning strategies, particularly in the laboratory
              environment.  No place is the need for the development of problem-solving
              skills more evident than in young scientists who function as analytical
              chemists in industrial, government, and academic laboratories.  This need has
              become so acute that industry has recently called upon the academic community
              to reexamine their training of chemistry students, particularly in the
              quantitative and instrumental analysis laboratories.  One particular concern
              expressed by industry and government laboratory analytical chemists is that
              students emerging with undergraduate degrees today have only a technique-based
              perspective on chemical analysis instead of viewing chemical analysis as an
              integrated process based on problem solving.  Thus, in academia's zeal to
              provide hands-on exposure to every new instrumental analysis method that is
              developed, education of students in the integrated concept of the "analytical
              process" has been lost.  To remedy this curricular deficiency nationwide
              necessitates a broader recommitment to a pedagogy based on the development of
              critical thinking and problem-solving skills in our students.  While the
              desirability of achieving this goal through increased emphasis on hands-on
              laboratory problem-solving experiences is obvious, the reality for many
              institutions today, particularly small four-year colleges, is that they lack
              the necessary complement of analytical instrumentation for effective solution
              of modern real-world problems in their undergraduate analytical chemistry
              laboratories.  The recent explosion in new electronic technology affords, as a
              supplement to the central hands-on component of the laboratory curriculum, the
              opportunity to enhance the problem solving skills of students through
              interactive computer-based experiences.  This project is designed to take
              advantage of recent developments in the analytical curriculum at the Unive
              rsity of Arizona to demonstrate the feasibility of production of an
              interactive, prototype, hypermedia-based Materials Characterization Project on
              the World Wide Web in which the student undertakes a comprehensive analysis,
              with both qualitative and quantitative aspects, of a commercial product,
              device, or formulation.  This computer-based experience is intended as a
              supplement to the more conventional laboratory-based training in undergraduate
              analytical chemistry. This experience will require the student to chemically
              analyze several major components of a common commercial product by defining the
              analysis approach, selecting the analysis method(s) required, designing the
              measurement experiments, "collecting" the data, interpreting the data, and
              arriving at conclusions about chemical composition and content based on the
              data.  The prototype Materials Characterization Project to be developed is
              based on analysis of the components of a solar electronic calculator.
