Title       : POWRE: Combined fMRI and Psychophysics to Study Functional Plasticity in the
               Human System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9753009

Award Number: 9753009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucia M. Vaina vaina@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goals of the POWRE grant are two-fold: first, to assist the investigator in
              acquiring expertise in the newly emerging technology of functional magnetic
              resonance imaging (fMRI), and second, to combine that expertise with her
              background and strength in visual psychophysics and computation modeling to
              study mechanisms underlying visual motion perception and their modulation by
              learning.  The major training components of the grant include the
              investigator's participation in tutorials, seminars, NMR training sessions and
              course work, and collaborative research and developing skills in fMRI data
              analysis, developing fMRI specific activation paradigms, and methods of
              representation of fMRI activations.  The broad scope of the research component
              of this proposal, to be carried out at the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Center at
              Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH-NMR), is on combining fMRI and
              psychophysics to study functional plasticity in the normal adult human visual
              system, specifically the mechanisms and neural circuitry underlying learning
              motion discrimination in humans.  Cortical fMRI signal changes (in both the
              cerebral and cerbellar cortices) can be reliably measured, and will be used to
              ask specific questions about practice and stimulus attributes-related changes
              in human brain functional anatomy.  The approach of the proposed experiments
              will also serve as validation for the learning technique as a powerful
              psychophysical tool to investigate specificity and dynamics of the neural
              circuitry underlying visual perception and its modulation by attentional
              mechanisms.  The POWRE funding mechanism will provide the investigator, already
              a senior scientist and educator specialized in human vision, the opportunity to
              bring that knowledge to bear in the design and interpretation of
              neurobiologically relevant imaging experiments.  It will also give her the
              opportunity to become proficient in fMRI techniques and to gain additional
              knowledge that she will subsequently apply in her research and teaching.  The 
              MGH-NMR is a superb training site for accomplishment of these goals.  The
              results of this training will significantly increase the candidate's visibility
              in the neuroscience and human brain mapping community.  Also, it will allow her
              to play a key role in the efforts of the Biomedical Engineering Department at
              her home institution to develop a strong neurosciences track in the graduate
              program in biomedical engineering.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
