Title       : POWRE: Rheology and Microstructure of Dilute Surfactant Systems in Complex Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9753157

Award Number: 9753157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80247              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn M. Walker lwalker@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  Surfactants, or surface active agents, pervade almost every aspect of our
              daily lives.  Biological functions, healthcare products, cleaning materials,
              paints and many other products and processes rely on the unique properties of
              these molecules.  Many of these solution properties arise from the fact that
              surfactants aggregate in solution, forming a myriad of structures with
              different properties.  The ability to control aggregate structure requires a
              fundamental knowledge of the influence of system parameters.  Although this
              understanding exists for equilibrium situations, the changes in structure
              caused by external forces, such as flow, are not well studied.  Flow is a
              pertinent variable as most surfactant-based systems are subject to flow in
              application, transport and processing.    Thread-like micelles, or
              one-dimensional aggregates, form in a number of surfactant solutions.  In the
              case of dilute solutions of rod-like (stiff) micelles with low levels of added
              salt, a transition to a shear-thickened state has been observed and fairly well
              characterized.  A qualitative understanding of the shear-induced transition
              exists both at a macroscopic and structural level and this understanding is
              becoming more quantitative.  Most studies have focused on simple shear fields
              and Couette rheometry.  The influence of flow fields other than shear has not
              been studied, yet information from these types of studies are required for a
              complete understanding of the phenomenon.   In this proposed research, the
              intent if to simultaneously probe macroscopic flow behavior and microstructural
              changes in more complex flow fields.  Initial thrusts will involve
              inhomogeneous shear flow.  The study will then extend to flow fields with
              increasing levels of elongation to begin to understand the influence of strong
              flows.  Long term goals include the study of elongational flows, both at the
              macroscopic and microstructural levels.  Results from this research will
              provide information necessary for the development of struct ure based
              constitutive equations for these micellar solutions, verify the potential of
              these fluids n specific engineering applications (such as drag reduction) and
              answer specific questions about the nature of the shear-induced transition
              which cannot be elucidated with shear alone.
