Title       : POWRE: Palynological Survey of Sirius Group and Related Neogene Sediments,
               Transantarctic Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9753000

Award Number: 9753000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 15,  1997   
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Askin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1592      PROF OPPOR FOR WOMEN IN RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9753000  Askin  This award supports a palynological survey of previously 
              collected Neogene sediments from the Transantarctic  Mountains and Ross Sea
              margin.  Because terrestrial  vegetation history is intimately linked to
              climatic and  tectonic history, this survey will provide valuable  information
              for tracing environmental trends through this  important interval of geologic
              time.  The survey will  include many of the Sirius Group strata cropping out in
              the  Transantarctic Mountains, and subsurface sediments  encountered in
              drillholes from McMurdo Sound and the McMurdo  Dry Valleys. These Neogene
              sediments (Miocene through  Pliocene) include glacial, fluvioglacial,
              glaciolacustrine,  and glaciomarine facies. Age control is from marine 
              microfossil assemblages (mainly diatoms) and radiometric  dates.  Palynomorphs,
              and wood and leaves at one locality  (Oliver Bluffs) have been reported from
              the Sirius Group.  Although relatively rare, the previously recovered spores 
              and pollen illustrate the potential for useful  paleoenvironmental information
              from a broader survey.  Specific objectives include a palynological survey of
              Sirius  and other Neogene sediments to determine presence or absence  of spores
              and pollen and any other plant remains derived  from contemporaneous
              vegetation. If sufficient spores and  pollen can be recovered from
              independently dated samples,  trends in vegetation composition, diversity,
              distribution  and extinction, might be identifiable.  Patterns of presence  vs.
              absence, composition and diversity will be used to help  interpret Antarctic
              climatic, cryospheric and tectonic  evolution.  If present, recycled
              palynomorphs from older  sediments will be used to help identify provenance of
              the  sediments.  Some marine units will be sampled, and search  for marine
              palynomorphs (dinoflagellate cysts and  acritarchs) will be included in the
              survey, as these have  great biostratigraphic and paleoenvironmental potential.
               This award is supported by the Office of Polar Programs  under  the National
              Science Foundation program entitled  Professional Opportunities for Women in
              Research and  Education (POWRE).  This POWRE award affords the  investigator an
              opportunity to broaden her research career  to include a significantly
              different interval of geologic  time.
