Title       : POWRE: Role of Calcium-Binding Proteins in Synaptic Transmission Between Retinal
               Amacrine Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1997 
File        : a9753027

Award Number: 9753027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56566              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evanna L. Gleason egleaso@unix1.sncc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1192,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE Research Enhancement award will give Dr. Gleason the opportunity to
              explore the feasibility of using antisense techniques to investigate her
              research system of retinal neurons.    Control of calcium concentration in
              cells is critical for regulation of calcium-dependent events such as synaptic
              transmission between neurons.  Calcium homeostasis is especially important in
              the retina, where synaptic signaling is relatively slow and therefore calcium
              elevations can be large.  This research project addresses the role that
              buffering calcium-binding proteins play in neuronal calcium homeostasis and
              synaptic transmission.    Dr. Gleason will use antisense oligonucleotides to
              block the expression of the predominant buffering calcium-binding protein,
              calretinin, then examine the effects of removing this protein on synaptic
              transmission.  Synaptic transmission will be studied in a preparation of
              cultured neurons derived from the chick retina, where an identified type of
              retinal neuron, the amacrine cell, forms synapses with other amacrine cells. 
              Isolated pairs of synaptically connected amacrine cells can be studied with
              high resolution using simultaneous perforated-patch voltage-clamp recording of
              both neurons.    By combining the two powerful techniques of molecular biology
              and electrophysiology, this research will enhance our understanding of
              calcium-homeostasis mechanisms in the central nervous system.  The antisense
              methods developed in this pilot project will be used in future studies to
              selectively remove other neuronal proteins that may be important in retinal
              synaptic transmission.
