Title       : POWRE: Forward and Inverse Analysis of Hydrologic Optics to Measure Aspects of
               Marine Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1997 
File        : a9753205

Award Number: 9753205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99947              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Perry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                POWRE:  Forward and inverse analysis of hydrologic optics to measure aspects
              of marine phytoplankton        The research focuses on the close coupling that
              exists between phytoplankton and light in the upper ocean.  Marine
              phytoplankton, the one-celled plants responsible for 99% of marine carbon
              fixation, play a dominant role in determining the optical characteristics of
              most ocean waters.  As photosynthetic plants, phytoplankton selectively absorb
              specific wavelengths of light and, as single-celled organisms, they efficiently
              scatter light.  Wavelength-dependent absorption and scattering by phytoplankton
              directly modify the in-water light field, as well as modify the light that
              emanates from the sea surface and that can be detected by remote sensing.      
                 Accurate determination of the absorption of light by phytoplankton is
              essential for understanding rates of photosynthesis (the `forward` component in
              the interaction of phytoplankton and light).  Two key elements necessary for
              modeling photosynthesis are the spectral phytoplankton absorption coefficient
              and the spectral irradiance.  A new series of in-water instruments recently
              have been developed for measuring the optical properties of seawater.  This
              research will take advantage of the high spectral resolution and the rapid data
              acquisition rate of these new instruments to study in-situ variability in the
              optical properties of marine phytoplankton.        The POWRE award is critical
              to my re-entry into academia after a prolonged illness.  POWRE's Visiting
              Researcher program will provide release time from teaching to allow me to
              re-establish my research program and allow me to be, once again, fully
              competitive for funding.  In addition, this research opportunity will directly
              improve my future teaching capability and will strengthen my case for promotion
              to full professor.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
