Title       : POWRE: Designs and Cryptography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9753244

Award Number: 9753244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Esther Lamken lamken@cco.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Visiting Professorship award at the California Institute of
Technology
              will allow the investigator to broaden and strengthen
her research.
Research
              will be conducted in two areas of mathematics, combinatorics
and cryptography.
              Both of these fields are interdisciplinary and
fall in the intersection of
              mathematics and computer science.
They have important applications in
              Information Theory.
The research projects in combinatorics are on existence
              problems
in combinatorial design theory and applications of decompositions
              of
edge-colored complete graphs in design theory. The emphasis is
on explicit
              constructions using both recursive and direct, efficient
computational
              methods. Applications of combinatorial designs can be
found in cryptography,
              scheduling, coding theory, statistics,
computer science, and molecular
              biology.
The projects in cryptography are of two types. The first is
              research
in the intersection of combinatorics and cryptography: an
              investigation
of combinatorial constructions for authentication schemes and
              of
designs which provide important cryptographic properties.  The second
is
              to expand and broaden the investigator's research in cryptography.
Areas of
              particular interest for research include applications of
finite field theory,
              finite geometry, and other combinatorial
constructions used for public key
              cryptography.
An extended visit to the new Center for Applied Cryptographic
              Research
at the University of Waterloo will provide a unique opportunity
              for
collaboration and research in cryptography.  This POWRE project is jointly
              supported by the MPS
     Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the
              Division of Mathematical
     Sciences (DMS). 

