Title       : POWRE: Near Intergration: The Implications for Macro Political Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1997 
File        : a9753119

Award Number: 9753119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93485              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanna L. DeBoef   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1371,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The process of political change is the focus of inquiry across the subfields of
              political science.  Testing theories about political dynamics requires analysts
              to make critical statistical assumptions about the nature of the memory of our
              time series.  Intuitively, the memory of a time series refers to the rate at
              which the effects of shocks to a process, such as the effect of the massive
              change in Congress in 1994 to the stream of policy outputs, dissipate. 
              Assumptions about memory lie at the heart of our theories about political
              processes and they affect both the models we choose and the inferences we draw
              from them.  But these assumptions are not well known, are technically
              difficult, and the implications of violating them have not been fully
              established.  The purpose of this study is to relate statistical assumptions
              about the memory in our time series to theory and hypothesis testing.  The
              results of the project will illustrate the properties of alternative estimators
              as the nature of the memory in time series varies and the conditions under
              which each estimator is appropriate.  The evidence will be used to gauge the
              reliability of results that have led to theoretical debates in current applied
              work with a particular focus on the support for the political parties and for
              the President, but the implications have much broader applicability across the
              subfields of political science and social sciences more generally.  This POWRE
              award will support the investigator in a Visiting Professorship to the
              Harvard-MIT Data Center.  It will allow her to interact and collaborate with
              other political methodologists who will serve as her mentors during and after
              her year at Harvard.  The Harvard-MIT Cata Center will provide valuable tools
              that will be pivotal for the completion of the research and will prove
              invaluable after she leaves Harvard and continues to explore additional time
              series questions.  The investigator will also immerse herself in the various
              workshops and symposia relating to macro political theory and econometrics
              while working on her research.  The quantitative skills that she will gain will
              enable her to make the needed breakthrough to successfully complete her
              research and, thus, enhance her visibility in the field.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
