Title       : POWRE: A Computer-Assisted Approach to Ethnohistorical Analysis in Polynesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9753111

Award Number: 9753111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathy A. Small cathy.small@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1390,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project pursues a novel direction in cultural analysis.  The investigator
              proposes to build a computer model of a Polynesian social system, and then
              apply it to an ethnographic problem concerning the historical articulation of
              gender, warfare, and stratification.  It is an exploratory approach that seeks
              to specify the rules by which a Polynesian chiefdom (Tonga) operates, including
              its conventions concerning marriage, production, redistribution, tribute,
              expansion, warfare, etc., and then to simulate them over time so that system
              dynamics and relationships can be observed and recorded.  The outcomes of
              simulations produce a `virtual history` that can then be used to trace the
              effects of changing warfare and stratification patterns on customary
              institutions related to gender.  The significance of this project is not in
              `replaying` real history but rather in being able to explore the logical
              constraints and implications of social dynamics.  In so doing, computer
              simulations can be used to develop fruitful hypotheses about how social forces
              and institutions articulate and therefore what impels or impedes their change. 
              In this project, computer modeling and simulation are used to assist the
              ethnographer in building and testing middle-level anthropological theory about
              how gender, warfare, and stratification operated and interacted over time in
              the Tongan social system.  Results will directly contribute to important
              debates in the literature concerning how gender relates to the reproduction and
              transformation of chiefdoms.  In its broader application, this project is a
              step in the development of an agent-based computer modeling approach to the
              study of culture, and promises to offer a powerful descriptive tool for the
              study of social process and change.  The investigator is a traditional
              ethnographer who is moving, in mid-career, toward combining computer modeling
              approaches to represent culture with descriptive ethnography.  This POWRE award
              affords her the opportunity to build significantly on her preliminary modeling
              work, bringing three years of exploratory work to fruition.  Her ultimate goal
              is to develop the potential of simulation research in anthropology in order to
              enable more powerful analyses of social change, namely one that combines a
              commitment to the rich tradition of narrative ethnography with the precision
              and scope that computer analysis can offer.  This is both a new career
              direction and new venue for anthropology.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
