Title       : POWRE: Nonlinear Modeling for Political Data Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1997 
File        : a9753126

Award Number: 9753126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82173              (Estimated)
Investigator: Langche Zeng lzeng@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1371,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research explores the application of artificial neural network models to
              empirical research in political science.  There are two main objectives.  The
              first is to conduct comparative studies of neural network models and a variety
              of novel and standard models used in political science to assess the utility of
              neural network models to the field.  This will be done through both computer
              simulation and application to substantively important political data, including
              the unique and comprehensive ROAD (Record of American Democracy) database at
              the Harvard-MIT Data Center.  The second objective is to adapt neural network
              models to apply to the special problems in political science.  In particular,
              the investigator plans to develop and implement methods of interpretation and
              inference from neural network modeling, results to facilitate the use of these
              models.  This will be of importance to nonlinear models in general, where
              interpretation of estimation results and significance tests are more
              complicated than in the linear models.  Other related methodological issues of
              general importance, such as data fitting vs. generalizations, noise level and
              model performance, will also be examined.  This work will contribute
              significantly to the field of political methodology in the increasingly
              important area of nonlinear, flexible modeling of political data.  Political
              and social relationships are generally characterized by nonlinearity and
              complexity, and their exact functional forms are rarely known or implied by
              substantive/formal theories.  The standard models in political science research
              such as the linear regression, logit, and probit models assume known functional
              forms for the data generating process, and are usually linear with or without a
              nonlinear link function.  Artificial neural network models are able to
              approximate unknown functional relationships and allow for arbitrary patterns
              of nonlinearity.  The planned work will therefore significantly contribute to
              the improvement of the quality of empirical research in political science. 
              This POWRE Visiting Professorship award will allow the investigator to expand
              her own methodological and teaching skills as well as afford her the
              opportunity to develop numerous substantive applications for her methodological
              innovations.  This will give her an important research and educational
              experience that will contribute to her visibility in her field and her
              subsequent academic advancement.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
