Title       : POWRE: New Constructions for Quantized and Classical Enveloping Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1997 
File        : a9753211

Award Number: 9753211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55817              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail Letzter letzter@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This work is funded through the Professional Opportunities for  Women in
              Research and Education (POWRE) program as a  Research/Educational Enhancement
              Project.    This project has  two parts.  The first is the development  of a
              theory of Harish-Chandra modules for quantized  enveloping algebras.  These
              modules are important because  of their impact on the study of Lie group
              representations.  In the classical case, the Harish-Chandra modules of 
              semisimple Lie algebras behave nicely when the action  is restricted to maximal
              compact Lie subalgebras. To construct  an analogous quantum theory, the
              investigator will analyze  already known quantum analogs of these special Lie
              subalgebras  and identify new ones.  Next, basic results such as a quantum 
              Harish-Chandra's subquotient theorem and a finiteness condition  on isotypic
              components will be proved relative to these  subalgebras.    The second topic
              concerns generalizations of the classical  theorem due to Chevalley: the
              invariants of the symmetric  algebra of a semisimple Lie algebra under the
              adjoint group  surjects onto the Weyl group invariants of the symmetrized 
              Cartan subalgebra. The researcher will study a variation of  this setup where
              the two groups  are replaced with  the smaller  adjoint group and Weyl group
              associated to certain Lie  subalgebras of a given semisimple Lie algebra.  To
              what  extent does  the image of the first invariant subalgebra  have finite
              codimension in the second? Answers will put  recent solutions to a question of
              Wallach in a general context.  The main technique is to exploit the so-called
              Letzter map,  originally developed for quantized enveloping algebras.
