Title       : POWRE: Individual Motives For Giving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9753125

Award Number: 9753125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Laury   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1320,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of a series of controlled laboratory experiments designed
              to examine  individual contributions to the provision of public goods, such as
              parks, playgrounds, clean air, or national defense.  Economists have observed
              that on average people contribute more to these public goods than predicted for
              purely self-interested individuals maximizing their own single-round monetary
              earnings.  The analysis of this phenomenon has focused almost exclusively on
              aggregate behavior, using as its predominant measure the average contributions
              by groups ranging in size from four through 100.  While this has yielded
              important insights into contribution behavior, it ignores the richness and
              diversity of the individual behavior within these groups.  The purpose of this
              project is to design experiments that allow one to better analyze this
              individual contribution behavior.  Recent theoretical work has pointed toward
              the effects that experimental treatments (such as the value of the public good,
              the cost of contributing, group size and individual resource endowment) are
              predicted to have on contributions when other motives for giving (altruism,
              errors, and signaling for example) are considered. In this project the
              investigator will design and run experiments in which these factors are varied
              for individuals during a single session.  The effects of these treatments on
              individuals' contribution behavior are then studied, and compared with the
              predictions of several models of contribution behavior.  A model of
              intertemporal signaling behavior will also be developed:  an individual may
              contribute in the current round in order to signal a willingness to `cooperate`
              in future rounds.  Traditional economic theory assumes that individuals are
              purely self-interested and rational:  they maximize their own earnings and
              ignore the impact of their decisions on others' welfare.  Public goods,
              however, provide an additional benefit to others.  If an individual ignores
              this additional benefit (as traditional theory predicts) then too little of the
              public good will be provided from society's point of view.  In the most extreme
              situation, the public good will not be provided at all, even when it is in
              everyone's best interest to provide the good.  This is one justification for
              government provision of some public goods:  the market will fail to provide (or
              will provide inefficiently low levels of) a public good and thus outside
              intervention is mandated. Previous research has demonstrated that such a
              complete market failure does not occur:  public goods are provided both in
              naturally-occurring settings (contributions to charity are widely observed, for
              example) and in controlled laboratory experiments.  However, the amount of the
              good provided is typically less than the social optimum. This research has
              implications for agencies and organizations that rely upon private donations
              for their support.   By focusing on those factors that foster or inhibit
              cooperation, and identifying the prevalence of various motives for contributing
              among individuals, this may allow non-profits and other organizations to better
              target their fund-raising efforts.  Alternatives to direct government provision
              of some public goods may also be assessed.   This POWRE research grant will
              allow the investigator  to plan her research agenda, conduct pilot experiments,
              develop a new theoretical model, and analyze the results of pilot experiments. 
              She currently hold a joint position at the University of South Carolina: 
              half-time with a tenure track position in the department of economics and a
              half-time research position managing the South Carolina economic forecasting
              service for the College of Business Administration.  Her duties for the
              research position take away from the time and attention she can pay to her
              academic research on the public goods provision problem.  The support of the
              National Science Foundation will be invaluable in helping her to focus on her
              tenure track research objectives and thus will advance her academic career.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
