Title       : POWRE: Genetic and In Vitro Investigations of Drosophila Reproductive Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9753006

Award Number: 9753006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72616              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mariana F. Wolfner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1119,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE award permits Dr. Wolfner to spend a sabbatic semester in two leading
              labs at the University of California, San Diego.  She will generate reagents
              and obtain training in techniques that will propel both projects in her lab
              into new, important areas.  She will also bring new technologies back to
              Cornell.    To advance her studies of seminal-fluid proteins that induce
              egg-laying, sperm storage, and life-span changes in mated Drosophila females,
              Dr. Wolfner will screen a Dr. Charles Zuker's large collection of mutants for
              mutations in seminal-fluid-protein genes. The mutants' phenotypes will pinpoint
              those genes on which to focus her future molecular studies.  She will also
              screen for mutations that overcome the need for a seminal-fluid protein in
              sperm storage, to obtain a genetic "handle" on the receptor for this
              sperm-storage protein.  Because of the size and nature of the Zuker collection,
              it would be prohibitive to carry out equivalent screens in Dr. Wolfner's lab.  
               To extend her studies of "YA", the nuclear lamina protein essential for
              post-meiotic nuclear behaviors, in John Newport's lab Dr. Wolfner will learn
              the Xenopus nuclear-assembly system and use it to test whether purified YA can
              assemble into nuclear envelopes in vitro.  Drosophila nuclear-assembly assays
              are not amenable to this sort of study, and their components are less well
              understood.  In the future, Dr. Wolfner plans to use the Xenopus assay to
              define YA's function and targeting signals in vitro.  While at UCSD, she will
              also screen the Zuker collection for mutations that compensate for lack of YA,
              thereby identifying genes whose products act with YA or in related biochemical
              processes.
