Title       : POWRE: Associative Recognition: Recall-to-Reject or Recall-to-Accept
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9753136

Award Number: 9753136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48591              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caren M. Jones caren@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many researchers have hypothesized that recognition judgments are a result of
              two separate processes: a rapid familiarity-based process and a slower
              recall-like process.  That is, recognition judgments that must be made very
              quickly are generally thought to be based on how familiar the test item seems,
              whereas judgments that are made more slowly may be partially or entirely based
              on a search of memory for the test item itself.  The slower recall process has
              usually been assumed to function as a recall-to-reject process in which
              mismatching information that is retrieved from memory is used to reject a test
              probe.  Recently, however, Heit and Jones (1996) tested the recall-to-reject
              account of item recognition and found no support for such a mechanism.  In
              contrast, they found evidence consistent with a recall-to-accept process in
              which matching information is retrieved from memory to facilitate acceptance of
              a studied item.  The current research extends Heit and Jones's work into the
              domain of associative recognition, in which two items or events are recognized
              as having occurred together in the past.  Such associative recognition
              judgments have been thought to be based on a slow recall-to-reject process in
              addition to the fast familiarity-based process, for intuitively simple reasons.
               Recalling, for example, that John is married to Susan allows one to reject the
              idea that John is married to Mary.  The specific nature of the recall process
              in associative recognition has important implications for the development of
              mathematical models of memory.  Currently, many of those models assume that
              recognition judgments of both items and associations are based exclusively on
              the overall familiarity of the test item(s).  The more familiar something
              seems, the more likely it is to be judged as `old;` as something that was
              experienced before.  However, several lines of research have demonstrated that
              such a simple process cannot account for all recognition judgments.  Clearly,
              then, the models need to be revised.  The manner in which the models should be
              updated is not entirely obvious though, in part because we do not have adequate
              information about the operation of the recall component of recognition.  The
              data that will be collected in the current research will inform memory modelers
              about the specific nature of that recall process.  Armed with such information,
              our models can be revised in appropriate ways, with a minimum of false-starts,
              and our understanding of memory in general will be enhanced.  This research
              meets the objectives of the POWRE program in two ways.  First, it explores a
              very new aspect of memory.  Although previous researchers have hypothesized
              that two processes might be involved in recognition, until recently no one has
              evaluated the specific nature of the recall-like component.  Second, the
              investigator is at a critical point in her career regarding tenure
              consideration.  The POWRE grant will allow for increased productivity, thus
              enhancing the investigator's potential for advancement and leadership in her
              field.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
