Title       : POWRE: Microgram to Nanogram: A Study to Reduce the Sample Size of Graphitic
               Carbon Targets for AMS Radiocarbon Dating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9753128

Award Number: 9753128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna L. Kirner dkirner@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1391,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Currently, accelerator mass spectrometry (AMS) technology provides the
              radiocarbon researcher with the ability to routinely measure samples of 500
              micrograms to one milligram of graphitic carbon.  Radiocarbon age
              determinations using AMS technology reduces the carbon requirement by several
              orders of magnitude from decay counting methods.  This reduction in the
              required carbon sample size has allowed researchers access to samples
              previously not practical to measure.  This study will focus on two methods to
              reduce the required amount of carbon for AMS radiocarbon dating in the ultra
              small sample range.  This project has two pivotal objectives.  The first
              objective is to optimize the processing of microgram to nanogram-sized samples
              of catalytically-reduced graphitic carbon for AMS radiocarbon age
              determinations.  The second goal is to determine the most accurate way to
              correct 14C/13C ratios for contaminant contribution to the measured ratios of
              these ultra small samples.  The ability to utilize AMS technology that reduces
              the required amount of a graphitic carbon sample to the levels of ultra small
              samples on a routine basis would provide the archaeological researcher with the
              opportunity to seek new areas of scientific inquiry.  These include but are not
              limited to organic residues on potsherds, rock art, pollen, phytoliths, sherd
              temper, plant amino acids, amino acids from bone, seeds, charcoal smudges, and
              organic residues on tools.  All of these materials are candidates for
              radiocarbon age determinations but the limiting factor is the extremely small
              amounts of organic material.  Critical data from these sources could provide
              clues to help answer a variety of questions about human origins and prehistoric
              cultures.  Paleontology, environmental and paleoclimatic studies and
              oceanography would also benefit from this research.  Material that may be used
              for ultra small samples include amino acids in fossil bone and teeth that fall
              within the range of radiocarbon, chemical compounds in atmospheric aerosols,
              marine dissolved organic carbon and foraminifera.  Each of these research areas
              could utilize ultra small sample technology to gather critical data and develop
              new areas of inquiry.  The funding provided by the POWRE program opens up new
              avenues of research that will allow career enhancement and substantively
              further professional standing with the research community.  Since the
              investigator is in a non-tenured research associate position, POWRE support may
              assist in her academic advancement as well.   This project could provide the
              scientific community with a useful new tool and offers the researcher a chance
              to contribute in an area not ordinarily available through regular research
              grants.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
