Title       : GRAPH REDUCTION MODELS OF LOGIC PROGRAMMING CONTROL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1990  
File        : a9002132

Award Number: 9002132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 15,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Salter rms@cs.oberlin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rhys Price Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oberlin College
	      
	      Oberlin, OH  44074    440/775-8461

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                   Initial experiments with a graph reduction model for                      
              nondeterministic program control indicate that this is a viable and            
              natural approach.  Appropriate reduction rules for and and or                  
              combinators together with a new type of tagged node (alt nodes)                
              enable the straightforward compilation of declarative language                 
              statements to graph sections whose reduction by simple rewrite rules           
              will effect backtracking.  Other graph reduction approaches to logic           
              languages place this burden on the metalanguage.                               
                                                                                             
                   The matching of an operational graph reduction model with a               
              denotational semantics for the declarative language B provides an              
              elegant framework for extension to full logic programming and the              
              future incorporation of more advanced control structures.  Although            
              the current model abstracts the complexities of state by making                
              explicit a state argument, there are appropriate alternative                   
              strategies that can be employed in the extension.  Other investigators         
              are currently producing graph reduction models incorporating                   
              appropriate behavior for logic variables, which will be considered in          
              our extension.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                   The main objective is to develop the current model to correctly           
              and efficiently model sophisticated control for declarative languages.         
              Investigation of methods to superimpose Prolog's cut is already                
              underway.  The model will seek ways to incorporate the necessary               
              control information into the graph.  The success of simple alt nodes           
              in modeling nondeterminism is an encouraging start.
