Title       : Postdoctoral Fellowship in Studies in Science, Technology Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1991     
File        : a9002693

Award Number: 9002693
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Lindee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1353,
Abstract    :
              Working with Dr. Robert Nussbaum of the Dept. of Human                         
              Genomes Center at the University of Pennsylvania, Dr. Lindee                   
              is developing a research plan to understand modern eugenics.                   
              This plan includes a study of modern eugenics, 1950 to the                     
              present, which includes exploring the implications of the                      
              human genome project for future "directed human evolution."                    
              She is trying to determine how concerns about human evolution                  
              have shaped the development of genetics.  By the end of the                    
              postdoctoral year, significant progress should have been made                  
              on a scholarly study of the problem.                                           
                                                                                             
              As part of the training under Dr. Nussbaum, Dr. Lindee is                      
              working with research geneticists in an intense laboratory                     
              apprenticeship.  She is also working with the Center staff in                  
              preparing for site visits, and will attend all administrative                  
              and scientific meetings of the Center.                                         
                                                                                             
              With the training and the research which she is undertaking                    
              under this fellowship, Dr. Lindee hopes to reshape the way                     
              historians, philosophers, and social scientists think about                    
              eugenics in America. Provocative recent work on German                         
              eugenics suggests some inadequacies of current American                        
              scholarship on this topic.  This work hopefully will open the                  
              field to more productive analysis.
