Title       : Taphonomic Patterns in Fossil Marine Invertebrates and TheirPaleobiologic
               Significance: I. Trilobita From the Upper Ordovician (Earth Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1990       
File        : a9002885

Award Number: 9002885
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1991  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Danita S. Brandt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                Broken, disarticulated fossils record by their preservation state            
              the physical history of transport, reworking, and length of exposure           
              before final burial and preservation of the organisms.  Thus,                  
              taphonomic data (e.g., patterns of breakage and wear) are used as              
              paleoecological indicators of physical factors such as relative                
              environmental energy and sedimentation rate.  Taphonomic data have a           
              second, separate significance for paleobiologists: they also reflect           
              underlying paleobiologic control (e.g., the mechanical strength of the         
              skeleton).  This second aspect of taphonomic information is only               
              beginning to be studied in a systematic way.  The purpose of this              
              research is to document patterns in:  (1) breakage/wear/damage of              
              exoskeletons and (2) the distribution of epibionts on fossil marine            
              invertebrates.  The goal of this work is to interpret these patterns           
              in terms of underlying paleobiological factors such as the mechanical          
              strength of the skeleton, predator/prey relationships, and life                
              orientation of the organism.  Understanding the biological basis of            
              taphonomic patterns is necessary to accurately interpret the history           
              (e.g., the mode of formation) of fossiliferous assemblages.  This type         
              of research is a prerequisite for taphonomic studies that consider             
              fossils as sedimentary particles.  This initial study will examine             
              several genera of Late Ordovician trilobites from the Cincinnati arch          
              region.  Subsequent studies will focus on different taxonomic groups,          
              and the long-term goal is to compare the taphonomic patterns of this           
              fauna with faunas from other depositional settings and geologic                
              periods.                                                                       
                The interactive component of this project includes the following:            
              a) primary teaching responsibility for an undergraduate course in              
              geology, b) participation in a graduate seminar in paleontology, c)            
              departmental guest lecture, d) a "Women in Geoscience" guest lecture           
              series, and e) various mentor/counseling activities.                           
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
