Title       : PRF/J: Turbulent Exchange at Vegetated Surfaces: Canopy Geometry and
               Gas-Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1990     
File        : a9002326

Award Number: 9002326
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Crystal Blackshear                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Rich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1124,
Abstract    :
                   Relations between forest canopy geometry, local                           
              physiological characteristics, and whole-canopy gas-exchange will              
              be examined.  The goal is understand links between individual-                 
              plant and whole-canopy physiological processes.  Focus will be on              
              effects of vertical position on plant physiological processes, to              
              provide input values for a higher-order closure model of                       
              turbulent exchange at vegetated surfaces.  The extent to which 1)              
              canopy position can be used to predict local physiological                     
              properties and 2) canopy geometry can be used to predict canopy-               
              level gas exchange will be examined.  It is hypothesized that 1)               
              radiation flux is a good predictor of leaf-level gas-exchange                  
              within relatively closed canopies, and 2) leaf-level physiology                
              can be predicted by spatial position using a simple structural                 
              model.  To test these hypotheses and to provide model input                    
              parameters.  1) gas-exchange characteristics as a function of                  
              vertical position will be sampled and 2) canopy radiation                      
              flux/geometry maps using photographic techniques will be                       
              constructed.  The canopy-level gas-exchange model will be                      
              validated using eddy correlation.  This research will be                       
              conducted in close collaboration with research groups at the                   
              University of California at Davis and the New Zealand Forest                   
              Research Institute.  Field techniques will be tested in an                     
              orchard and detailed field studies will be conducted in two well-              
              studied natural forests.
