Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Underwater Acoustics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1991   
File        : a9002837

Award Number: 9002837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15585              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Gilbert gilbert@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator will show how the inverse problem              
              in underwater acoustics can be solved for the case of finite                   
              oceans with a depth-varying index of refraction.  There are two                
              difficulties.  The first involves the interaction of th ocean                 
              and the bottom.  The second involves the fact that the index of                
              refraction of the water varies with depth.  The problem with the               
              ocean bottom can be taken care of by postulating an appropriate                
              far-field boundary condition, while the problem with the variable              
              refractivity is solved by replacing the original set of equations              
              with a set of averaged equations that are more tractable.  The                 
              analytical work will be complemented with numerical simulations.               
              One reason that people are interested in underwater acoustics is               
              that it is important to be able to locate and track submarines                 
              using a satellite.  Essentially a satellite sends a signal to a                
              part of the ocean to look for a submarine and interprets the                   
              return signal.  This is a difficult problem because the ocean is               
              a complicated medium and the return signal can be distorted                    
              easily.  The principal investigator will study ways of improving               
              the interpretation of signals from the ocean by using                          
              mathematical analysis and numerical simulations.
