Title       : Mathematical Sciences: "L-Adic Representations and Iwasawa Theory"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1992   
File        : a9002468

Award Number: 9002468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Y. Velez                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Wiles wiles@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award supports the research in arithmetic algebraic                  
              geometry of Professor Andrew Wiles of Princeton University. Dr.                
              Wiles plans to continue his researches in Iwasawa Theory by                    
              examining the symmetric square of a representation associated to               
              a certain class of Hecke eigenforms. In this way, he hopes to                  
              attack the Greenberg conjectures, which concern the newly defined              
              Selmer groups of compatible families of L-adic representations.                
                   This is research in the field of arithmetic algebraic                     
              geometry, a subject that combines the techniques of algebraic                  
              geometry and number theory. In its original formulation,                       
              algebraic geometry treated figures that could be defined in the                
              plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials. Number                    
              theory started with the whole numbers and such questions as                    
              divisibility of one whole number by another. These two subjects,               
              seemingly so far apart, have in fact influenced each other from                
              the earliest times, but in the past quarter century the mutual                 
              influence has increased greatly. The field of arithmetic                       
              algebraic geometry now uses techniques from all of modern                      
              mathematics, and is having corresponding influence beyond its own              
              borders.
