Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Classical Analysis: Complex Analysis,Computation, and
               Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1990       
File        : a9002852

Award Number: 9002852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48024              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Marshall marshall@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work on this project combines investigations into                         
              mathematical questions of classical complex analysis with                      
              applications to control problems and finitely generated algebras               
              of functions of several complex variables.                                     
                   The optimal control problems, arising in engineering, are                 
              phrased in terms of vector-valued, bounded, functions defined on               
              certain cylinder-like sets.  One is interested in minimizing a                 
              certain functional over the class of functions.  Sometimes there               
              are no extermal functions, other times they turn out to be                     
              analytic.  Sometimes there are unique solutions, but not always.               
              The goal of this work is to describe the cylinders which give                  
              rise to bounded analytic optimal functions which are smooth on                 
              the boundary of the cylinder.  A number of positive results in                 
              this area have focused the problem to one of taking analytic                   
              selections of functions on sets fibered over the unit circle and               
              determining when such functions agree with a given function when               
              restricted to the unit interval.                                               
                   Work on algebra generators evolves from an earlier result of              
              Gleason which suggests that the classes of continuous and                      
              holomorphic functions in the two-dimensional domains which vanish              
              at the origin are finitely generated algebras.  This is easy to                
              do for the bidisc, although the minimum norm of the generators is              
              not yet known (it is probably unity).  This particular question                
              is to be addressed by computational methods first to verify the                
              conjectured minimum.  For the general Gleason problem, a new                   
              approach will be made by converting it to an equivalent problem                
              in first order partial differential equations.  Estimates for the              
              norm of the generators should follow if this plan works out.
