Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Fourier Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1993      
File        : a9002420

Award Number: 9002420
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Benedetto jjb@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues work on modern aspects of Fourier                  
              analysis related to wavelet theory, weighted inequalities for the              
              Fourier transform and restriction theorems for the transform.                  
                   Weighted Fourier transform inequalities are motivated by                  
              some of the central issues of signal processing.  In linear                    
              system theory, weights correspond to various filters in energy                 
              concentration problems.  Another area of application, prediction               
              theory, weighted Lebesgue spaces arise for weights corresponding               
              to power spectra of stationary stochastic processes.  The object               
              of the research is to obtain bounds on the q-th power norm of the              
              weighted Fourier transform in terms of the weighted p-th power                 
              norm of the signal (original function).  The program seeks best                
              possible estimates.  This search gives rise to uncertainty                     
              principle inequalities; these provide natural constraints for                  
              determining the effectiveness of spectrum estimation techniques                
              used in signal processing.  The methods of wavelet theory play a               
              basic role in this activity.  Initial efforts will focus on the                
              special case of quadratic (weighted) norms.                                    
                   Inequalities may be obtained when information concerning the              
              (integrals of) decreasing rearrangements of the weights can be                 
              computed.  The same condition obtains without rearranging the                  
              weights when the inequalities are valid.  What needs to be worked              
              out is what happens between the necessary and sufficient                       
              conditions.  Techniques derived from balayage combined with                    
              atomic decompositions of underlying tent spaces will be employed               
              in efforts to clarify the different conditions.
