Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Vicosity Solutions of Fully NonlinearEquations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1992   
File        : a9002331

Award Number: 9002331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125057             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Crandall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project involves the study of viscosity solutions to                 
              fully nonlinear partial differential equations.  Earlier work in               
              this area set the stage for the complete development now                       
              available for first order equations in finite dimensions, and                  
              subsequent developments in the theory of viscosity solutions of                
              first and second-order fully nonlinear equations yielded strongly              
              developing theories of Hamilton-Jacobi equations in infinite                   
              dimensions and fully nonlinear second order equations in finite                
              and infinite dimensions.  The present work is concerned with                   
              viscosity solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi equations in infinite                   
              dimensions, second order equations in both finite and infinite                 
              dimensions, and second order equations in the space of integrable              
              functions.                                                                     
                   In recent years there has been a remarkable development of                
              the theory of fully nonlinear partial differential equations of                
              first and second order; this development followed the successful               
              introduction of the notion of "viscosity solutions" of these                   
              equations which allows one to admit nowhere differentiable                     
              functions as solutions.  Equations of this sort arise in many                  
              areas of mathematics and its applications, including control                   
              theory, the theory of differential games, problems of a                        
              geometrical nature, asymptotic problems, etc., etc.  The pace of               
              this development is currently at its peak, and fundamental work                
              remains to be done to render the theory more accessible, more                  
              general, and more complete.  The proposed work lies in these                   
              directions and chiefly concerns the using of the new methods to                
              complete several aspects, including "infinite dimensional"                     
              versions partially motivated by the theories of control and                    
              differential games involving systems whose state lies in infinite              
              dimensional spaces and more penetrating studies of the finer                   
              structure of viscosity solutions in both infinite and finite                   
              dimensional settings.
