Title       : Applications of Artificial Intelligence to Materials Logistics in Semiconductor
               Manufacturing (Engineering)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9002917

Award Number: 9002917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88034              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Shilepsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                Potential applications will be investigated of artificial                    
              intelligence and expert systems to the design and operation of                 
              materials logistics systems within semiconductor manufacturing.  The           
              United States semiconductor industry faces considerable pressure from          
              international competition in a time of rapidly changing products and           
              processes.  Problems such as scheduling and dispatching within a               
              production line are computationally intractible and must rely on               
              heuristics for system operation.  Their complexity, size, and                  
              stochastic variability suggest that they are best addressed by a               
              combination of techniques from Operations Research and Artificial              
              Intelligence.  Dr. Shilepsky will bring together current models from           
              Operations Research, scaling to reduce problem size, and embedded AI           
              submodules in the form of expert systems, neural nets, and/or space            
              state search to develop new models for production planning.                    
                The interactive activities include teaching two courses during each          
              of the fall and spring semesters selected from Introduction to                 
              Engineering Probability, Introduction to Stochastic Processes, and             
              Inventory Theory.  In addition, Dr. Shilepsky will advise 10                   
              undergraduate and 5 graduate students, supervising a master's degree           
              project in conjunction with the proposed research.                             
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
