Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1991      
File        : a9002006

Award Number: 9002006
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chad A. Mirkin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Chad A. Mirkin has been awarded a Postdoctoral Research                    
              Fellowship in Chemistry.  Dr. Mirkin's doctoral degree was from                
              the University of Pennsylvania under the supervision of                        
              Professor Gregory Geoffroy.  Dr. Mirkin intends to continue                    
              research at MIT under the sponsorship of Professor Mark                        
              Wrighton.  Dr. Mirkin's area of postdoctoral training and                      
              research will be the development of microelectrode devices                     
              capable of effecting electrocatalysis.  Initially he will                      
              develop a microelectrode which will use macrocycles to detect                  
              Lithium.  This training will provide him with the background to                
              design other catalytic electrodes which may be used for oxygen                 
              atom transfer reactions.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The Postdoctoral Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as                 
              an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the                   
              knowledge and experience of new Ph.D's and attract them into                   
              meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research and                       
              teaching.
