Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Summer Institute in Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1992     
File        : a9002119

Award Number: 9002119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Glazebrook                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1990      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $952451             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Devaney bob@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The principal investigator will direct the establishment of               
              a "Regional Geometry Institute."  Research mathematicians,                     
              graduate students, pre-college teachers, and high school students              
              will form a community with the goal of learning dynamics while                 
              coming to understand each individual's special viewpoint.  For                 
              the most part, this award will support the "Advanced Research                  
              Component," which over the course of the project will convene the              
              foremost dynamical systems theorists in the world, college                     
              research faculty, and graduate students.  Research activities in               
              complex analytic dynamics, computational complexity, attractors,               
              renormalization, annular maps, neural networks, and fractal                    
              geometry will be organized by several experts.  Activities are                 
              also planned between summers.                                                  
                   Coupled to this award will be a four-year project funded                  
              through the Division for Teacher Preparation and Enhancement                   
              (TPE-8954797).  Entitled, "Contemporary Mathematics and                        
              Technology as a Driving Force for School Reform," this project                 
              will draw pre-college teachers from two Boston area school                     
              districts to the same environment to learn dynamics and methods                
              by which these topics can be infused into the high school                      
              curriculum.  Also coupled to these projects in the first year is               
              a Young Scholars Project (RCD-8855151) entitled Project PROMYS-                
              Program in Mathematics for Young Scientists.  This ongoing                     
              project draws bright high school students together to study a                  
              variety of research problems in dynamical systems which have been              
              tailored to their level of mathematics expertise.                              
                   Participants from each of the three funded projects will                  
              have extensive opportunities to work together and learn from one               
              another.  Mixed groups will be formed for day-to-day discussions               
              and field trips.  These will study dynamics problems from several              
              viewpoints.  A well-equipped "Dynamics Lab" will be made                       
              available to all participants and is seen as a focal point for                 
              interaction activities.
