Title       : Catalytically Stabilized Thermal Incineration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1995  
File        : a9002844

Award Number: 9002844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Pfefferle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Precision Combustion, Inc.
	      410 Sackett Point Road
	      North Haven, CT  064733106    203/287-3700

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
              Catalytically stabilized thermal (CST) incineration of                         
              chlorinated hydrocarbons uses catalytic surface reactions to                   
              stabilize gas phase reactions.  Hot wall effects and surface-                  
              generated reactive intermediates are hypothesized to improve                   
              stabilization of gas phase chlorinated hydrocarbon combustion,                 
              enabling rapid plug flow (low residence time and small                         
              combustor size) incineration with high destruction of toxic                    
              organic species, and stable combustion of even very low BTU                    
              mixtures.  Work to date has shown that a CST incinerator can                   
              stabilize methyl chloride and methylene chloride combustion                    
              sufficiently to enable high throughput plug flow operation,                    
              achieving 99.999% + destruction levels with a residence time                   
              of 15 ms.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              In Phase I, reaction mechanisms for methyl chloride                            
              destruction in plug flow thermally stabilized and                              
              catalytically stabilized reactors were investigated, through                   
              preliminary model development and through experimental flow                    
              tube kinetic studies.  This work identified preliminary                        
              parameters and provided a initial basis for further                            
              experimental studies and development of a catalytic plug flow                  
              reactor model in Phase II, for use in Phase III prototype                      
              development and system design.  First approximation plug flow                  
              thermal reactor model results predicted high destruction                       
              levels at moderately high temperature, and this was confirmed                  
              experimentally in a non-catalytic isothermal reactor.                          
              Catalytic isothermal reactor experiments altered the gas phase                 
              reaction mechanisms and significantly lowered required                         
              temperature and residence time for high destruction.  The                      
              experimental findings advance fundamental understanding of the                 
              underlying mechanisms affecting chlorinated hydrocarbon                        
              combustion and emissions.  Ultra-high destruction                              
              effectiveness, increased safety, small incinerator size and                    
              reduced costs will make this technology attractive to the                      
              large and growing thermal incineration market.
