Title       : Collaborative Research on Development and Evaluation of Continuously Weighing
               Minilysimeters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1990   
File        : a9002700

Award Number: 9002700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1990   
Expires     : July 31,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6280               (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Isard s-isard@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1352,
Abstract    :
                   Inquiries into microclimatological patterns and processes have            
              been inhibited by difficulties in determining micro-scale variations in        
              heat and moisture transfers.  Among the most important variables are           
              transfers of water vapor through evaporation and transpiration from            
              ground surfaces and vegetation into the air.  Lysimeters have been             
              developed to directly measure evapotranspiration, but these machines           
              are large, stationary, expensive, and capable only of averaging                
              readings over the area that they cover.  This collaborative research           
              project will refine and test a set of minilysimeters to measure spatial        
              variations in the transfer of heat and moisture.  Three continuously           
              weighing, portable minilysimeters will be designed and tested in a             
              carefully controlled experiment that will compare their measurements           
              with records obtained using three alternative microclimatological              
              approaches.                                                                    
                   This project will determine the extent to which small, portable           
              minilysimeters can be used to accurately measure evapotranspiration in         
              a variety of different sites.  These tests will help ascertain the             
              conditions in which these instruments will be useful and the confidence        
              with which the data that they collect can be used.  Because of the             
              potential for using instruments of this type to provide heretofore             
              unavailable information about micro-scale spatial variability in heat          
              and moisture transfer, the project should contribute significantly             
              toward advancement of microclimatological research.
