Title       : Integrating Explanation-Based and Neural Approaches to Machine Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9002413

Award Number: 9002413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Su-Shing Chen                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170069             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jude W. Shavlik shavlik@cs.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              To be considered intelligent, machines must be capable of                      
              learning.  Symbolic and neural approaches to machine learning                  
              both have been heavily investigated.  However, there has been                  
              little research into the synergies achievable by combining these               
              two learning paradigms.  This work will develop a hybrid system                
              that combines the symbolically-oriented explanation-based                      
              learning paradigm with the neural back-propagation algorithm.  In              
              this system, the initial neural network configuration is                       
              determined by the generalized explanation of the solution to a                 
              specific classification of planning task.  This research                       
              addresses the problem of choosing a good initial neural network                
              configuration and overcomes problems that arise when using                     
              imperfect theories to build explanations.  Most real-world                     
              problems can never be formalized exactly.  However, there is much              
              to be gained by utilizing the capability to reason approximately               
              correctly.  Explanation-based learning provides a way to                       
              profitably use casual models of the world, while neural networks               
              provide a way to refine roughly-correct concepts.  This research               
              on combining these two learning paradigms promises to broaden the              
              applicability of machine learning techniques, producing learning               
              algorithms that are not brittle and which can produce concepts                 
              whose accuracy improves through experience.
