Title       : Global Model Prediction Optimization Using Three DimensionalTruncation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1991      
File        : a9002835

Award Number: 9002835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158569             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ferdinand Baer Baer@ATMOS.UMD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  Solutions to the atmospheric (or oceanic) prediction                       
              equations require an understanding of the three dimensional                    
              spatial nature of the fluid, including dynamics and physics,                   
              conservation conditions, and forcing.  Since the equations are                 
              exceptionally complex and highly nonlinear, it is necessary to                 
              convert those equations to some numerical form which will provide              
              meaningful iterative solutions within the constraints of                       
              available computational capabilities.  The challenge is to do so               
              optimally.  While the problem has been investigated, because of                
              the nature of the system, horizontal and vertical representations              
              have been considered independently in the past.  It is the                     
              contention of the principal investigator that systematic                       
              truncation of the atmosphere/ocean prediction equations in all                 
              three dimensions simultaneously could improve predictive skill.                
                   Thus, the purpose of this research is to study the                        
              correlation of truncation in all dimensions in a numerical model,              
              and to find a truncation which is systematic in all three                      
              dimensions.  The principal investigator will select a truncation               
              according to scaling arguments that are based on the results from              
              his previous studies and define appropriate functions.  To                     
              establish the optimal three dimensional truncation, the functions              
              will be tested in the operational numerical prediction model of                
              NOAA's National Meteorological Center (NMC).                                   
                  This project is part of the NSF-NMC Program Joint Program in               
              Numerical Weather Prediction.
