Title       : Experts, Information and Political Improvement: A Professional Development Award
               in Studies in Science, Technology and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1991      
File        : a9002985

Award Number: 9002985
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry M. Casper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This one year, full-time award enables a physicist who directs the             
              Carleton College Technology Policy Project to develop his                      
              understanding of the relationships between access to information               
              and new information technologies and political power and influence.            
              He will spend a year at the University of California at San Diego,             
              working with two host scholars.  Political scientist Sanford Lakoff            
              studies the interaction of science and government; Herbert York,               
              director emeritus of the Institute on Global Conflict and                      
              Cooperation, is an experienced government servant and international            
              negotiator on arms control and other technology/society issues.                
              Professor Lakoff will guide Professor Casper's study and analysis              
              of concepts in democratic theory such as "political accountability"            
              and "public right to know," and consideration of how such concepts             
              might be operationalized.  Professor York will guide his study and             
              analysis of how scientists have both empowered and legitimated, and            
              disempowered and delegitimated citizen involvement.  The project               
              will place particular emphasis on important new roles for colleges             
              and universities in providing citizens access to information and               
              expertise.  Among the concrete products of the project will be a               
              series of articles and a book, tentatively titled Experts,                     
              Information and Political Empowerment.                                         
                                                                                             
              This project addresses a central issue in ethics and values                    
              studies:  the social values and mutual obligations and                         
              responsibilities that arise in the interactions between scientists,            
              engineers, and citizens.  The investigator and his host specialists            
              and host institution are uniquely well-qualified to undertake and              
              support this project; research and related activities are likely               
              to continue after the period of the award.  Results are likely to              
              be appropriately disseminated and useful.  An award in the amount              
              ofd $43,000 is therefore recommended.
