Title       : Dissertation Research: A Taphonomic Investigation of Reptiles and Their
               Significance to Early Hominid Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1990       
File        : a9002901

Award Number: 9002901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7690               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jolee A. West  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Eugene Giles, Ms. Jolee West, a                     
              graduate student at the University of Illinois at Urbana, will                 
              conduct research for her doctoral dissertation.  She will combine              
              field and laboratory work to study the distribution of reptilian               
              remains - crocodile and turtle - on the East African landscape                 
              and determine the causal factors of the patterns observed.  In                 
              particular, she wishes to learn how humanly derived assemblages                
              may be identified.  To accomplish this, she will first focus her               
              attention on areas located on the Eastern shore of Lake Turkana,               
              Kenya which are not inhabited by people.  She will establish                   
              transects which extend away from water sources and collect                     
              reptilian remains along them.  This will provide data on                       
              "natural" or non-human patterning.  She will then work with                    
              traditional peoples who live near the lake margin and hunt and                 
              butcher these same species.  A comparison of these samples should              
              permit identification of uniquely human signatures.  Ms. West                  
              will also examine reptile remains from hyena lairs, study bone                 
              weathering, and conduct flume experiments to show the                          
              differential effects of water movement.                                        
                                                                                             
              This basic research will provide archaeologists with extremely                 
              valuable data.  Crocodile and turtle remains are often recovered               
              during the excavation of early hominid sites in East Africa.                   
              However, it is extremely difficult to determine the derivation of              
              these remains which also occur naturally as a scatter across                   
              African landscapes.  It is not possible therefore to tell whether              
              such species formed part of early hominid diet or whether the                  
              association of these bones occurs by chance.  Ms. West's project               
              will provide the key for such interpretation.                                  
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons.  First, it will                 
              provide a tool of use in a wide range of archaeological                        
              situations.  Secondly, it will assist in the training of an                    
              extremely promising young scientist.
