Title       : Computational Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1993     
File        : a9002819

Award Number: 9002819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270404             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bhubaneswar Mishra mishra@cs.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chee K. Yap  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research is largely motivated by complexity considerations.  To            
              understand complexity of algorithms, it is often necessary to obtain           
              good lower and upper bounds to commutative algebra.  In the last few           
              years, new bounds have been achieved in three key areas:  namely,              
              Groebner Bases, Hilbert Nullstellensatz and Wu-Ritt Characteristic             
              Sets.  The proof techniques employed are novel and contain ideas that          
              have much wider potential applications.  These and a few other related         
              techniques will be further investigated and new algorithms based on            
              these ideas will be devised.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Another area is the construction of efficient algorithms -- for GCD.           
              Sturm sequences, computations with algebraic numbers.  Groebner bases          
              and Wu-Ritt characteristic sets.  Here also some important progress            
              has been achieved.  Further applications of these results to obtain            
              decomposition of ideals and varieties, and extensions to more general          
              classes of algebraic structures will be pursued.                               
                                                                                             
              An important area that has not received much attention is the one              
              dealing with the choice of data structures in algebraic algorithms .           
              This seems a very exciting area because the computational objects              
              (multivariate polynomials, ideals) here are much richer in structure           
              than anything that has been traditionally studied in data structures.          
              Research will be undertaken in this area to address issues of the              
              following kind:  Selection of data structures for various                      
              computational algebraic algorithms,  Application of amortization and           
              hashing techniques to algebraic data structures, etc.
