Title       : Invertebrate Paleontology Improvements and Integration of Orphaned Collections:
               Florida Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1990    
File        : a9002689

Award Number: 9002689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Schindel                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas S. Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1129      LONG-TERM PROJCTS IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Florida Museum of Natural History is an active center                 
              for paleontological research and preservation of fossil                        
              collections.  Under the stewardship of Dr. Douglas S. Jones, the               
              invertebrate fossil collections have been the subject of renewed               
              interest and significant support.  This fossil collection now                  
              represents one of the fastest-growing repositories of                          
              invertebrate fossils in the country, and will soon become the                  
              premiere repository for marine invertebrates of Cenozoic age from              
              the southeast U.S. and the Caribbean Ocean.  Dr. Jones proposes                
              transfer of the collection to high-density storage units, and                  
              acceleration of the efforts to arrange, catalog, and computerize               
              the collection's holdings.                                                     
                   The proposed curatorial improvement project will have wide-               
              ranging benefits for the research community.  Researchers will                 
              have improved access to the collections during their visits to                 
              Gainesville, and through a more effective program of borrowing                 
              specimens.  The computer database will be a research resource in               
              its own right, allowing investigators to explore patterns of                   
              fossil distribution through time and space.  Natural history                   
              collections such as this are the primary documents of the                      
              evolution of life on earth.  The research community realizes                   
              important dividends from their proper curation.
