Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Monotonicity in Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1990    
File        : a9002431

Award Number: 9002431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12852              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Haddock jhaddock@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project supports mathematical research on problems                   
              arising in the study of dynamical systems and differential                     
              equations.  The equations are functional differential equations                
              of retarded type.  In certain equations occurring in biological                
              models, the retardation of memory effect is a natural feature.                 
                   Work will focus on four main topics.  The first concerns                  
              monotone flows on monotone dynamical systems.  Efforts to modify               
              standard systems theory to present a unified treatment of                      
              differential equations for which the set of equilibrium points                 
              contains all (phase space) constant functions will be made.  The               
              second topic relates to instability of physical systems.                       
              Applications of invariance principles of finite delay equations                
              will be made to obtain instability results for finite and                      
              infinite delay functional differential equations.  Instability is              
              characterized by the property that all solutions passing near an               
              unstable point must leave every neighborhood of the point.                     
                   Neutral functional differential equations make up the third               
              element of this project.  Work will be done in establishing                    
              comparison-convergence techniques for approximating solutions.                 
              The final goal of the research is that of using monotone                       
              iteration techniques to study periodic boundary value problems                 
              for functional differential equations.  Both the existence of                  
              periodic solutions and techniques for constructing them will be                
              considered.
