Title       : RUI: Algebras, Domains and Categories in Computation and Semantics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9002251

Award Number: 9002251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Krishna M. Kavi                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43665              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Mulry phil@cs.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              Algebras and monads, domains and categories provide powerful                   
              approaches to various connected problems in computation and semantics.         
                                                                                             
              The project employs categories in formalizing the iterative process in         
              fixed point constructions suitable for wide computational                      
              interpretation.  Questions such as producing a systematic approach to          
              interpreting non-termination and measuring the extent recursion                
              coexists in the presence of powerful closure properties, necessary for         
              semantic interpretation, will be answered.                                     
                                                                                             
              Recent progress in interpreting domains in non-standard models of              
              computation will continue.  The objective here is the enumeration              
              of a powerful computation paradigm capable of broad semantic                   
              utilization in which notions such as order, continuity and                     
              effectiveness are intrinsically defined.  An important goal is                 
              providing a logical framework that will systematize present work,              
              promote greater accessibility, and point to possible future                    
              implementation.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The research will utilize algebras and monads to study partial data            
              types and their computations.  Utilizing recent success with Kleisli           
              and Eilenberg-Moore algebras, a systematic study of various monadic            
              refinements and their corresponding computation calculi will be                
              undertaken.  Connections with other models of partial computation and          
              with work in operational semantics will also be explored.
