Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Holomorphic Mappings and Projections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1991      
File        : a9002541

Award Number: 9002541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emil J. Straube straube@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold P. Boas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work on this project combines geometry and function theory                
              in several complex variables to study how the geometry of a                    
              domain influences the properties of holomorhpic functions defined              
              on the domain.  Although progress has been made recently in                    
              understanding domains whose complex geometry is not excessively                
              degenerate, so-called domains of finite type, the general state                
              of knowledge is still limited.                                                 
                   Among the most manageable classes of holomorphic functions                
              defined on a domain, those which are square integrable are                     
              probably the most useful.  It is possible to convert any square                
              integrable function on a domain into its nearest holomorphic                   
              neighbor by a process of integration against a kernel function -               
              the Bergman kernel.  There is a unique such kernel for each                    
              domain and integration projects each function onto the best                    
              holomorphic approximant.  Perhaps the most important question                  
              related to holomorphic functions on domains is that of                         
              determining whether or not the projection preserves functions                  
              which are differentiable on the boundary of the domain.  Are                   
              their images also differentiable on the boundary?  Even                        
              experienced mathematicians would consider the likelihood of such               
              an event an accident.  The facts are otherwise.  If the boundary               
              has a smooth, curved shape (pseudoconvex) then the projections                 
              are always differentiable.                                                     
                   Work will continue in an effort to extend present results to              
              domains which are not pseudoconvex.  Among the more tractable                  
              domains to be analyzed are the Hartogs domains.  These are                     
              domains possessing some circular symmetry.  Several                            
              counterexamples in function theory have been found in Hartogs                  
              domains.                                                                       
                   Ultimately, this work will be applied to the general problem              
              of analyzing biholomorphic mappings between domains in several                 
              complex variables.  These maps are known to have smooth                        
              extensions to the respective boundaries in many instances.                     
              A complete description of the domains for which these smooth                   
              extensions exist is probably the most important question under                 
              investigation in several complex variables at this time.
