Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1991      
File        : a9002628

Award Number: 9002628
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin L. Kirk   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1988      CHEMISTRY POSTDOCTORAL FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Martin Kirk has been awarded a Postdoctoral Research                       
              Fellowship in Chemistry.  Dr. Kirk's doctoral degree was from                  
              The University of North Carolina under the supervision of                      
              Professor William Hatfield. Dr. Kirk intends to continue                       
              research at Stanford University under the sponsorship of                       
              Professor Edward Solomon.  Dr. Kirk's area of research will be                 
              physical-inorganic studies which relate the activity of                        
              transition metal ions in protein active-sites to their geometry                
              and structure.  Long range, he will study biomimetic manganese                 
              complexes related to the oxygen-evolving centers in                            
              Photosystem-II. His postdoctoral studies on the behavior of                    
              iron-sulfur clusters related to ferridoxins will facilitate his                
              future research.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The Postdoctoral Fellowships in Chemistry Program is viewed as                 
              an important infrastructural program designed to broaden the                   
              knowledge and experience of new Ph.D's and attract them into                   
              meaningful careers in contemporary chemical research and                       
              teaching.
