Title       : The Middle to Upper Paleolithic Transition: Upper Pleistocene Research at the
               "Cingles del Capello" (Spain)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1991     
File        : a9002839

Award Number: 9002839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence G. Straus lstraus@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Numerous rock shelters or overhangs which line the base of                     
              Cingles del Capello, a cliff located in SE Barcelona Province,                 
              Spain, have been shown to contain stratified archaeological                    
              deposits.  These are of interest for several reasons.  First,                  
              they contain stratified materials which document the Neanderthal               
              period in Europe and which probably continue into more recent                  
              times.  Second, because sedimentation in this region appears to                
              be rapid, clean separation between different occupations of these              
              rockshelters is likely.  Finally, the shelters contain layers of               
              travertine the age of which can be determined by Uranium series                
              dating.  For these reasons Dr. Lawrence Straus will conduct a                  
              season of archaeological excavation at two cliff sites:  Cova                  
              Anton and Els Pinyons.  He will clean the face of previously                   
              excavated pits, remove overburden, and then conduct careful                    
              stratigraphic excavation to determine the nature of the cultural               
              materials present.  He will collect and analyze faunal and floral              
              materials as well as lithic remains.  In addition to travertines,              
              organic materials will be submitted for absolute age                           
              determinations.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Anatomically modern humans first appeared in Europe approximately              
              35,000 to 40,000 years ago.  Before that time the human                        
              inhabitants were physically distinct and termed "Neanderthals."                
              The associated culture is called "Mousterian."  It is unclear                  
              what happened to the Neanderthals and not known whether they                   
              developed relatively rapidly into modern forms or whether they                 
              were replaced by other peoples.  It is also unclear whether or                 
              not the succeeding "Upper Paleolithic" cultural tradition                      
              developed directly from the Mousterian or is intrusive from                    
              elsewhere.  Because sites which are both datable and which cover               
              this time period are so rare, it has been difficult to select                  
              between alternatives, and in this context El Pinyons and Cova                  
              Anton assume great significance.                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will shed light on the                   
              emergence of anatomically modern humans and associated culture in              
              Europe.
