Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Gain of Regularity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1990      
File        : a9002152

Award Number: 9002152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Kappeler kappeler@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   One central theme of this project focuses on nonlinear                    
              partial differential equations representing the evolution of                   
              certain physical phenomena.  An evolution equation whose                       
              solutions are smoother than the initial data is said to have a                 
              gain of regularity.  An example of this occurs in the Schrodinger              
              equation if the initial data decay faster than any polynomial.                 
              Some success has also been obtained in the nonlinear area,                     
              particularly in the case of the Korteweg-de Vries equation.  In                
              this work, a general class of equations will be investigated for               
              gain in regularity.  It will concentrate on equations in three                 
              space dimensions and seek to prove that gain in regularity is                  
              governed by the sign of the third derivative of the solution.                  
              Method of proof uses the technique of nonlinear multipliers and a              
              fundamental energy (integral) estimate which shows the gain.                   
              Efforts will also be made in applying similar ideas to dispersive              
              equations such as nonlinear Schrodinger equations.                             
                   A second line of investigation concerns spectral and inverse              
              spectral problems of the Laplace operator or the Laplace operator              
              plus a potential defined on compact Riemannian manifolds.  Three               
              objectives of this work are to: (1) describe the distribution of               
              the eigenvalues, (2) identify the properties of a Riemannian                   
              metric or a potential which are spectral invariants, and (3)                   
              determine the metrics or potentials which can be isospectrally                 
              deformed in a mathematically significant manner.  Particular                   
              emphasis will be placed on measuring the pattern of gaps between               
              eigenvalues and the density properties of potentials with a                    
              finite number of double eigenvalues.
