Title       : Targeting to the Vacuoles in Plant Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1994      
File        : a9002652

Award Number: 9002652
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natasha V. Raikhel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Comparison of the amino acid sequences of plant vacuolar proteins              
              indicates that there is no sequence in common among these                      
              proteins which can be solely responsible for targeting to                      
              vacuoles.  Therefore, the study of sorting signals from different              
              proteins will be required to understand the structural                         
              determinants involved in this process.  Gramineae lectins, which               
              are vacuolar proteins, are among the best characterized plant                  
              proteins.  Amino acid sequences, 3-D protein structures, and                   
              cDNAs for these lectins are available.  Transgenic tobacco plants              
              and suspension cultures have been obtained which correctly                     
              express and process barley lectin.  The goals of this research                 
              for the next five years include the analysis and characterization              
              of protein sequences responsible for sorting to the vacuole and                
              the identification of a putative receptor (or receptors) which                 
              recognizes these sorting sequences and subsequently mediates                   
              protein transport to vacuoles.  The vacuolar sorting signal of                 
              the barley lectin proprotein will be identified and analyzed.                  
              Once the sorting signal is identified, the following questions                 
              will be addressed:  1) What is the shortest sequence capable of                
              redirecting a reporter protein to the vacuole?  2) What are the                
              specific amino acids within the sorting domain that are                        
              responsible for correct targeting?  3) Is secondary structure of               
              the sorting signal important?  The characteristics of binding of               
              probarley lectin to its putative receptor(s) will also be                      
              determined.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Maintenance of separate subcellular compartments in eukaryotic                 
              cells depends on the correct sorting and targeting of newly                    
              synthesized proteins.  Thus, mechanisms must exist in the cell to              
              assure that these proteins are targeted to the correct                         
              intracellular membranes.  In plants, many proteins are deposited               
              in multifunctional organelles called vacuoles.  These proteins                 
              contribute to the lysosomal, storage, and plant defense functions              
              of the vacuole.  The goal of this research is to understand the                
              mechanisms by which proteins are targeted to the plant cell                    
              vacuole.  The results will contribute important new information                
              on this important problem in plant cell biology.
