Title       : Biomimetic Carpentry of Self-Assembling Functional Protein Nanostructures Based
               on Phage Tail Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9834603

Award Number: 9834603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $467325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Boas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Lieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Cronin-Golomb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 1084,5936,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Our overall goal is to develop a system for massively  parallel manufacture of
              materials, from the molecular level  up, which contains integrated functional
              nanostructures  (FNS). The system is biomimetic and is based on self-  assembly
              of rigid, rod-shaped proteins. Useful protein rod  units are redesigned
              genetically from their natural DNA  segments and produced biologically. They
              will self-assemble  in regulated stages, to predesigned shapes, with spacings
              in  the range of 5-100nm in length. We call this process  biomolecular
              carpentry.    With this grant we will prove the concept by producing the 
              natural rods and variants thereof and measure physical  characteristics such as
              the Young's Moduli of bending and  stretching in various environments, using
              atomic force  microscopy and chemical force microscopy. We will also  measure
              the diffusion constants, flexibility dimensions and  orientation of the
              individual rods in aqueous solution and  in the presence of AC electric fields
              of various  frequencies. In addition, we will examine the kinetics of 
              self-assembly of sets of rods to find the rate constant(s)  of this process in
              various environments to better understand  the process and to maximize it.
              Dynamic light scattering  will be employed to enable us to measure these
              properties in  a noninvasive way and to follow the reaction in real time.   
              The technology using these protein units has the potential  to form a basis for
              an integrated system for the design and  manufacture of novel functional
              nanostructures built into  new types of material from the molecular level up.
              In  addition this technology, which should help to supplant some  other
              outmoded and polluting systems, is environmentally  friendly and its products
              are recyclable. To accomplish  these goals a team of principal investigators
              from  Departments of Molecular Biology and Microbiology, Electro-  optics and
              Chemistry and Chemical Biology has been  organized.
