Title       : SET CAREERS: Science, Engineering and Technology Careers Museum Exhibit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1994     
File        : a9355802

Award Number: 9355802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $982929             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Rabin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educational Film Center
	      5101-F Backlick Road
	      Annandale, VA  220036055    703/750-0560

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No. ESIE 93-55802  Proposal Name: SET CAREERS:  SCIENCE, ENGINEERING,
              AND TECHNOLOGY                 CAREERS MUSEUM EXHIBIT  PI: Stephen Rabin 
              Amount:  $982,929                                ABSTRACT         The
              Educational Film Center (EFC) is developing a science,  engineering, and
              technology careers exhibit for distribution to  science museums and technology
              centers.  The core of the exhibit  kiosk, with related career graphics
              surrounds, is SET/QUEST, an  interactive multimedia program for both Macintosh
              and PC/Windows  using CD-Rom as the full motion video source.  Teens and
              preteens  will enter an interactive exploration of thirty careers with first 
              person video profiles of people in science and engineering;  animated/reality
              video simulations of a work experience in these  fields, decision screens, and
              a database of over 200 more science  and math-based professions.  The
              documentary profiles, database,  and a personal interest career match component
              will also be  developed in alternative media formats (video, audio, print) for 
              broad distribution to community and youth education networks,  schools, and
              libraries.  Specific emphasis in this project is being  placed on reaching and
              attracting female, minority, and disabled  youth.         A parent outreach
              component has been developed and will be  implemented by the Directorate of
              Education & Human Resources  Programs of AAAS.  The concept of the parent
              effort is to work  directly with and through the national offices of four major
               national organizations with different institutional community roots  --
              Science Museums, Public Libraries, Schools, and Community Based  Organizations
              -- to involve parents and families with SET Project  materials and to provide
              them with information with which they can  foster their children's pursuit of
              science and math education and  careers in these fields.  Initial efforts will
              be conducted in 18  cities.         The project is a collaborative endeavor
              among three  organizations:  The Educationa l Film Center which will be 
              responsible for management and development/production of the  software and
              documentary video profiles; The New York Hall of  Science which will be
              responsible for the exhibit kiosk and  graphics, will design and develop the
              student workbook and user  installation print, will serve as the principal test
              site for the  exhibit, and will advise on software, interactive multimedia 
              design, and installation options; and COMAP which will be  responsible for
              direct involvement of the Advisory Board, for  selecting and hiring content
              consultants, for assuring the accuracy  of the science and math content, for
              formative and summative  evaluation, and for developing and preparing community
              leader and  school users guides for publication.  Stephen Rabin, President of 
              EFC, will serve as PI for the project.
