Title       : Philadelphia Informal Science Education Collaborative (PISEC): Family Science
               Learning Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9355504

Award Number: 9355504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barry A. Van Deman                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $616248             (Estimated)
Investigator: Minda Borun mborun@erols.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane H. Horwitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James V. McGonigle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen F. Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin Inst Sci Museum
	      20th & The Benjamin Franklin Pky
	      Philadelphia, PA  19103    215/448-1121

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9355504  Borun    The Family Science Learning Project is comprised of a research
               study and subsequent program development designed to fundamentally  improve
              family science learning in museums.  The endeavor will be  carried out in the
              Philadelphia area by PISEC, a partnership of The  Academy of Natural Sciences,
              The Franklin Institute, the Thomas H.  Kean New Jersey State Aquarium at Camden
              and the Philadelphia Zoo,  joined for this project by the University of the
              Arts.    To achieve the goal of fostering science literacy by encouraging 
              families to engage in successful learning strategies while visiting  science
              museums, PISEC has identified the following objectives for  the project:      
              -    To increase understanding of the processes and potential            of
              science museum-based family learning.       -    To apply this understanding to
              the development and            implementation of effective program and exhibit 
                        enhancements in four science museums.       -    To involve existing
              staff so that evaluation and research            become an ongoing component of
              program and exhibit            development in the participating museums.      
              -    To utilize a multi-institution team approach designed to           
              maximize impact, be cost-effective and be replicable in            other
              regions across the country.    The project has three phases.  First, a research
              study using  ethnographic data collection and focus groups will be conducted at
               the participating museums.  This study will lead to the formulation  of a set
              of criteria for successful family science learning and  hypotheses about what
              is needed to facilitate this behavior.   Second, utilizing these findings, the
              four institutions will  develop four distinct programs and/or exhibit
              enhancements designed  to foster positive family learning experiences. 
              Formative  evaluation and inter-museum collaborative will be integral parts of 
              this process.  Finally, the summative findings of the individual  efforts will
              be compared  to look for constants in successful  programming across the sites.
               Results will be assembled in a  handbook which will be widely disseminated to
              the field.    In carrying out this study, the project will fill in the body of 
              existing museum-based family learning research.  The knowledge  gained will
              give science museum professionals a new set of tools  which can be used to
              increase the frequency of positive learning  experiences in their facilities,
              and to broaden the diversity of  visiting families as well.  Because the
              subject matter under  investigation represents a wide range of scientific
              disciplines,  the results of the projects should prove applicable to many 
              different types of informal science learning environments,  including science
              centers, natural history museums, zoos, aquariums  and botanic gardens.  The
              collaborative nature of the project will  serve as a model for similar
              partnerships among cultural  institutions and universities in other large
              metropolitan areas.
