Title       : Journey to the Center of the Cell
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1995  
File        : a9355741

Award Number: 9355741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger D. Mitchell                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Oles 76067.530@compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Ratcliffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Lansing Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst
	      4400 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152134080    412/622-3241

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
              60        Life Sciences                           
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9355741  Olejniczak    The Carnegie Science Center (of Carnegie Institute) and
              Carnegie  Mellon University (Center for Light Microscope Imaging and 
              Biotechnology, a National Science Foundation Science and Technology  Center,
              and The Studio for Creative Inquiry) have initiated a  collaborative project
              that portends to change in a dramatic fashion  the planetarium theater as a
              tool for informal science education.   After several months of preliminary
              discussions and, now, the  beginning of work, the creative team has been
              assembled that is  defining the vision and executing the program of this
              exciting  project.    The vision being formulated is the transformation of The
              Henry Buhl  Jr. Planetarium into a new visualization environment to achieve an 
              interdisciplinary and interactive group learning experience.  We  call this new
              concept the "Group Immersive Visualization  Environment (GIVE).    GIVE will
              accomplish much of the impact of virtual reality by  combining
              "three-dimensional" images generated by Evans &  Sutherland's Digistar
              Projection System with real and animated,  high-resolution video computer
              images and multimedia and by  providing direct audience-control of program
              direction via The  Henry Buhl Jr. Planetarium's elaborate 156-seat, electronic 
              response system.    While we anticipate the eventual production of a series of
              programs  in a variety of subject fields, the first to utilize GIVE will be 
              "Journey to the Center of the Cell," a 35-minute presentation.  The  treatment
              will convey an experience of self-discovery and natural  wonder as audiences
              transport themselves through striking  visualizations of the living cell.   
              Production and evaluation of "Journey to the Center of the Cell"  and the
              development of the Group Immersive Visualization  Environment will occur under
              the auspices of staff of The Henry  Buhl Jr. Planetarium, key personnel from
              Carnegie Mellon  University, evaluator Harris H. Shettel, and an Advisory Panel
               consisting of key planetarium and eductional profes sionals.    Program
              production packages, incorporating compatible components of  "Journey to the
              Center of the Cell," will be produced, marketed and  distributed to public and
              school planetariums; and a Teacher  Resource Kit containing supplementary
              educational materials in the  form of video tapes, CD-ROMS and computer disks
              wil extend the  program's reach into the classroom.    Special relationships
              and viewing times will be offered at The  Henry Buhl Jr. Planetarium targeting
              Pittsburgh inner city schools  and regional districts containing large
              percentages of underserved  and minority students.
