Title       : Innovation in Doctoral Engineering Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a9355019

Award Number: 9355019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Thompson rwt@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. O'Shaughnessy  (Principal Investigator former)
              Richard D. Sisson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon A. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Elmes  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              William W. Durgin  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The support from this project will allow the development of a new program in
              engineering  education at the Ph.D. level, called the Managerial,
              Environmental, International (MEI) doctoral  option.  The targeted Graduate
              Research Traineeship area is Education and Human Resources:  Innovation in
              Teaching and Learning.  The program will produce a new level of awareness in 
              highly competent, technical engineering graduates in three areas currently
              ignored in doctoral  engineering programs.  This program will educate
              individuals who, in addition to having  standard levels of technical
              competency, also possess competency in the management of  technology,
              environmental responsibility, and the problems associated with international 
              competitiveness.  This option will initially be open to students who wish to
              complete the Ph.D.  degree in the areas of Chemical, Civil, Environmental,
              Materials, Manufacturing, and  Mechanical Engineering.  Innovative structural
              components include:      o  Appropriate cross-disciplinary course and project
              work in managerial and environmental  areas, culminating in a competency
              examination and a publication addressing an issue of  managerial or
              environmental importance related to the candidate's area of study in the 
              appropriate journals or proceedings.    o  A six-month industrial internship
              with a participating company involving the international  aspects of industrial
              competition.    o  Co-advisement of undergraduate student projects with WPI
              faculty in appropriate areas.
