Title       : Graduate Training Program in Hawaiian Conservation Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9355055

Award Number: 9355055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Y. Kaneshiro kykanesh@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal is for the funding of five Graduate Research  Trainees to
              undertake research and training in the University of  Hawaii's Ecology,
              Evolution, and Conservation Biology Program.    The students' training would
              expose them to one of the world's  most spectacular examples of adaptive
              radiation, provide first-  hand experience of Hawaii's native ecosystems,
              active  conservation policies, research and practice and integrate basic 
              knowledge with conservation practice in real situations.  The  training
              environment will be enhanced by an exchange agreement  with Cornell University
              at present being negotiated, the  development of a Center for Conservation
              Research and Training,  the closely-related Hawaii Evolutionary Biology
              Program, the  expansion of the Lyon Arboretum's role as a conservation research
               area, and a summer field course with collaborating land managing  agencies. 
              The training will include a two-semester core course  that will provide
              professional level discussion of areas in  biology that are fundamental to the
              understanding of all biology.    Recruitment of ethnic minorities, already
              strong, will be  enhanced through keying in with existing undergraduate
              minority  programs.  Special efforts will be made to recruit women by  working
              through the American Association of University Women and  the American Women In
              Science.  Leading mainland candidates will  be flown to Hawaii for assessment. 
                To assist retention and the acquisition of skills students will  in the 
              first year be rotated through several research projects  with associated
              graduate faculty.
