Title       : Plant Resources: An Integrated Program in Molecular, Systematic and Economic
               Botany
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a9355070

Award Number: 9355070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $559150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gloria M. Coruzzi gloria.coruzzi@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian M. Boom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The NYU/NYBG Plant Resources Program will train a new type of  doctoral-level
              plant biologist:  those with the expertise to  find, characterize, and discover
              the economic importance of  plants and to conserve them.  Students will be
              trained in three  areas of plant biology (Molecular, Systematics, and Economic 
              Botany) and in fields which impact studies of biodiversity  (Anthropology,
              Environmental Science, International Law, etc.)   This interdisciplinary
              program combines the resources of two  major research/educational institutions
              whose complementary  expertise is uniquely suited to these goals.  Training
              begins  with a rigorous Core Course covering basic elements of plant  science,
              from structure and regulation of plant genes, to  practical skills and ethics
              required to negotiate agreements for  plant collections/conservation.  Students
              will attend an annual  seminar course to monitor recent developments in plant
              biology  and policy/environment issues, and an annual workshop which will 
              include parties from industry, government and academia.  Students  will receive
              practical training by performing three 0-week lab  "rotations", in an active
              laboratory in each area.  Students will  also complete six advanced courses and
              undertake thesis research  in their area of interest.  This will be the first
              program to  provide formal training not only in modern approaches to studying 
              economically and medicinally important plants, but also in  disciplines
              important for implementing the conservation of these  rapidly disappearing
              resources.
