Title       : Graduate Research Traineeships Proposal in Plant Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9355042

Award Number: 9355042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Bray elizabeth.bray@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This proposal has been developed in order to define and plan a  training
              program in a fundamental area of Plant Biology,  regulation of plant growth and
              development.  Recent evidence that  signaling mechanisms in plants are
              controlled by the established  plant hormones as well as other types of
              signaling molecules has  led us to increase our research efforts on regulatory
              events that  occur during plant development.  The education of each trainee 
              will include research and instruction in lecture and discussion  course.  The
              trainees research will be supervised by a faculty  collaborator in the Graduate
              Research Traineeship (GRT) Program  of the Department of Botany and Plant
              Sciences at the University  of California at Riverside (UCR).  An equally
              important goal of  this NSF-GRT Program is to promote student diversity in
              Plant  Biology, leading to an increased number of Ph.D. scientists from 
              currently underrepresented ethnic groups.  Innovative Inter-  Institutional
              Arrangements have been made with Tuskegee  University and the University of
              Puerto Rico an Rio Piedras for  the purpose of recruitment of underrepresented
              minorities to  graduate studies in Plant Biology.  Faculty collaborators in the
               NSF-GRT will visit the two campuses to present a seminar and talk  to students
              that are interested in Plant Biology.  Qualified  students from these
              institutions will visit UCR, and will be  given priority during the selection
              of NSF-GRT recipients.
