Title       : MIE: Center of Excellence for Native Americans in Science, Engineering and
               Mathematics Planning Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1994     
File        : a9355491

Award Number: 9355491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert L. Bridgewater                   
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ray M. Bowen  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Seig   (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Hess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Larry M. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Monroe E. Simpson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chester L. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7440      CAREER ACCESS OPPOR IN S&T
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7177,
Abstract    :
              9355491  Bowen    Oklahoma State University, in collaboration with seven
              two-year,  Native-American-serving colleges, Connors State College, 
              Northeastern Oklahoma City, Oklahoma State University-Okmulgee,  Rogers State
              College and Tulsa Junior College, requests support to  plan for the
              establishment of a center of excellence to increase  the recruitment,
              advancement, and graduation of Native American  students in baccalaureate
              science, engineering and mathematics  (SEM) degree programs.  These eight
              institutions of higher  education are already major contributors to the SEM
              "pipeline" for  these students and provide SEM education to the thirty-eight 
              federally recognized tribes in Oklahoma.  Each of these  institutions has well
              established relationships with tribal  governments in Oklahoma.  They operate
              many human-resource-  development projects focused on the 252,420 Native
              Americans living  in Oklahoma.  We propose to plan for this new center by an 
              exploration process with the Native American communities of  Oklahoma and
              elsewhere in the nation to identify those activities  that will be most
              effective in serving the needs of Native  Americans, establish governance for
              the center to include tribal  and community representation along with industry
              and higher  education, and form an external advisory committee of Native 
              American SEM professionals.  Central to this exploration process  will be a
              planning conference to be attended and led by Native  American SEM
              professionals, faculty and administrators, students  and parents, tribal
              officials and other community leaders with  representative from business,
              industry and government.  The outcome  of this conference will be a plan for
              the center designed by and  for Native Americans.  The outcome of this
              conference will be a  plan for the center designed by and for Native Americans.
               The  center will be executed by the proposing institutions of higher 
              education, but will be governed, operated and evaluated by Native  Americans
              with shared respons ibility for quality control.
