Title       : SuperQuest Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1994       
File        : a9355836

Award Number: 9355836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114538             (Estimated)
Investigator: Malvin H. Kalos kalos@tc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9355836  Kalos    A key hurdle in the advancement of science at the secondary
              level  is the inability of public and private education to keep up with 
              scientific advances that involve computers.  SuperQuest, an NSF  funded
              program, was designed to bring computational tools and  techniques to high
              school students and their teachers, with an  ultimate goal of incorporating
              computational science into the high  school curriculum.  To date, SuperQuest
              has involved a national  competition, wherein teams of students and their
              teacher-coaches  propose computational science or mathematics problems to 
              investigate.  The winning teams are selected by a national review  committee. 
              Winners attend three-week summer institutes at one of  four SuperQuest Centers,
              where they learn how to use high-  performance computing and visualization to
              solve their scientific  problems.  The winners' high schools receive
              workstations and  communications links to the internet.  The early success and 
              enthusiasm of these teams has sparked interest in moving SuperQuest  toward the
              next phase in its evolution - to provide broad-based  instruction and guidance
              to educators nationwide in how to  integrate computational tools and techniques
              into secondary science  and mathematics curricula.    The Cornell Theory Center
              seeks support from the NSF to conduct a  detailed, systematic external
              evaluation of the SuperQuest program  to assess and understand the impact of
              the program on the high  schools and to establish long-term directions and
              goals as the  program evolves to foster secondary school computational science 
              education.  The Cornell Theory Center will contract with the Center  for
              Technology in Education to conduct this evaluation in  cooperation with the
              SuperQuest project director.  Specifically,  the evaluation will answer the
              following questions:         What is the range of models for implementing
              SuperQuest       activities in the schools that have participated in the      
              program?       What has been the impact of S uperQuest participation within    
                the different schools on the students, the teachers, and the       curriculum
              and learning environment?       What can be learned in general about how
              advanced computing       resources are most effectively and efficiently made
              available,       supported, and used in schools?       What kinds of
              professional development experiences are       required for teachers to use
              computational resources well?       What kinds of outreach took place to the
              broader community?       Among the non-winning schools, were there any lasting 
                   consequences of the application process?       What kinds of information
              sources do schools who apply to the       SuperQuest program use?
