Title       : Teachers Empowering Teachers: Vertically-integrated, Inquiry-based Geometry in
               School Classrooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9355671

Award Number: 9355671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis M. Fennell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $633768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Allen allen@stolaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale G. Pearson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha L. Wallace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith N. Cederberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              93-55671    Abstract    This thirty-five month project hosted at St. Olaf
              College at a cost of $633,762 with non-NSF  cost-sharing reported at $209,985
              will involve 50 middle (grades 6-9) and upper grade (10-  12) teachers to
              improve their teaching of geometry using hands-on materials and technology  to
              promote student inquiry.  The teachers will participate, as district teams, in
              two four-week  summer institutes with the purpose of creating scenarios that
              will initiate vertically-integrated  geometry curricular change in their
              districts.    The project will generate guidelines for  teacher enhancement
              projects to create and sustain inquiry based teaching of mathematics,  grades
              6-12, with an impetus from geometry related topics.     In the first summer,
              participants will expand their knowledge of geometry,  instructional  skills
              using manipulatives and technology, and construction of inquiry-based
              scenarios.   During the year, they will establish networks and observe mentors
              and colleagues for  learning and reflection.  In the second summer, they will
              expand their knowledge, learn to  provide staff development, and begin
              vertically-integrated curricula.   During the second  academic year,
              participants will teach and revise their lessons/scenarios and provide staff 
              development to their colleagues in the district.  The project will culminate
              with a national  conference on the teaching of geometry with participant-team
              scenarios highlighted as  examples of a vertically-integrated inquiry curricula
              using technology and manipulatives.    The project will focus on building
              teacher skills and confidence in the teaching of geometry  and related topics
              with technology and manipulatives in an inquiry mode.  From this first  level,
              the participants will move to establishing scenarios and units for use by their
               colleagues in their district.  The participants will gain skills in staff
              development and school  change to enhance district implementation of their
              efforts.  Districts will contribute through  co llaborative planning
              opportunities, within and across buildings, and opportunities to work  with
              colleagues on curriculum and classroom change.
