Title       : Will Current Educational Reforms Narrow the Gender Gap In Science?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1994    
File        : a9355506

Award Number: 9355506
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iris C. Rotberg                         
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122603             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Shavelson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jasna D. Jovanovic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7262      RESEARCH ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9355506  Shavelson    Over the years, gender differences in science have been
              evident in  two significant ways.  First, as early as elementary school, males 
              outperform females on traditional measures of science achievement.   Second,
              there is persistent evidence that in comparison to males,  females express more
              negative affect in science (e.g., lower self-  concepts, lower performance
              expectancies) and report fewer positive  experiences in the science classroom
              (e.g., fewer student-teacher  interactions).  Currently, there is a general
              belief that if  science teaching and testing change to parallel methods of
              science  itself (e.g., hypothesis testing, hands-on experimentation),  females
              will have the opportunity to show more clearly what they  know, leading to
              increased achievement, positive classroom  experiences, and positive student
              affect.  In turn, female students  may come to view science as a field that is
              open to them rather  than a domain reserved for males.    Although advocates of
              science curricular and testing reform propose  that such positive outcomes for
              females will occur, there is little  to no research which has explored this
              issue.  The purpose of this  study is to examine whether new methods of
              teaching will, indeed,  result in narrowing or eliminating the existing gender
              gap in  science.  Therefore, this study aims to assess the educational 
              experiences of male and female students in performance-based  classrooms (i.e.,
              those stressing inquiry, scientific methodology,  and "hands-on"
              experimentation) and to identify the instructional  methods within classrooms
              that may give rise to or eliminate gender  differences.
