Title       : Long-range Dependence and Heavy Tails in Communication Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2000       
File        : a9805623

Award Number: 9805623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murad S. Taqqu murad@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Willinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                There has been recently a big increase in the number of studies related to the
              statistical analysis and mathematical modeling of traffic measurements from
              modern communication networks.  While many of the measured traffic traces 
              differ from each other in their high-frequency behavior, they typically exhibit
              a number of  statistical characteristics that tend to be insensitive to the
              constant changes that real-life data networks experience over time.  Such
              robust characteristics are sometimes called "traffic invariants", and include
              such phenomena as long-range dependence  and/or heavy tails.  Long-range
              dependence  occurs when the correlations of the traffic  processes at hand
              decay to zero slowly as the lag increases (i.e., power-law decay) and causes
              traffic to exhibit pronounced larger-than average ``bursts'' and
              lower-than-average ``lulls''.  Heavy tails refer to the power-law decay of the
              underlying probability distributions and capture the notions of extreme
              variability and ``intermittancy''.  In the networking context, long-range
              dependence and heavy tails abound  and have been observed at practically all
              layers in the networking hierarchy.  This research focuses on these traffic
              invariants: how to detect and measure them,  how to explain their presence in
              realistic networking situations, what  is their effect on queuing/loss
              performance, and also how to identify other potential invariants, especially
              within the apparent chaotic structure in the high-frequency domain.    One of
              the open problems in understanding the dynamic nature of network  traffic is
              when the underlying traffic (e.g., packet rate process), in addition to
              exhibiting strong temporal dependencies, is itself non-Gaussian and  exhibits
              heavy tails.  This research aims to develop physical models  that can explain
              the joint presence of   long-range dependence and heavy tails at the
              macroscopic level. These  models should be useful in practice, give rise to
              efficient traffic generation methods that result in synthetic traces  with
              realistic features, and provide novel insights into the wide area  of network
              performance analysis. Another problem area concerns the nature of network
              traffic at the microscopic level, where we will build upon the recent discovery
              of the presence of multiplicative mechanisms that cause network traffic over
              fine time scales to exhibit multifractal scaling properties.    This research
              also focuses on the Web and plans to track how self-similarity, heavy-tails,
              and multifractals fare in a constantly changing Internet. How does the ever
              increasing variability in access speeds (e.g., traditional modems on one hand, 
              cable modems, 100 Mbps Ethernet on the other) and the more and more
              heterogeneous nature of access technologies (e.g., phone modems, cable modems,
              ADSL) will affect the nature of currently considered  workload models and how
              they will impact the  scaling  (i.e., self-similarity) properties of aggregate
              packet traffic.     This project involves the collaborative effort of the P.I.
              (Murad S. Taqqu) at Boston University and the Co-P.I. (Walter Willinger) at
              AT&T-Labs Research.    For more details please refer to the web site
              AREF="http://math.bu.edu/people/murad">  http://math.bu.edu/people/murad</A>.
