Title       : WordNet as an Interlingual Lexical Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9805732

Award Number: 9805732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99798              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christiane D. Fellbaum fellbaum@clarity.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This work represents a two-pronged extension of the lexical database WordNet to
              create a resource suitable for automated word sense disambiguation,
              multilingual adoption, and crosslinguistic applications.  Mapping WordNet's
              words and concepts into those of other languages requires disambiguation,
              identification, and discrimination of related entities.  We first group
              WordNet's finely distinguished senses of highly polysemous nouns, verbs, and
              adjectives into underspecified "super"-senses to facilitate discrimination and
              disambiguation.  Second, we add to the verbs in WordNet sentences illustrating
              their subcategorization patterns and selectional restrictions so as to better
              distinguish senses and facilitate matching the verb lexicons of different
              languages.  The project is significant because it creates a resource that meets
              present demands for multilingual Natural Language Processing applications. 
              Moreover, the augmentations carry considerable theoretical interest. 
              Systematic underspecification of lexical entries might lead towards a
              psychologically realistic lexicon.  A principled grouping of closely related
              senses will shed light on the nature of polysemy and specific ways in which
              flexible word meanings yield possible sense extensions in all areas of the
              lexicon.  Subcategorization information and selectional restrictions will
              reveal the extent to which the semantic relatedness of verbs, expressed in
              WordNet's relational structure, is correlated with syntactic relatedness.



