Title       : Chaos and Crystallographic Symmetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9805507

Award Number: 9805507
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford A. Reiter reiterc@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9141,9178,9229,9251,9263,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Reiter  9805507    Chaos and Crystallographic Symmetry    Recent investigations
              have led to illustrations of attractors arising  from the iteration of
              functions that are measurably chaotic but  nonetheless have specified
              nontrivial symmetry.  This requires  determination of classes of functions with
              suitable equivariance  properties along with searches for parameters yielding
              nontrivial  behavior and visualization techniques suited to the attractor. 
              This  investigation is designed to advance that work to the crystallographic 
              space groups.  The classes of equivariant functions need to be  identified,
              nontrivial parameters located and the attractors  visualized.  It is expected
              that viewing parameters can be changed in  real time at low resolution and
              fixed images and animations routinely  created at high resolution.  This task
              is challenging and interesting  because of the mathematical complexity of the
              230 crystallographic space  groups and the difficulties in rendering attractors
              in three dimensions  in a manner in which the symmetries are apparent.  It is
              expected that  this work will allow viewers to experience the features of these
               symmetry groups in new ways.    The general focus of this project is to find
              and visualize certain  complex mathematical objects in three dimensions using a
              high  performance workstation; the particular objects are chaotic attractors 
              with crystallographic symmetry.  These mathematical objects have an  underlying
              chaotic structure while at the same time exhibiting a high  degree of symmetry.
               The symmetries which will be considered are those  associated with crystals;
              these symmetries have been of great interest  to chemists for that reason. 
              Similar two dimensional objects have been  the subject of considerable recent
              study by mathematicians and this  project is designed to extend our
              understanding of objects of this type  to three dimensions.  A graphics
              workstation with massive memory will be  used to create high quality images of
              these complex objects.  Sin ce  these complex objects are the result of
              literally millions or billions  of data points, creating insightful, meaningful
              visual representations  of the data is essential to understanding them.  The
              high level  visualization techniques and the resulting insights into the three 
              dimensional symmetries of these objects should be of interest to 
              mathematicians and others, like chemists, who can benefit from  understanding
              these symmetry groups.  The project is designed to fully  involve several
              undergraduate students in the research and hence these  students will not only
              gain valuable experience with using this high  performance workstation but they
              should also be among the first to view  these symmetry groups in the new ways
              resulting from this research  project.
