Title       : Stochastic Flow and Transport in Heterogeneous Soils: A New Approach for
               Measurement Conditioning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9805357

Award Number: 9805357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97363              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shu-Guang Li   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805357
Li

It is becoming widely recognized that solute transport in
              heterogeneous soils are extremely difficult to predict.  Factors, which
              complicate the prediction, include geological heterogeneity and data
              limitations.  This project will investigate a new approach to predict
              field-scale flow and solute transport which accounts for variability and
              uncertainty in a systematic way. The new approach is based on the distributed
              stochastic estimation theory which combines field measurements with predictions
              from a stochastic groundwater model.  The approach can be applied to
              characterize the extent and severity of groundwater contamination at hazardous
              waste sites before remediation begins and to evaluate the progress of cleanup
              techniques during remediation.  The stochastic model provides prior estimates
              of the mean and variance of head and solute concentration throughout a
              contaminated site.  These estimates are updated whenever new measurements of
              hydraulic conductivity, head and/or concentration become available.  These
              estimates may be used to guide the placement of sampling wells and to evaluate
              the accuracy of the site characterization.

The research project is intended
              to be methodological in orientation and address tough conceptual and
              computational
problems.  The project will develop a new algorithm for coupled
              flow and transport conditioning that is not restricted by the assumptions of
              linearity, stationarity, or ergodicity.  Specifically, the project will extend
              the PI's nonstationary spectral approach to iterative measurement conditioning
              and present a novel technique for its efficient implementation.  The approach
              should greatly improve the estimation accuracy and dramatically increases the
              size and complexity of the site characterization problems that can be analyzed
              with stochastic methods.

The proposed research will proceed in two phases. 
              The first phase will test nonstationary spectral conditioning on a groundwater
              flow problem.  The objective of phase 1 study is to 1) demonstrate the new
              theory and specific objective phase is to  application procedure using a
              concrete example, 2) demonstrate the accuracy, efficiency, and robustness of
              the new approach by comparing it with existing solution techniques, and 3)
              demonstrate the feasibility of the new approach for large groundwater systems. 
              The second phase will test the new approach for coupled three-dimensional flow
              and transport problems and apply it to predict and characterize groundwater
              flow and contamination at a real field site.  As suggested by NSF
              implementation of phase 2 will be deferred until phase 1 is successfully
              completed.  We will later submit a revised proposal to NSF with a refined
              research plan for the second phase based on phase 1 results and make a
              compelling case for phase 2 investigation.

