Title       : Next-Generation Optical Backbone Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9805285

Award Number: 9805285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298516             (Estimated)
Investigator: Biswanath Mukherjee mukherje@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1338,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Our Internet is congested today.  As more users get on the Internet,  and as
              their demand for bandwidth-intensive applications  (web browsers, java
              programs, video conferencing, etc.) increases,   there emerges an acute need
              for very high-bandwidth transport facilities.   The design of faster IP routers
              and high-speed ATM switches are important  measures, but they are ``stop-gap''
              efforts since the corresponding network  architectures are still limited by
              electronic speed.  To elevate the Internet to the next generation, a networking
              technology  revolution is needed that can scale up its existing capability 
              (particularly its bandwidth) by 2 to 3 orders of magnitude!    Fortunately,
              fiber optics is our ``savior.''  Given that a single-mode fiber's potential
              bandwidth is nearly 50  Tbps, every effort should be made to tap into this huge
              resource.  Wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM) can exploit this  bandwidth
              by requiring that each end-user's equipment operate only  at electronic rate,
              but multiple WDM channels from different end-users  are multiplexed on the same
              fiber.    This research project is targeted towards building the backbone of 
              the next generation of our networks using optical WDM.  Specifically, the
              following research topics will be addressed:    * WDM Network Control and
              Management (NC&M), in order to build a    virtually ``reconfigurable'' Internet
              that allocates bandwidth to    users on demand, with the corresponding research
              challenges being    development of alternate-path routing, fault management,   
              and control channel management mechanisms.  * Light-Trees: Multicast Optical
              Backbone, that can efficiently    support not only many emerging multicast
              applications, but also    provide faster service to some unicast applications
              by reducing    the ``average hop distance'' between end points of connections. 
              * IP over WDM, so that the next-generation network is truly scalable,    i.e.,
              it can work smoothly with our existing Internet infrastructure.  * Combatting
              Physical Laye r Impairments, so that many of the desirable    properties of
              optics can be exploited while employing smart network    algorithms to
              ``correct" for some of its not-so-desirable properties.
