Title       : POWRE: TGFB Signaling in the Egg-Laying System of C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1998    
File        : a9805868

Award Number: 9805868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cathy Savage-Dunn csavage@qcl.qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE Research Enhancement award willprovide the investigator the
              opportunity to do pilot work on an unstudied branch of a TGFb-like signaling
              pathway. Transforming growth factor beta (TGFb) superfamily ligands play
              important roles in the development and physiology of diverse tissues by
              controlling cell growth, cell death, and differentiation. To understand how
              TGFb and related growth factors exert their effects the signal transduction
              pathway must be known. The long-term objective of this project is the
              elucidation of TGFb signaling pathways in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans,
              using molecular biological and genetic approaches. Besides several
              well-characterized roles of TGFb signaling in C. elegans development, some
              mutants reveal an additional role in the egg laying system. The investigator
              proposes to study the role of TGFb signaling in egg laying and identify a
              genetic pathway for this function. The investigator therefore proposes, first,
              to map these genes to a precise location in preparation for their molecular
              cloning. Second, the investigator will characterize the egg-laying defective
              phenotype of TGFb pathway mutants and its responsiveness to environmental
              stimuli. Finally, the investigator will determine whether other known
              egg-laying defective mutants represent genes that function in the same pathway.
               Although the molecular cloning of these genes is beyond the scope of this
              proposal, the genetic characterization described here will define a branch of
              this signaling pathway and provide the basis for future molecular
              characterization. Furthermore, by studying a branch of a TGFb pathway in its
              developmental context, the investigator hopes to understand the mechanisms of
              signaling specificity and crosstalk.
