Title       : POWRE: Polar Versus Single Electron Transfer Mechanisms in Reactions With
               Alkylaluminum(III) Reagents: A Theoretical Exploration RESEARCH ENHANCEMENT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1999   
File        : a9805872

Award Number: 9805872
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Bragin                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31143              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle M. Francl mfrancl@brynmawr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1592,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award of the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education
              (POWRE) program funded through the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
              (OMA) supports the research and educational activities of Professor Michelle
              Francl of Bryn Mawr College.  This award provides funding for the PI to
              collaborate with Professor Laurie Butler at the University of Chicago, enabling
              her to expand her research experience into the relatively unexplored area of
              main-group organometallic excited-state chemistry.  Ab initio molecular orbital
              theory will be used to explore transition structures corresponding to the polar
              and single-electron-transfer (SET) pathways for the reaction of simple alkyl
              aluminum (III) compounds with various carbonyl-containing substrates.  The gap
              between adiabatic surfaces at both types of transition structures will be
              estimated using virtual-orbital configuration-interaction methods.  Structural
              comparison of the transition states and trends in gaps between surfaces will
              assist in elucidating the key structural and electronic features governing
              competition between the two mechanisms

The opportunity afforded through the
              POWRE program will enhance Professor Francl's research potential as well as her
              educational mentoring of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scientists. 
              Through the work supported here, the PI will develop research experience in a
              new area.   Understanding the factors which control reactivity can lead to
              rationally designed selective reagents for organic and organometallic
              synthesis. The results of this research can ultimately have considerable impact
              on costs and complexity in commercial chemical processing.

