Title       : Experimental Study of Criticality & Crossover Phenomena in 
Complex Fluid
               Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1999  
File        : a9805260

Award Number: 9805260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $413000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan V. Sengers sengers@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mikhail A. Anisimov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jan Sengers is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry program to perform experimental studies of criticality and crossover
              phenomena in complex fluid mixtures.  This research will elucidate how the
              properties of complex fluids are affected by the interplay of the properties of
              the fluid very near the critical point, where the long range interactions are
              the cause of the universal behavior, and the classical mean field (van der
              Waals-like) region where the local microscopic structure plays the dominant
              role. The cross-over static and dynamic phenomena will be studied using optical
              techniques.  A test of crossover from universal scaling behavior asymptotically
              close to the critical point to mean-field behavior upon increase of the
              distance from the critical point is proposed for solutions of polymers in
              low-molecular weight solvents.  The hypothesis to be tested is that the extent
              of the crossover is affected by a competition between the correlation length of
              the critical fluctuations, and the size of the polymer molecule.  The
              investigation will try to probe experimentally this point by performing highly
              accurate light scattering measurements of  polymers and blends (ethane+
              n-heptane, and ethane+ n- dodecane, as well as others such as methylcyclohexane
              and polystyrene) of varying chain lengths. The influence of the chain length on
              the correlation length of the critical fluctuations will be studied.

A
              reliable understanding of phase-transition and critical behavior of complex
              fluids and fluid mixtures is needed for many innovative applications such as
              supercritical extraction, enhanced oil recovery, and supercritical pollution
              oxidation.  Critical phenomena in fluids have been the subject of many
              experimental and theoretical studies, and the surprising result of these
              studies has been the discovery of phenomenon known as critical point
              universality: the observation that microscopic structure of fluids becomes
              unimportant in the vicinity of a critical point.  The current study is directed
              at a detailed understanding of this phenomenon.  This knowledge could have a
              substantial impact on a number of areas that rely on supercritical fluids for
              chemical processing.
