Title       : POWRE: Experimental Studies of Fe-Mg Carbonates and Their Role in Petrogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1998 
File        : a9805873

Award Number: 9805873
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55674              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea M. Koziol koziol@neelix.udayton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805873
Koziol

The occurrence of carbonate minerals in rocks and sediments
              is a mark of the interaction of the biosphere, hydrosphere, and atmosphere with
              the lithosphere.  The studies described in this proposal will help geologists
              understand the conditions of formation of banded iron formations, carbonatites,
              and magnesite-bearing eclogites, among other parageneses.

	The objectives of
              this study are to determine siderite (FeCO3), magnesite (MgCO3), and CO2
              thermodynamic properties and the mixing relations of siderite-magnesite solid
              solutions.  Selected carbonate univariant equilibria, experimentally reversed
              over a wide range of pressure and temperature, will provide this information. 
              The equilibria siderite + hematite = magnetite + CO2, when displaced downwards
              in pressure by magnesite solution in the siderite, will provide the constraints
              on siderite-magnesite mixing.  In effect the principal investigator will be
              calibrating a geothermobarometer for use in a number of
              parageneses.

	Piston-cylinder experiments will be performed at the
              University of Dayton High Pressure Laboratory, which has been established by
              the principal investigator.  She will use appropriate experimental techniques
              to ensure that equilibrium is closely approached.  Experimental products will
              be analyzed by weight loss measurements, X-ray diffraction analysis, and when
              appropriate, electron microprobe analysis.
	Results of this study will be
              applicable to carbonate globules in Martian meteorite ALH84001, which are
              composed of Fe-Mg carbonate with variable Ca content.  The interpretation of
              the history and significance of these carbonate globules.  The results of the
              principal investigator's experiments will help determine whether a high
              temperature origin for these globules is allowable or whether a low temperature
              environment is indicated.

	These studies will also provide tight constraints
              on the fugacity of CO2 at upper mantle pressure-temperature conditions.  A
              clearer understanding of the stability of magnesite with typical mantle phases
              olivine and enstatite affects our understanding of the conditions of diamond
              formation and bears on discussion of the oxidation state of the mantle.  It
              will also determine the free energy of formation of siderite and the mixing
              properties of magnesite-siderite solid solutions.  This work lays the
              foundation for further research on Fe-Mg mixing in other minerals and for
              defining an accurate equation of state for CO2.

	Completion of this research
              will establish the principal investigator as an independent scientist.  It will
              enhance her role as a mentor of undergraduates pursuing research experiences.
              

