Title       : Computational and Mathematical Investigations in Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9805602

Award Number: 9805602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Todd miketodd@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yuying Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie E. Trotter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805602
Todd

The goal of this project is to continue a broad set of ongoing
              studies concerning optimization algorithms and the mathematical theory
              underlying them.  The project covers continuous and discrete optimization
              algorithms, both exact and approximate, their computational complexity,
              practical large-scale implementation, performance guarantees (in the case of
              approximate algorithms), and applications in such areas as crew-scheduling,
              image-processing, facility location, financial modeling, electrical power
              systems, and statistical learning theory.

The research to be conducted can
              be roughly grouped into three areas.  The first is interior-point methods,
              including the study of: semidefinite programming, algorithm design and
              analysis; infeasible-interior-point methods for both linear and convex
              programming, including detection of infeasibility; the complexity of
              target-following methods and of semidefinite programming; and methods for
              large-scale nonlinear problems arising in image-processing, financial modeling,
              and statistical learning theory.  The second area of research is combinatorial
              optimization, encompassing:  investigation of stable-set and crew-scheduling
              problems; the study of linear congruence relations and their use in
              branch-and-cut methods; analysis of inconsistent linear inequality systems,
              with applications in computer vision, data compression, and statistical
              discriminant analysis; and design of approximation algorithms for facility
              location problems.  The third is concerned with numerical linear algebra, and
              will study: methods to solve the linear systems that arise at each iteration of
              an interior-point semidefinite programming algorithm in a stable manner; and
              special methods for obtaining accurate solutions to ill-conditioned linear
              systems arising in electrical power systems.

This research will lead to
              improved algorithms to find exact or approximate solutions to large-scale
              optimization problems arising in industry, finance, the military, science, and
              engineering.  Emphasis is placed on the interplay between practice and
              theory.


