Title       : SGER: Synthetic Genes for the Design of Hydroxproline-Rich Glycomodules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9805960

Award Number: 9805960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia J. Kieliszewski mkielisze1@ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9805960  Kieliszewski   Hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins (HRGPs) are ubiquitous
              architectural components of growing plant cell walls, often accounting for
              10-20% of their dry weight; polysaccharides account for the bulk.  HRGPs are
              implicated in all aspects of plant growth and development including responses
              to stress.  The HRGP superfamily contains three major groups representing a
              continuum of glycosylation and periodicity.  They range from the repetitive
              proline-rich proteins that are lightly glycosylated and highly periodic,
              through the crosslinked extensins that are highly arabinosylated and periodic,
              to the arabinogalactan-proteins that are the most highly glycosylated and least
               periodic.  The repetitive units are small, often only 4-6 residue glycosylated
              motifs viewed hypothetically as functional modules.   The function of these
              unique plant glycoproteins remains largely unexplored.  We propose to define
              their roles through functional analysis of single glycopeptide modules when
              expresssed as repetitive glycopolypeptides in tomato cultures.  We shall insert
              synthetic genes encoding HRGP glycopeptide modules into two plant
              transformation vectors both derived from pBI121; one with a reporter gene, the
              other, for test for module function, lacking the reporter.  We shall use these
              plasmids to transform cell cultures of tomato, which contain the plant
              prolylhydroxylases and glycosyltransferases required for module
              posttranslational modifications.  Expression and isolation of these modules
              will enable us to test general and specific hypotheses for glycosylation and
              molecular function:  1. Glycosylation codes predicted by the Hyp-contiguity
              hypothesis specify precise saccharide addition to specific HRGP Hyp residues,
              namely:  tetraarabinose to the most highly contiguous residues, arabinosylation
              decreasing with decreasing Hyp-contiguity; and  polygalactosylation of
              repetitive noncontiguous Hyp residues that typify AGPs.  2.
              Carbohydrate-mediated alignment of extensin monomers is necessary for  their
              orderly assembly and crosslinking roles in cell wall self-assembly.
