Title       : Computational Methods for the Simulation of Chemical Vapor Deposition on Rough
               Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9805547

Award Number: 9805547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthias K. Gobbert gobbert@math.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9805547    Matthias K. Gobbert    Computational Methods for the Simulation
              of Chemical Vapor Deposition  on Rough Surfaces    Abstract:    In chemical
              vapor deposition (CVD) processes a mixture of reacting  gases is applied to the
              surface of a semiconductor wafer in the  reaction chamber of a chemical
              reactor. A thin film of material is  formed on the surface via surface
              reactions with the surface material.  The wafer surface contains small trenches
              and holes, collectively  referred to as features, for interconnect lines,
              transistor gates,  etc., thus making the surface rough. Currently, reactor
              scale models  (RSM) based on the Navier-Stokes equations capture the flow of
              the  reacting gases throughout the entire reactor chamber with a typical 
              dimension of 10 centimeters, and feature scale models (FSM) based on  kinetic
              equations predict the film growth profile inside a single  feature with a
              typical dimension of 1 micrometer. Due to the extreme  difference of length
              scales, an integrated process model spanning all  length scales of interest is
              best obtained by introducing a mesoscopic  scale model (MSM) with typical
              dimension on the order of 1 millimeter.  This project will develop the
              mathematical model and computational  methods for the appropriate kinetic
              equations in the low pressure  regime on this scale.    This project is part of
              an effort at modeling the manufacturing  processes of computer chips. Computers
              are already and will continue to  be one of the most important tools of our
              economy and technology. There  is a trend towards more specialized computer
              chips to be produced in  smaller numbers, for instance for specific
              applications in space  exploration or defense systems.  But prototype runs
              necessary to test  the manufacturing processes use expensive chemicals and
              produce  hazardous exhaust gases, which need to be treated before releasing
              them  to the environment.  For these reasons, interest in simulating the 
              manufacturing processes on all scales from individual device to fa ctory  floor
              has been increasing. This project will contribute to the  development of
              appropriate models as well as better numerical  techniques for the process of
              chemical vapor deposition, one of the  crucial production steps for computer
              chips. In this process, a thin  layer of material is deposited to form either
              the electrical lines or  the electronic devices that make up the computer chip
              in the final  product.
