Title       : POWRE: High-Resolution Chronology of Millennial-Scale Lake-Level Fluctuations in
               the Dry Valleys (Antarctica) From Uranium-Thorium and Radiocarbon Dating
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9805909

Award Number: 9805909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74943              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda L. Hall Brendah@Maine.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9805909  The Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and
              Engineering (POWRE) program affords new research and educational enhancement
              opportunities for women scientists.  This project, which addresses the
              fundamental problem of the cause of millennial-scale climate change, contains
              components specifically designed to increase the educational and research
              skills of the principal investigator.  She will learn the following new
              information/skills: 1) thermal ionization mass spectrometry (TIMS)
              uranium/thorium (U/TH) dating with Dr. G. Henderson at Lamont-Doherty Earth
              Observatory (LDEO) and Oxford University, 2) millennial-scale climate change
              with Drs. W. Broecker  and G. Bond, LDEO, and with Drs. D. Oppo and L. Keigwin,
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, 3) Antarctic limnology with Dr. C. Hendy,
              University of Waikato, and 4) regional climate modeling with Dr. K. Maasch,
              University of Maine.   She will then apply her new knowledge and skills to a
              study of millennial-scale fluctuations of lake levels in the Dry Valleys of
              Antarctica.  The investigator will use TIMS, U/TH and accelerator mass
              spectrometric (AMS) radiocarbon dating of lacustrine carbonates to test the
              reservoir effect in order to ensure that the chronology of lake-level
              fluctuations in accurate.  She will then use her knowledge of millennial-scale
              fluctuations to determine if the lake variations are similar to those seen
              elsewhere in the world.  Knowledge of limnology will help not only to assess
              the lake reservoir effect, but also to begin to determine the cause of
              large-scale changes in lake level.  Likewise, regional climate modeling will
              allow her to gain insight into the energy balance and wind patterns of the Dry
              Valleys region during the last glacial maximum.  These new skills will benefit
              the P.I., not only in this particular project relating to Antarctic lakes, but
              also in her future Antarctic and Southern Hemisphere research in New Zealand
              and Patagonia.    ***
