Title       : POWRE: Investigation of Long Term Electrical Performance of Polymeric Insulating
               Devices Under Multi-Stress Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9805890

Award Number: 9805890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raji Sundararajan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9805890  Sundararajan    Polymers are becoming the materials of choice for
              high voltage outdoor insulation due to their superior contamination
              performance.  They offer high surface resistance even when contaminated due to
              their water repelling or hydrophobic nature, and hence increasing system
              reliability.  When the hydrophobicity is temporarily lost, it can be recovered
              due to the migration of low molecular weight chains from the bulk to the
              surface.  This recovery characteristic is central to their many applications,
              including cable terminations, insulators, and surge arrestor housings.  Being
              organic, a major concern in using the polymeric materials is their long term
              performance, since electrical discharges can physically degrade the material.  
               The present standards mostly concentrate on testing materials and insulators
              at the worst case conditions with little correlation between the failure modes
              encountered in the field and the tab.  The insulators in field experience
              synergistic stresses from electrical voltage, UV radiation, humidity,
              contamination, and temperature change.  Thus, there is a need to test these
              insulators in a multistress environment similar to that they are expected to
              serve.    Investigating the aging and recovery characteristics of polymeric
              insulating devices under multistress conditions is a very practical and
              challenging problem, the results of which can be applied directly.  The
              research supported under this proposal will be directed toward developing a
              better understanding of the long term performance of polymeric insulating
              devices under synergistic environmental stresses.  This kind of applied
              research is very much needed by industry to analyze, understand, enhance and
              expand the knowledge of the widely used polymeric insulating materials under a
              wide spectrum of outdoor conditions.  This is because a polymeric insulator
              that serves best at one environment fails miserably in another environment, and
              it needs to be resolved as to what material and formulatio n is needed for a
              given environment.  Graduate and undergraduate students in Electronics and
              Computer Engineering Technology (ECET) department will be working on this
              project.    An attractive serendipity is that this research can also be used as
              an educational aid to students in the power system courses offered in the ECET
              department.  With ASU's partnership with the Maricopa Community Colleges (both
              being one of the largest of their kinds in the nation), it provides an
              excellent opportunity to introduce power engineering aspects and techniques to
              the next generation scientists and technologists of varying gender, ethnicity,
              and geography.    The PI is entering the second half of her assistant professor
              years, and has shown significant promise in the classroom and in the
              laboratory.  A POWRE grant will provide the essential equipment, supplies and
              time to help the PI focused  in her academic career.
