Title       : Study of Doping in ZnBe Chalcogenide Alloys via MBE Growth with use of
               Non-Equilibrium Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a9805760

Award Number: 9805760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gertrude F. Neumark gfn1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9805760  Neumark  This project aims for greater understanding of bipolar doping
              in  wide bandgap semiconductors. A primary aim of the project to  investigate
              nonequilibrium effects on doping during MBE growth,  and to use the insight
              gained to improve doping. ZnSe and related  alloys (with mainly nitrogen
              doping) will be used as a test  system. A further aim of the project is to
              apply the resultant  understanding to improve doping in ZnBe, and possibly
              ZnCdBe  chalcogenide alloys, since these alloys are candidates for  potential
              improvements in device lifetimes of ZnSe-based  blue-green diode lasers.
              Specific aspects of MBE growth planned  for investigation are planar doping,
              changes in the  metal/chalcogenide ratio, and/or changes in crystallographic 
              orientation. A further objective is to study and possibly  eliminate DX centers
              by use of the planar doping technique.  Planar doping will be used with both
              the dopant and a different  chalcogenide (such as Te for ZnMgSeS) to modify the
              local  environment of such centers so as to eliminate them from some  systems
              where they now exist--it has been reported that  simultaneous Te/N planar
              doping gives not only almost an order of  magnitude improvement in hole
              concentrations in ZnSe, but also  changes the ionization energy to close to the
              ZnTe value.  Elimination of DX centers would be a major technological and 
              fundamental breakthrough. In addition to the study of growth, it  is also
              planned to coordinate growth with determination of  compensating species.
              Considering non-equilibrium aspects of  doping, different compensating species
              may dominate under  different conditions. Compensating species resulting from
              various  growth approaches will be studied, primarily via luminescence, 
              positron annihilation spectroscopy, and optically detected  magnetic resonance.
               %%%  The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of 
              materials science having high technological relevance. The  research will
              contribute basic materials science knowledge at  a  fundamental level to
              important aspects of electronic/photonic  devices.  Experimental tools are now
              available to allow atomic  level observation of materials defects and their
              origins which  when better understood will allow advances in both fundamental 
              science and technology. The basic knowledge and understanding  gained from the
              research is expected to contribute to improving  the performance and stability
              of advanced devices by providing a  fundamental understanding and a basis for
              designing and producing  improved materials, and materials combinations.  An
              important  feature of the program is the integration of research and  education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and  technologically
              significant area.
