Title       : Quantitative Measures of the Antiquity and Evolution of Cratonic Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9805132

Award Number: 9805132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249676             (Estimated)
Investigator: John O. Stone stone@geology.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805132
Stone

Erosional planation surfaces are a predominant landform of
              cratonic regions worldwide, covering millions of square kilometers across all
              continents.  Large areas of these surfaces are mantled by deep weathering
              profiles that mask bedrock geology and conceal underlying mineral deposits. 
              Their planation can be dated, in many instances, to the early Tertiary and
              Mesozoic eras, and in some cases, even earlier.  The subsequent downwearing and
              exposure history of these surfaces is generally less well constrained. 
              Preserved planar forms and summit-height concordances, and the survival of
              ancient deeply-weathered mantles and duricrusts formed in the near-surface
              environment point to extremely low rates of erosion.  In contrast, evidence of
              active denudation by physical, biological and chemical processes and results of
              initial cosmogenic isotope studies of rock surface erosion point to downwearing
              rates of metres per million years, which are difficult to reconcile with their
              survival.  This apparent conflict will be explored by determining erosion rates
              of selected surfaces over the past 1-5 Ma with cosmogenic isotopes, and
              comparing them to the erosion rates required to exhume dated Mn oxide
              assemblages formed by ancient weathering of the same surfaces.
Cosmogenic
              nuclide measurements will be made on resistant and indurated outcrops outcrops
              (e.g. silcrete, quartz veins within laterite) representative of the broad-scale
              geomorphic surfaces selected for examination.  The time period averaged in
              these determinations will vary with erosion rate, from < 1 Ma if erosion rates
              exceed 2 m/Ma, to a maximum of 5-6 Ma if erosion rates approach zero.  These
              measurements are aimed at measuring both the magnitude and spatial variability
              of Quaternary erosion.
Weathering ages for the same surfaces will be obtained
              by 40Ar/34Ar dating of K-bearing manganese oxide minerals precipitated in
              related deep-weathering profiles.  Upper limits to the depth of K-Mn oxide
              precipitation (from modern anlogues and hydrochemical constraints), combined
              with the K-Mn oxide ages, will then rpovide upper limits on the average
              denudation rate since the time of weathering.  Argon dating results from the Mt
              Isa district of Australia indicate that it will be possible to obtain average
              denudation rates over timescales ranging from 5 Ma to 65 Ma from stepped
              planation surfaces.  Samples for cosmogenic isotope measurement have been
              collected from these surfaces but not yet analysed.
Preliminary work in the Mt
              Isa area will be extended with studies in the Pilbara Block and Hamersley Basin
              of Western Australia, and the Carajas region and Quadrilatero Ferrifero on the
              Brazilian Shield.  All three regions show a stepped morphology, with cores of
              high-standing, dissected plateaus standing above successively lower and younger
              inset plains.  Landscape evolution in these areas can be traced back to the
              Mesozoic and early tertiary.
Comparison of the short-and long-term denudation
              rates at the four study sites will: (i) Indicate whether the magnitude and
              spatial variability of Quaternary erosion rates are compatible with the
              preservation of cratonic planation surfaces.  (ii) Reveal whether erosion rates
              on these surfaces have increased or decreased in the Quaternary, or persisted
              at rates similar to average values through the Tertiary.  Depending on these
              outcomes, it may be necessary to develop geomorphic evolution models for
              cratonic terranes that account for planar forms and summit height concordances
              inherited from ancient planar precursors but lowered significantly and
              uniformly by subsequent erosion.  combined with surface reconstructions, the
              results will also: (iii) Provide limits on the relative rates of surface
              downwearing versus scarp retreat, a key ratio in the development of the stepped
              landscapes characteristic of the areas to be studied.
Comparisons between the
              four geographic areas will reveal the importance of eustatic and tectonic base
              level changes, local paleoclimate and global-scale forcing factors such as
              atmospheric CO2 changes and Quaternary climatic deterioration in determining
              erosional histories.  This work will provide a detailed insight into the
              geomorphic evolution and recent rates of geomorphic activity in low-gradient,
              low-relief cratonic terranes.  The results will be of importance to mineral
              exploration for ore deposits which occur in these terranes but are commonly
              concealed by deeply weathered cover.  Reconstruction of sediment production and
              dispersal pathways through time, and the history of episodic weathering and
              erosion, will provide an interpretive framework for future geochemical
              prospecting.

