Title       : Determinism Versus Stochasticity for Non-equilibrium Interface Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9805036

Award Number: 9805036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert Levine hlevine@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9805036  Levine  This is a renewal grant which puts forward an ambitious plan 
              for making substantial progress on interface structure and  motion in
              spatially-extended non-equilibrium systems.  The  primary focus is on the
              disordered interfacial structure  (sometimes with fractal scaling) seen in
              diffusion-limited  growth, unstable viscous fingering and related processes. 
              Interfaces which arise in non-equilibrium chemical reactions  and interfaces
              that arise in simple models of of biological  evolution will also be studied. 
              One recurrent theme is that  in all of these cases, one has both deterministic
              effects  and stochastic ones; the stochastic effects typically enter  as
              multiplicative noise acting on a set of reaction-  diffusion equations
              describing the "mean" structure.  These  studies will use both computational
              techniques and  analytical methods; formulations will be investigated in  terms
              of stochastic partial differential equations, or  alternatively in terms of
              coupled correlation functions.  The goals include a better understanding of the
              origin of  scaling, a more quantitative approach to the calculation of  the
              overall probability distribution of the growth patterns  and a deeper
              appreciation of exactly which changes at the  microscopic level can drastically
              alter macroscopic  structure.  If successful, our efforts will provide a firmer
               basis for applications of interface dynamics to systems  ranging from enhanced
              oil recovery and alloy solidification  to diffusion-controlled chemical
              reactions and  microbiological evolution.  The lessons learned here will  also
              have a significant impact on the understanding of non-  equilibrium
              spatially-extended dynamical processes, one of  the frontiers of modern
              physics.  %%%  This theoretical grant will support research on interface 
              structure and motion in spatially-extended non-equilibrium  systems.  The
              analysis will include both deterministic and  random effects.  Results will
              provide a foundation for  applications of interface dynamics  to enhanced oil
              recovery,  alloy solidification, diffusion-controlled chemical  reactions and
              microbiological evolution.  ***
