Title       : Collaborative Research: Salinity of Groundwaters in Continental Sedimentary
               Basins as a Record of Quaternary Paleoclimatic Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a9805456

Award Number: 9805456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112205             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Person   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805456
Person

Understanding the natural and anthropogenic controls on
              aquifer salinization is of great societal relevance because of its impact on
              irrigated agriculture and drinking water supplies within semi-arid regions of
              the world where fresh water is in short supply.  Because the dissolved solids
              concentration of groundwater recharge represents a measure of precipitation
              minus evapotranspiration, the amount and spatial distribution of salinity
              within shallow aquifer systems may represent a useful indicator of past
              climate.  A research plan is outlined in this proposal to study salinity
              evolution within sedimentary basins on time scales of 104-105 years.  A new
              mathematical model (MWT3D SALT) is in the process of being developed to solve
              governing equations representing groundwater, salt transport,
              groundwater/surface water interactions and evapotranspiration within the root
              zone.  This three-dimensional model will be capable of representing four
              aquifer  salinization mechanisms: 1) evaporative concentration and reflux of
              salts from saline lakes; 2) concentration of salts within the root zone and
              near the water table by deeply rooted phreatophytes; 3) diffusion of connate
              groundwater from marine confining units; 4) direct evaporation of groundwater
              across the capillary fringe where the water table encroaches upon the land
              surface.  The model will be applied both in a generic sensitivity study and to
              the hydrogeologically and paleochimatologically well studied Murray Basin,
              Australia.  The generic sensitivity study will help to determine what specific
              land surface, subsurface, and vegetation conditions play an important role in
              aquifer salinization.  For the Murray Basin application, the model will first
              be calibrated/validated using modern hydrologic stresses, published aquifer
              parameters, and records of long-term  (~50 years) groundwater level
              fluctuations.  Once we are satisfied that the Murray Basin model can reproduce
              historical hydrologic changes at the regional scale, we will attempt to
              reconstruct Quaternary records of paleo-lake level fluctuations, the spatial
              occurrence of shallow evaporite deposits, and the present-day distribution of
              groundwater salinity across the basin.  The paleohydrologic model will be
              driven either by estimates of groundwater recharge taken from composite lake
              core records for Australia and Tasmania and by paleo global circulation model
              (Paleo-GCM) output.  If we can use lake core records and/or paleo-GCM output to
              reconstruct the present-day salinity distribution across sedimentary basins,
              then we will have discovered a powerful new approach for regional Quaternary
              paleoclimate studies in semi-arid regions of the world.  PIs Person and Hanor
              have proven strengths in basin-scale mathematical modeling and groundwater
              brine geochemistry and are well suited to carry out the proposed study.

