Title       : Mesoamerican Pottery Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9805339

Award Number: 9805339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52005              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy Hosler Hosler@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicola H. Strazicich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although Dr. Dorothy Hosler serves as Principal Investigator, this project is
              designed and will be conducted by Dr. Nicola Strazicich. The goal is to study
              the manufacture of a prehistoric type of pottery termed `pseudo-cloisonne.` At
              the onset of the Mesoamerican Classic period, around 200 A.D., artisans in
              North and West Mexico began to make this highly unusual ceramic decorated with
              intricate inlay designs. What makes the situation unusual is that this single
              distinctive type of pottery was used by four socially, politically and
              geographically distinct cultures over a 700 year period. Normally pottery types
              of such complexity are culture specific and, in fact, are often used by
              archaeologists to define such desecrate entities. Although not unique, the
              pseudo-cloissonne case contravenes a generally accepted archaeological rule and
              thus is of specific interest. Dr. Strazicich discovered that the four areas are
              geologically distinct and it is highly probable that the clay sources are
              different from region to region. This means it is, in principle, possible to
              chemically characterize the clays in each and then match trace element
              signatures in the archaeological ceramics to source areas. One can thus gain
              insight into the interaction between regions and determine whether the ceramics
              were locally produced, which indicates sharing of detailed technical knowledge,
              or whether all were manufactured in one area and then distributed through trade
              networks.     Dr. Strazicich will collect and analyze a total of 110 clay
              samples as well as 270 vessels from securely excavated contexts. She will
              employ petrographic analysis of pottery and clays to identify geological source
              materials and regional clay preparation techniques. Neutron activation analysis
              of vessels and clays will provide trace element data and electron microprobe
              analysis will be employed to determine chemical compositions and plastic
              constituents in the cloisonne decoration. Scanning  Electron Microscopy will be
              used to characterize ceramic microstructure.        The research is important
              for several reasons. It will not only shed new light on the development of
              social complexity in Mesoamerica but also provide insight into social and
              economic interactions which may have occurred in many areas of the world among
              prehistoric cultures at a similar level of social complexity.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
