Title       : Collaborative Research: Subglacial Deforming Beds as Erosive and Sedimentary
               Agents: An Experimental Study of Particle Comminution and Rock Erosion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9805083

Award Number: 9805083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5982               (Estimated)
Investigator: Barclay Kamb barclay@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805083
Kamb

Subglacial sediment deformation is becoming increasingly
              accepted as the new, distinct, and perhaps even predominant mechanism of fast
              ice flow and till generation.  By this mechanism, extensive layers of till may
              be generated, transported at fast rates, and deposited entirely subglacially. 
              At present, two fundamental assumptions are made in the deforming-bed models of
              ice flow and till generation: (1) that these rapidly deforming beds erode
              underlying bedrock efficiently enough to sustain the required high sediment
              fluxes; and (2) that they can produce the evidence of debris comminution which
              is commonly observed in tills.  Results of observational and experimental
              investigations of the till from beneath Ice Stream B. West Antarctica suggest
              that these assumptions changes significantly the presently existing
              understanding of deforming beds.  However, it is not clear whether the
              observations from Ice Stream B till can be extrapolated to other subglacial
              environments.  A series of experiments is proposed here to study the rates of
              particle comminution and bedrock erosion by shearing till.  In these
              experiments, an existing ring shear device will be used to shear six different
              types of till to large strains (~100,000) under effective normal stresses which
              are applicable to the deforming-bed model (6 kPa< N < 100 kPa).  Comparison of
              pre-shear and post-shear granulometry, composition of clay-size fraction, as
              well as sand grain shape and micromorphology will determine the extent of
              particle comminution.  The rate of rock erosion will be measured on rock plates
              of common lithologies mounted in the ring shear device.  The results will be
              used to test the general validity of the assumptions (1) and (2).  The
              collected data will provide an experimental basis for quantitative formulations
              of erosion and comminution that can be used in future modeling of deforming
              beds.  Finally, these experiments have the potential to yield solid
              sedimentological criteria for testing whether a given till may or many not have
              been generated fully by subglacial deformation.

