Title       : IDA/WG: Partial Support of a Conference entitled "Tackling the Engineering
               Resources Shortage: Creating New Paradigms for Developing and Retaining Women
               Engineers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9805158

Award Number: 9805158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Bogue bbogue@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Hadden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara B. Lazarus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Priscilla Guthrie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Tackling the Engineering Resources Shortage:  Creating New  Paradigms for
              Developing and Retaining Women Engineers is a  conference that brings together
              practicing engineers, managers,  policy makers, and educators to look at the
              retention of women in  engineering as an educational-to-career spanning
              continuum.  The  conference, July 14-18, 1998, at Club Tremblant near Montreal,
              aims  to achieve long-range retention, development, and success at the 
              professional level.  The objectives are:  to present and compare  best
              practices and research findings related to retention at all  levels; to
              identify institutional and cultural barriers to the  better retention of women
              engineers; to identify common interests  and areas for active collaboration and
              institutional change; to  identify and develop model programs for
              dissemination; to create  and promote new strategies and collaborations for
              participating  institutions, and to set a research agenda.         The
              conference makes a significant contribution to the  advancement of knowledge by
              bringing together engineering  professionals in industry and education who are
              in the position to  influence or implement effective strategies and policies
              affecting  long-term retention, but who are not necessarily familiar with the 
              existing research, literature, and practice outside of their  company or
              institutions.  Planning and the conference itself are  designed as iterative,
              collaborative processes to insure that  academic and industry voices and
              institutional requirements for  change and deliberation are addressed.  A
              professional evaluation  of the conference and conference outcomes will be
              undertaken.       Conferees will be in a unique position to actively
              disseminate  conference results as well as act on them.  Participants will 
              commit to return to their respective organizations with action  plans for
              internal change as well as for partnerships across  organizations.  Conference
              proceedings will be published and widely  disseminated to industry and 
              universities.
