Title       : Research at the Frontier of the Physical Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9805885

Award Number: 9805885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359707             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venugopal Veeravalli   (Principal Investigator current)
              Chris Heegard  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The physical layer of the network protocol stack refers to the  signals
              transmitted, and received, over a physical medium, such  as a wire (e.g. a
              twisted pair of wires or a coaxial cable), an  electromagnetic wave (e.g. a
              satellite transponder, a  cellular/PCS tower or a wireless local area network
              (WLAN) base  station), or a recording medium (e.g. magnetic or optical disks). 
              The research has a broad perspective, from the viewpoint of the  physical
              medium, and a narrow focus in that the problems  addressed all involve a form
              of forward error control (FEC).  The  research is directed in three areas:     
                 Mathematical methods and analysis algorithms for coding       Problems in
              algebraic coding       Turbo code error control    In the first topic area, the
              following are considered:  theory  and practice of interleaving, a novel method
              for computing the  weight distribution of a binary convolutional code, and
              problems  concerning the capacity of wireless channels with and without  side
              information on channel state.  The second topic area  concerns basic
              understanding and advances in the area of  algebraic geometry (AG) coding. 
              These AG codes show potential  for application in transmission systems. 
              Further understanding  needs to be developed to enable the practical
              implementation of  AG codes.  In the final topic, new applications of "turbo
              coding"  are identified, including systems with memory and turbo coded 
              modulation.
