Title       : Cephalopod Hemocyanins: Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9805570

Award Number: 9805570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen I. Miller millerka@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kensal E. Van Holde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The study focuses on the structure and physiological function of hemocyanins,
              which are oxygen-carrying proteins found in the blood of some invertebrates. 
              The amino acid sequence, and part of the 3-dimensional structure of one of
              these giant molecules (that from Octopus) has recently been determined by the
              investigator and her collaborators.  The new work proposed will first examine
              the structure of a part of the gene for the Octopus hemocyanin, and then
              attempt to develop a system to express a portion of this gene in bacteria or
              other cells.  This should ultimately allow directed mutation, to analyze the
              effects of particular  amino acids on the oxygen binding function.  The protein
              also contains attached carbohydrate groups; the composition and structure of
              representative ones will be determined, and their possible roles in determining
              protein structure and/or function examined.  Finally, the program will focus on
              how portions of these giant molecules communicate with one another to regulate
              the cooperative binding of oxygen on many sites.  This phenomenon of allosteric
              regulation is common to many other important proteins, and is still not
              completely understood.

Hemocyanins are oxygen transport proteins found
              exclusively in molluscs and arthropods.  The octopus hemocyanins are truly
              enormous molecules, with molecular weights in the millions.  As a result of
              recent breakthroughs in structure and sequence analysis of these molecules, the
              investigators are poised to interpret the evolution and function of hemocyanin
              at a level of sophistication never before possible.


