Title       : Thin Films in Unsaturated Porous Media - Effects on Flow and Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9805409

Award Number: 9805409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Allen G. Hunt                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dani Or   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn M. Dudley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Bialkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805409
Or

Flow in partially saturated porous media, even at moderately
              unsaturated conditions (e.g., gravity-drained media) takes place through pore
              sizes smaller than a few micrometers.  Hence, practical unsaturated solute
              transport regimes invariably involve water flow in thin films adjacent to
              active surfaces.  Conventional models for liquid distribution, flow, and solute
              transport in unsaturated porous media are biased by the geometrical
              representation of media pore space as a "bundle of cylindrical capillaries". 
              The picture is further distorted by the "empty-filled" approach where a
              complete desaturation of pores (capillaries), based on the capillary potential,
              is assumed.  Experimental and theoretical evidence suggests a radically
              different liquid configuration for unsaturated conditions whereby liquid-filled
              corners and pendular spaces form the backbone for hydraulic connectivity and
              are further connected through thin liquid films coating exposed solid surfaces.
               Consequently interfacial forces play a larger role in transport and reactivity
              than assumed by conventional models.  Because the ranges of interfacial forces
              may exceed film thicknesses to the extent that bulk solution may not be
              present, hydrodynamic and electrochemical aspects are inseparable and must be
              considered simultaneously.
A new idealized unit  cell representing media pore
              space geometry and its surface area is proposed as an alternative to the bundle
              of cylindrical capillaries model.  To account for film adsorption and capillary
              condensation, a unitary approach to modeling these two processes in porous
              media is proposed and applied to the newly assumed basic pore space geometry. 
              Interface science formalism is used to calculate film thickness as a function
              of thermodynamic conditions, pore space geometry, and specific surface area. 
              The new conceptual framework should improve the representation of liquid
              configuration at low water contents and the associated hydraulic and transport
              properties.  In addition, it provides a rational basis for considering the
              important interplay among viscous, electrical and molecular forces operating
              within thin liquid films.  The understanding of these important pore-scale
              processes is essential to physically-based interpretation of complicated
              behavior of solutes at larger scales of interest.  Details of thin film
              hydrodynamics and induced interfacial phenomena, and their effects on reactive
              solute transport at low saturation levels will be a subject of future
              studies.

