Title       : FASEB Conference: Intracellular RNA Sorting, Transport and Localization, to be
               held in Snowmass, Colorado, June 6-11, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1998      
File        : a9805557

Award Number: 9805557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard D. Lipshitz lipshitz@sickkids.on.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurence D. Etkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9805557    The award provides partial support for a FASEB Conference that
              focuses on the multidisciplinary   area of post-transcriptional RNA processing,
              transport and targeting.  The importance of this area   has become evident as a
              result of the convergence of information from studies focusing on a   variety
              of molecular, cellular and developmental questions.  During the past fifteen
              years over   seventy intracellularly localized RNAs have been identified in a
              diversity of cell types in both   vertebrates and invertebrates, ranging from
              oocytes to epithelial cells to neurons and glia.  In   addition, diverse
              classes of proteins are encoded by localized RNAs, including transcription  
              factors, RNA binding proteins, cytoskeletal proteins, intracellular signaling
              molecules and   secreted growth factors.  It is now clear that the targeting of
              mRNAs to particular intracellular   locations plays a key role in biological
              processes that include the establishment of oocyte   polarity, early embryonic
              differentiation, somatic cell polarization and function, synapse growth,   and
              plasticity in the vertebrate nervous system.  The goal of the conference is to
              build upon two   similar and successful conferences held in 1994 and 1996 by
              bringing together researchers and   students with a wide range of perspectives
              and backgrounds in this area.  The conference will   explore common themes and
              questions that include (1) the role of RNA localization in   establishment of
              embryonic cell lineage and cell polarity, (2) cis-acting signals and
              trans-acting   factors that target mRNAs to specific intracellular locations,
              (3) the delivery systems responsible   for this targeting, (4) the mechanism
              that anchors mRNAs at target locations, (5) the   characterization and extent
              of targeting sites, (6) the involvement of extracellular and intracellular  
              signaling systems in mRNA transport and targeting, (7) transport of RNA across
              the nuclear   envelope,  and (8) the effects of RNA sorting on cell functions. 
              A significan t portion of   conference resources will be used to support the
              attendance of graduate students and young   investigators.
