Title       : RUI: Magnetic Stratigraphy and Miocene Tectonic Rotation of the Calients Range,
               San Luis Obispo County, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1998    
File        : a9805071

Award Number: 9805071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Prothero   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805071
Prothero

The Miocene Epoch (from 5 to 23 Ma) was a critical period
              in earth history, when the relatively warm, mild climates of the early Miocene
              were replaced by cooler climates, permanent Antarctic glaciers, and savannas
              and grasslands in temperate latitudes.  These climatic and vegetational changes
              apparently stimulated many faunal changes, including the appearance of horses,
              camels, and other herbivores with high-crowned teeth for eating gritty
              vegetation.  Many important changes occurred in Miocene marine faunas as well. 
              California has an excellent record of Miocene mammals and marine life, but in
              the past, the chronostratigraphy of these deposits and their fossils has been
              very imprecise.

The Miocene strata of the Caliente Range in California are
              unique in that they contain fossils representing five superposed North American
              land mammal "ages" (Arikareean through Hemphillian) interfingering with marine
              beds datable by both molluscs, benthic foraminifera, and calcareous
              nannofossils, and also tied together with dated volcanics.  This region
              provides an unusual opportunity to improve the dating and correlation of these
              land mammal "ages."  In addition, it contains one of the thickest and best
              dated sequences of the long-controversial Oligocene-Miocene Vaqueros Formation.
               Using benthic foraminifera and calcareous nannofossils, it should be possible
              to provide a good magnetostratigraphic correlation of this poorly dated unit. 
              Thus, a detailed magnetostratigraphic study of the Caliente Range Miocene would
              provide not only fine-scale chronostratigraphy of the Arikareean through
              Hemphillian land mammal "age," but also the Zemorrian through Luisian benthic
              foraminiferal stages, and the Vaqueros and Temblor molluscan stages.  With more
              precise dating of these fossils and biostratigraphic units, it will be possible
              to examine the faunal responses to these climatic changes in much finer detail
              than ever before.

In addition to the chronostratigraphic aspects of this
              project, the Caliente Range is also interesting for tectonic reasons.  Many of
              the blocks of the western Transverse Ranges have rotated as much as 90(
              clockwise since the early Miocene, but the Caliente Range is north of the
              presumed rotated tract, in a block that should have slid northwestward along
              the San Andreas fault, not rotated.  However, previous studies of the Cliente
              Formation in the Cuyama Badlands (just to the southeast of the Caliente Range)
              showed that this block was stable between 18 and 11 Ma, then underwent 15( of
              clockwise rotation between 9-11 Ma.  Between 1.7 and 9 Ma, the block was again
              stable, and since that time, it has undergone about 24( of clockwise rotation. 
              Preliminary magnetic studies of rocks from the Caliente Range also show
              evidence of clockwise rotation.  A detailed magnetic analysis of Caliente Range
              rocks will provide a continuous history of the tectonic rotation of this block
              between 26 Ma and present, which would be very important to controversies over
              the tectonics of this region.

