Title       : Investigating the Social Formation of Tells at catal Hoyuk, Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9805755

Award Number: 9805755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth E. Tringham tringham@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Ruth Tringham will lead a large group of collaborators and participate in
              the excavation of the archaeological site of Catal Hoyuk. Located on the Konya
              Plain of Central Anatolia Turkey a small portion of the site was excavated by
              Dr. James Mellaart in the early 1960s. On the basis of this work Catal Hoyuk
              has become famous as the world's `earliest city` and for the insights it has
              provided into the origins of agriculture and early Neolithic religious
              practice. It's buried architectural remains are well preserved and include
              embellishment of walls and floors by relief sculptures in clay and painted
              frescoes. In collaboration with Dr. Ian Hodder and a University of Cambridge
              team Dr. Tringham will expand on this earlier research. She is focusing on a
              series of houses which preliminary excavation indicates have a complex
              occupational history.  Catal Hoyuk consists of a `tell` or highly stratified
              mound which is composed mostly of occupational debris. In the past most
              archaeologists have divided such tells into `levels` and assumed that each was
              occupied and then later abandoned simultaneously. Dr. Tringham has reasonable
              argued that such an assumption is likely incorrect and to understand change
              through time it makes much more sense to focus on the histories of individual
              houses. Because such structures are replastered, repainted and remodeled many
              times, through careful excavation and analysis it is possible to reconstruct
              their histories.  The larger issue Dr. Tringham will address involves the
              trajectory which leads to complex stratified centralized societies. Based on
              her past work in Eastern Europe, she notes that the tells characteristic of the
              Middle East are lacking in Europe. Likewise a similar level of social
              complexity is not reached. Through the careful excavation and analysis of Catal
              Hoyuk Dr. Tringham hopes to reconstruct the nature of the social organization
              which led to groups remaining at a single location long enough to allow tell
              development. She will contrast this to patterns reconstructed during her
              European work.  Because of the significance of Catal Hoyuk this research will
              yield results of interest to many researchers. It will help scientists
              understand the processes which led to the development of state level societies
              and provide training for both US and Turkish students.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
