Title       : POWRE: Transcriptional Regulation of the Somatostatin Gene in Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1998    
File        : a9805774

Award Number: 9805774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Cecilia Aguila maguila@mednet.med.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              M. Cecilia Aguila  IBN-9805774    The overall goal of this application is to
              define the  molecular and  intracellular mechanisms by which cyclic  guanosine
              3'5' monophosphate (cGMP) increases somatostatin  (SRIF) gene transcription. 
              SRIF is a substance originally  found in the brain by its ability to inhibit
              growth hormone  secretion.  The production of SRIF is regulated by several 
              intracellular compounds such as nitric oxide, cyclic  adenosine monophosphate,
              and cGMP. In earlier studies, Dr.  Aguila found that nitric oxide modulated
              SRIF gene  expression through a cGMP mediated-mechanism.  The presence  of that
              intracellular mechanisms in the brain imply  that  cGMP-mediated control of
              SRIF synthesis can occur in  neurons, raising the intriguing possibility of an 
              unsuspected role for cGMP in the regulation of SRIF gene  transcription.   
              This application proposes a combination of physiological,  cellular and
              molecular approaches to address this issue and  to test the validity of the
              intracellular signaling pathways  hypothesized to control SRIF production.
              These experiments  will be conducted in primary cultures of neuronal origin and
               cell lines of either neuronal or glial origin found to  produce SRIF.
              Accordingly, we will examine the hypothesis  that a  mechanism by which cyclic
              GMP increases SRIF  synthesis involves transcriptional activation of the SRIF 
              gene.    Neuronal plasticity depends on the capacity of cells to  adjust to
              environmental stimuli.  The reasons for this cell  specificity are only now
              beginning to be understood.  The  SRIF gene,  provides a good model for
              examining how stimuli  detected on the cell surface, influence neuronal gene 
              expression. Advances in the understanding of SRIF  biosynthesis may have an
              impact on areas outside the field  of endocrinology by providing new notions of
              eukaryotic gene  regulation.
