Title       : From Microscopic to Macroscopic: A Multiscale Numerical Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9805582

Award Number: 9805582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shlomo Ta'asan shlomo@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1339,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ta'asan
9805582
     The investigator and his colleagues develop
              multiscale
numerical techniques for dealing with phenomena on a wide range
of
              scales.  The main aspect of the research is the numerical
construction of
              macroscopic equations in the form of partial
differential equations from
              microscopic models such as molecular
dynamics models.  The numerical
              techniques focus on fluids
modeling starting from molecular models.  Special
              emphasize is
given to models involving mixtures of several types
              of
atoms/molecules that may be governed by different interactions.
Such
              molecular models give rise to complicated physical phenomena
including
              multiphase flows.  A sequence of models is constructed
numerically in an
              hierarchical manner starting from molecular
dynamics.  Each level in this
              hierarchy represent a larger scale
dynamics (in time or space or both) of the
              previous level, and is
constructed using statistical tools (regression
              analysis) applied
to the data resulting from a simulation of the previous
              level.
The finest level of modeling is given by Hamiltonian dynamics and
is
              deterministic.  Stochastic particle dynamics models are
constructed from the
              finest level model, and represent the
physical phenomenon on time scale of the
              order of the relaxation
time.  Further coarsening (averaging) in space-time
              results in
deterministic density evolution models, which can be identified
as
              finite difference approximations to some partial differential
equation that is
              the macroscopic limit.
     Numerical techniques have been used extensively
              for several
decades to obtain approximate solutions of partial
              differential
equations in different fields, and have improved
              significantly
scientific insights and engineering tasks.  The derivation
              of
those equations, which describe physical phenomena in different
areas, was
              done by analytical techniques whose use is limited to
relatively simple cases.
               The treatment of more complex models
cannot, in general, be done analytically
              and it calls for another
approach.  This is the subject of this work: the use
              of numerical
techniques for 'deriving' macroscopic dynamics equations
              from
more basic principles given at microscopic levels.  This task is
carried
              out by large scale simulation of the detailed microscopic
models and
              appropriate statistics.  The problems treated in this
work are limited to
              multiphase fluid flows, which are crucial in
many areas of applications,
              including medical inhalation devices,
auto and aerospace industries (engines),
              computer industries
(printers), and more.  The techniques developed here,
              however, are
quite general and apply to other areas in chemistry, physics
              and
economics, from fundamental questions to real world applications.


