Title       : A Mathematical Framework for Tensor Image Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9805483

Award Number: 9805483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Akram Aldroubi aldroubi@math.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Aldroubi
9805483

The investigator develops a mathematical framework for
              representing discrete tensor images that is suited to post-processing
              applications, such as pattern recognition, registration and geometric
              transformations.  In particular, he constructs atomic Wiener amalgam tensor
              spaces that consist of continuous tensor fields, and establishes conditions on
              the generating tensors that guarantee that the discrete tensor field spaces
              obtained by any regular sampling of the continuous spaces are atomic and are
              isomorphic to the continuous spaces.  Using the connection between the
              approximation problems in atomic spaces and the filtering paradigm in signal
              and image processing, he develops and implements fast filtering algorithms for
              various fundamental processing operators, such as noise reduction, rotation,
              translation, and general affine transformations.  Because tensor image data
              possess spatial information about the fiber structure and geometry of
              materials, tissues, or organs, he also uses results from differential geometry
              to extract different architectural features of ordered media.  Part of the
              project is devoted to testing the accuracy, precision and speed of these
              algorithms.  For this purpose, he generates synthetic data sets and also uses
              real data acquired from in vivo clinical diffusion tensor MRI studies, and
              other imaging modalities, to evaluate the performance of these
              algorithms.

This project is motivated primarily by the need to process and
              analyze clinical data obtained from diffusion tensor MRI, a new noninvasive
              imaging modality that allows physicians to visualize nerve and muscle fiber
              tracts in the body.  However, the mathematics developed here is applicable to
              processing and analyzing data acquired from a much larger number of imaging
              devices and modalities used in diverse application areas including medicine,
              material sciences, oceanography, meteorology, fluid mechanics, satellite
              reconnaissance, and astronomy.  Many new scanning systems measure several
              quantities at each point or position within an image rather than a single
              quantity.  These lists of numbers may represent important physical quantities,
              such as velocities or displacements, or the amount of light absorbed,
              reflected, or emitted at different wavelengths at a particular location.  The
              theory being developed here provides a rational means to represent, process,
              analyze and compress this data -- a problem which no theory currently treats. 
              In addition, this work is intended to ameliorate many problems inherent in the
              measurement of these new types of data sets.  In particular, imaging data are
              usually corrupted by noise, are discrete rather than continuous, and are
              spatially averaged.  Finally, because these new imaging modalities can generate
              vast amounts of data, the algorithms that the investigator implements for
              representing, processing, analyzing, and compressing the data must be fast and
              efficient, as well.
