Title       : Computational Modeling of Platelet Aggregation and Coagulation and Development
               of Software for Biofluid Dynamics Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a9805518

Award Number: 9805518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron L. Fogelson fogelson@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1339,9183,9216,9263,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Fogelson
9805518
     The investigator undertakes modeling and
              computational
simulation of platelet aggregation and coagulation.  These
              are
the components of normal blood clotting and of the
life-threatening blood
              clots associated with vascular disease and
with the use of cardiovascular
              prostheses.  The investigator and
coworkers continue to explore and refine
              their models of platelet
aggregation in small and large diameter vessels;
              continue
development of models of coagulation including the effects of
flow,
              transport, and surface reactions; and integrate the
platelet aggregation and
              coagulation models to form a more
comprehensive model of the hemostatic and
              thrombotic processes.
These models use coupled systems of nonlinear partial
              and
ordinary differential equations to describe interactions between
the
              blood's fluid dynamics, the transport of platelets and
chemicals in the blood
              plasma, the mechanics and chemistry of
developing aggregates, and the
              solution-phase and surface-bound
biochemistry of the coagulation process.  The
              models present
substantial computational challenges that require development
              and
use of state-of-the-art numerical methods for their solution.
These
              include immersed boundary methods for fluid-material
interactions,
              high-resolution finite-difference methods combined
with Fourier-collocation
              spectral methods, immersed-interface
methods for handling transport in regions
              of complex geometry,
and parallel computation.  This work involves
              extensive
comparisons between computational results and
              laboratory
experiments and is aided by collaboration with leading experts
              on
flow and thrombosis.  The proposal is also concerned with
developing
              state-of-the-art parallel computational methods for
simulating biofluid
              dynamic flows like those involved in
aggregation and coagulation, and with
              including these
computational tools in a powerful and easy-to-use problem
              solving
environment that facilitates solving a wide range of complex
biofluid
              dynamic problems.
     Thrombosis, which is the formation of blood clots
              within
vessels of the circulatory system, is the proximal cause of most
heart
              attacks and of other severe cardiovascular problems such as
ischemia and
              angina.  It is also a major problem associated with
the use of
              blood-contacting prostheses such as mechanical heart
valves.  The process by
              which these blood clots form is very
complex and involves many dynamic,
              sometimes competing, sometimes
mutually-reinforcing, biophysical and
              biochemical processes.  A
major part of this project involves developing
              powerful
mathematical and computational tools for studying this
              complex
process, and using these tools to probe the factors that effect
the
              location, extent, and speed of formation of thrombi.
Computational modeling
              complements traditional experimental
approaches and provides a way to simulate
              complex dynamic events,
like the dynamic interactions among fluid, blood
              cells, clotting
factors, and blood vessel or prosthesis surface that lead
              to
thrombosis, that are beyond the reach of current laboratory
techniques. 
              Such simulations can give new insights into the
basic mechanisms that control
              this important biological process,
and can ultimately help in the more
              rational design of
therapeutic interventions and prosthetic devices.  Many
              other
challenging biological and biomedical flow problems have features
in
              common with that of simulating thrombosis, and so the
state-of-the-art
              parallel computational methods developed for
this project potentially have
              wide-spread application to problems
important to basic science, health care,
              and biotechnology.  To
help realize this potential the investigators develop
              and
disseminate an easy-to-use software package that facilitates
using these
              computational methods to set up and carry out
simulations of important
              biofluid dynamics problems.


