Title       : Rational Design of Internal Interfaces in Multicomponent Polymer Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9805852

Award Number: 9805852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nitash P. Balsara   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9805852
N. Balsara
Polytechnic U. @ NY

A systematic
              experimental study of microstructure and internal interfaces in multicomponent
              polymer blends is proposed.  In spite of several years of research on these
              systems, many fundamental issues remain unresolved.  The proposed  work is
              motivated by recent theoretical work [Schick, 1997, and Muthukumar, 1997] that
              indicate the presence a variety of complex phases in relatively simple mixtures
              of two homopolymers and a block copolymer.  The predicted phases are similar to
              those found in oil/water/surfactant mixtures, and are characterized by a high
              density of internal interfaces.  These theories make explicit and
              experimentally testable predictions of the parameters (molecular weight,
              temperature, etc.) that will lead to these structures. 

Experiments will be
              conducted on polyolefin blends.  Model materials, with molecular weights and
              compositions that are based on theoretical prescriptions, will be synthesized
              via anionic polymerization.  The main characterization tools of microstructure
              will be neutron and light scattering.  The curvature and other attributes such
              as interfacial thickness of the internal interfaces will be determined from
              static scattering experiments.  Selective labeling and contrast matching will
              be used to focus on specific components in the multicomponent blends.  In
              particular, the use of a labeled block copolymer, will enable a direct study of
              the interface, if the diblock is an active interfacial agent and coats the
              internal interfaces.  Achieving equilibrium in polymer systems is not always
              possible, due to slow kinetics and the presence of metastable intermediate
              structures.  Time-resolved scattering experiments will be conducted to study
              the evolution of structure when the blends are quenched from one region of the
              phase diagram to another.  The main goal is to identify the conditions that
              lead to the formation of modulated phases [Bates, 1997]: multicomponent ordered
              phases that possess long range order, and microemulsions which are periodic
              structures that lack long-range order.

The absence of coherent strategies
              for designing interfaces in multicomponent polymer blends is well recognized. 
              The fundamental knowledge that we propose to obtain will be a step toward
              developing such strategies.  New materials may also emerge from our
              experimentation.  In oil/water systems ordered phases have not received much
              attention due to their solid-like properties.  Polymer-based ordered materials
              may he valuable in structural applications where solid-like properties are
              necessary.  The thermodynamic stability of the internal interfaces will lead to
              better processing characteristics.  Shear-induced phase transitions may lead to
              a new morphologies that were not accessible under quiescent
              conditions.
***



