Title       : POWRE: Parentage and Male Parental Effort in a Species With Alternative
               Reproductive Opportunities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9805973

Award Number: 9805973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda A. Whittingham whitting@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              NONTECHNICAL ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  9805973    PI: Whittingham, Linda    
                 In many animals both the male and female cooperate to raise  a family.
              However, parents may have conflicts of interest  over how much parental care
              each should provide to their  young.  One source of conflict arises when males
              are not the  genetic fathers (sires) of the young for which they are  caring. 
              Such cases occur often in birds because females of  many species will mate with
              males other than their social  partner. Should males decrease their parental
              effort when  they are raising offspring that are not their own, and if  so, how
              much?  This pilot study will allow Whittingham to  pursue this question in a
              new and exciting model system  (house wrens), and to develop new molecular
              methods of  paternity analysis that are necessary for the expansion of  her
              research. This project also will provide research  experience and training in
              modern genetic techniques for  undergraduate and graduate students.      Recent
              theory suggest that males may adjust their parental  effort in relation to
              their paternity (the number of young  sired) under some conditions, but not
              others.  House wrens  provide a model system to examine the factors that
              influence  why parents may or may not cooperate to raise young.  These  factors
              include the ability of males to assess their  paternity and the availability of
              mating opportunities with  other females.  This project will result in a better
               understanding of the basic principles underlying parental  decision-making. 
              In addition it provides integrated  training in both field and genetic methods
              for young  scientists.
