Title       : POWRE: Confirmation Politics: New Perspectives on Legislative-Executive Gridlock
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9805772

Award Number: 9805772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah A. Binder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brookings Institution
	      1775 Mass Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200362188    202/797-6000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1371,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The causes and consequences of political gridlock figure prominently in much
              recent research in the field of legislative politics.  Most such research,
              however, focuses on conflict between Congress and the President and its impact
              on lawmaking and congressional investigations.  This project builds on recent
              insights from legislative scholarship and applies them to a study of
              inter-branch conflict between Congress and the President over the political
              shape of the federal courts.  Intra- and inter-branch conflict, it is argued,
              affect not only policy outcomes, but the shape of political institutions as
              well.  The objectives of the project are to conduct a pilot study in which the
              feasibility of a new approach to modeling inter-branch conflict will be
              explored.  The investigator will develop a new database on federal judicial
              nominations and will use the data to test a dynamic, institutional theory of
              political conflict.  As a pilot study, the database will focus on appellate
              court judgeships, and will provide the first comprehensive collection of data
              on nominations and confirmation fate of circuit court nominees to the federal
              bench between 1947 and 1997.    The impact of the project can be measured in
              several ways.  First, the collection of data will enhance judicial scholars'
              ability to focus on judicial politics at the lower court level, rather than the
              more commonly studied Supreme Court.  Second, it will expand other lower court
              databases.  Third, it will provide a means for assessing recent empirical
              claims about changes in the political character of the nomination process. 
              Fourth, it will enhance our theoretical understanding of the endogeneity of
              political institutions, adding to a newly emerging literature on the
              determinants of political institutions and their change over time.  This POWRE
              grant will have an important impact on the investigator's professional
              development.  It will enable the PI, currently at the Brookings Institution, to
              further develop her research agenda on the evolution of political institutions
              by expanding her substantive focus and her methodological approaches.   Because
              Brookings scholars normally seek funding from external private foundations, and
              because such foundations are more interested in tangible policy recommendations
              than the development and testing of theories of politics, this award will be
              invaluable support for the PI's intellectual and professional development.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
