Title       : Paleobiological and Geological Framework of the Denver Basin: Floral Evaluation
               and Ecology of an Evolving Synorogenic Lanscape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  2000  
File        : a9805474

Award Number: 9805474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk R. Johnson kjohnson@dmns.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Raynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Denver Museum of Nat & Sci
	      2001 Colorado Boulevard
	      Denver, CO  80201    303/370-8261

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805474
Johnson

The Denver Museum of Natural History (DMNH) proposes to
              develop an integrated paleobiological and geological framework for the Upper
              Cretaceous and lower Tertiary rocks in the Denver Basin using a
              multi-disciplinary approach of paleontology (plant megafossils and
              palynomorphs), magnetostratigraphy, and lithostratigraphy.  The study will be
              based on a multitude of surface observations and fossil sites tied to a new
              cored well to be drilled by this project in cooperation with local, state, and
              government agencies.  The well will be located in the center of the Denver
              Basin at the Elbert County Fairgrounds in Kiowa.  Magnetostratigraphy,
              lithostratigraphy, and palynostratigraphy of the 610m well supported by this
              proposal will be used to erect a reference geochronology and biostratigraphy
              for the Denver Basin.  This master section will be used to correlate basin-wide
              surface fossil sites and observations.

The resulting data framework will be
              used to test three major hypotheses.
- The first hypothesis is the Denver
              Basin contains two distinct unconformity-bounded sequences of synorogenic
              strata.
- The second hypothesis is that the Cretaceous-Tertiary (K-T) boundary
              impact event at Chicxulub in Mexico caused greater biotic damage proximal to
              the impact site than distal to it.
- The third hypothesis is that the
              evolution and infilling of the Laramide Denver Basin was driven by sediment
              supply and subsidence rather than by climate change.

The intrinsic benefits
              of this research will be seen in the fields of sequence stratigraphy, basin
              tectonics, paleobotany, magnetostratigraphy, paleoclimatology, biostratigraphy,
              and extinction studies.  The project will also have direct and immediate
              extrinsic benefits and will provide superb educational opportunities.  The 620m
              sequence to be studied contains the majority of the aquifers that provide water
              for the rapidly growing populations in the central Denver Basin.  The location
              of the reference will is such that it will provide much needed data on water
              quality and aquifer characteristics.  The local, state, and government agencies
              that will cost share to help fund the drilling of the reference will benefit
              not only from the science funded by this proposal but will also undertake their
              own hydrological research on the well core.  The USGS Division of Water
              Resources will coordinate this aspect of the research.  The well itself has the
              potential to be developed as a water resource for the town of Kiowa and for
              Elbert County.

As the umbrella organization for the project, DMNH will
              coordinate the basic research and educational endeavors resulting from this
              research.  Educational opportunities of this project are immense since they
              will link popular science, such as dinosaur extinction and fossil rainforests,
              with local resource utilization issues in one of the fastest growing urban
              areas in the country.  Educational products focusing on the topics of
              paleontology, geology, hydrology, and resource utilization could include such
              diverse products as teacher training workshops, adult education symposia,
              temporary exhibits, and outreach exhibits.

