Title       : POWRE: Dynamical MCMC Methods With Applications to Continuous Time Differential
               Equation Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9805598

Award Number: 9805598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Osnat Stramer stramer@stat.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805598  Stramer  Many physical systems are described by continuous-time models
              (diffusions) which incorporate the variability and randomness that occurs in
              the real world.  The PI will carry out research on two different aspects of
              such systems: the first enables the use of diffusions to give more efficient
              computing methods in simulation, and the second leads to better inference of
              the properties of systems.  Part I: Development of new Markov Chain Monte Carlo
              (MCMC) algorithms for efficient computation of a given high-dimensional density
              pi which is known up to a factor of proportionality.  These new algorithms will
              be based on multi-dimensional diffusion approximations.  The basic idea is to
              find, for a given probability density pi, a class of diffusion processes
              (continuous-time, continuous sample-path Markov chains) which have pi as an
              equilibrium distribution.  It is expected that the proposed new MCMC algorithms
              will speed up simulations of a broad class of distributions pi.  Part II: 
              Contribution to statistical inference in non-linear continuous time modeling. 
              It is often appropriate to model the time evolution of dynamic systems by using
              continuous time stochastic processes whose dynamics are characterized by
              stochastic differential equations.  It is proposed to employ a Bayesian
              approach for model estimation based on MCMC methods.  New simulation techniques
              for estimating the posterior distribution for a broad class of non-linear 
              Continuous time models will be studied.  The existing estimation methods in the
              literature depend on the length of the interval between two observations and
              hence Metropolis sub-algorithms for augmenting the data set will be studied. 
              This research is expected to provide a new approach for inference in a broad
              class of continuous time models.  This POWRE project is jointly supported by
              the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of 
              Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
