Title       : POWRE: Political Identification as Social Identity: The Portrayal of Feminists
               and the Development of Feminist Identity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9805892

Award Number: 9805892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonie Huddy Leonie.Huddy@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1371,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A new approach to political self-identification is advanced in this research and
              its predictions concerning the origins of feminist identity are examined.  From
              this new perspective, political identification is viewed as a social identity
              and the way in which its supporters and opponents are portrayed is considered
              central to its development.  Three major hypotheses concerning the origins of
              political identity are examined.  (1) A salient group label is crucial to the
              establishment, strengthening, and transformation of political identity.  (2)
              The political and personal attributes of typical group members (group
              prototype) and one's similarity (political and personal) to them is the basis
              for identity formation and development.  (3) The existence of a political
              opposition sharpens group boundaries and strengthens an existing political
              identity; dissimilarity from an opposition further promotes the development of
              political identity by defining what the political group is not.  These
              predictions are tested in a series of experimental studies with participants
              from Long Island, New York.  Participants read an experimentally altered news
              story embedded in a longer questionnaire in which the portrayal of feminists is
              systematically varied.  By exploring the origins of political identity in the
              portrayal of an ideology's adherents and detractors, the project will: (1)
              advance theoretical thinking on the origins of political self-identification;
              (2) identify the factors that contribute to the formation and development of
              political identity over time; (3) provide an explanation for the gap between
              political identification and support for related political beliefs that is not
              adequately explained by current theoretical approaches; (4) highlight the role
              played by the media in defining political identification as social identity;
              and (5) lend insight into the factors that lead to the formation and
              development of social identities more generally in an organizational,
              interethnic, or political setting for groups with a prior history and a
              previously established prototype.  Consistent with the goals of the POWRE
              program, this project will advance the investigators current research agenda
              and enhance and broaden her reputation as a scholar of political behavior,
              gender and politics, and political communications.  The current study will
              allow the investigator to advance her research in a new direction in the area
              of political self-identification.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
