Title       : POWRE: Leptin Action on Gonadotropin-Releasing-Hormone Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9805923

Award Number: 9805923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne E. Moenter smm4n@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              POWRE: Leptin Action on Gonadotropin-releasing Hormone  Neurons  Suzanne M.
              Moenter    The goal of the research to be performed with this NSF POWRE 
              funding is to explore the link between energy balance and  reproduction. This
              project is particularly suited  for a  POWRE award because it will allow
              exploratory work to  determine the feasibility of a new line of inquiry. 
              Negative energy balance inhibits reproduction but the  mechanisms involved are
              only partially understood.  The  central nervous system controls reproduction
              through the  episodic secretion of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH). 
              Negative energy balance is known to slow the frequency of or  completely stop
              GnRH release; this leads to infertility.  The mediator conveying metabolic
              information to the GnRH  neurosecretory system is unknown.  This research will
              test  the possibility that leptin serves as a messenger to convey  information
              regarding energy balance to the neuroendocrine  system regulating reproduction.
               Leptin is a hormone  produced by fat tissue and leptin levels in the
              circulation  are highly correlated with the percentage of body fat.  Leptin is
              thus a logical candidate for conveying information  on energy stores to the
              rest of the body.  Our specific  hypothesis is that leptin acts directly on
              GnRH neurons to  alter the pattern of episodic GnRH release.  We established 
              the receptor required for leptin action is expressed in an  immortalized GnRH
              neuronal cell line (GT1-7 cells-a source  of pure GnRH neurons in the absence
              of other cell types), as  well as in the anterior hypothalamus and preoptic
              area,  regions of the brain that contain the majority of GnRH cell  bodies in
              the mouse.  This provides a basis for the direct  regulation of GnRH release by
              leptin.  Subsequent studies of  GT1-7 cells have demonstrated that although the
              gene for the  leptin receptor is expressed, the resulting protein is  altered,
              preventing leptin action.  The  proposed research  will thus pursue the
              feasibility of studying leptin ac tion  on the GnRH neurosecretory system in
              both animal models and  in GT1-7 cells transfected with the cDNA for the leptin
               receptor.  The PI has four specific aims.  In Specific Aim  1, we will
              determine if GnRH neurons in vivo express the  leptin receptor by using in situ
              hybridization to localize  the expression of that gene specifically to GnRH
              neurons  (our preliminary studies placed it only in the general  vicinity).  In
              Specific Aim 2,  we will generate GT1-7 cells  stably expressing the cDNA for
              the unaltered leptin receptor  enabling us to study leptin action on isolated
              GnRH-like  neurons.  In Specific Aim 3, the effects of leptin on GnRH  release
              from the transfected GT1-7 cells will be studied.  The long and short term
              effects of leptin treatment on the  pattern of GnRH release will be determined.
               In Specific Aim  4, we will begin to examine the signaling pathways of leptin 
              in stably transfected GT1-7 cells and GnRH neurons and  changes in gene
              expression induced by leptin.  These  experiments should provide important
              insights into  communication of energy balance to the neural systems  involved
              in regulating reproduction, the underlying cellular  mechanisms, and overall
              rhythmic hormone release.
