Title       : Intercellular Coordination Schemes for Multimedia Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9805441

Award Number: 9805441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ness B. Shroff shroff@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this proposal the principal investigators (PIs) study intercellular
              coordination schemes for the efficient utilization of the wireless network
              capacity incorporating QoS constraints. The framework that the PIs assume
              throughout is a cellular mobile system in which each cell contains a base
              station that communicates with mobile users in that cell. This communication is
              done over a given set of channels, where a channel is defined to be a generic
              network resource (e.g., time-slots, frequency bands, etc.). The PIs then
              propose to develop intercellular coordination schemes for managing channels in
              two categories:

Inter-cellular coordination for Incomplete Reuse:  The PIs
              will study dynamic channel allocation schemes that involve localized
              coordination between neighboring cells. Specifically, they will investigate a
              novel scheme called channel sharing, where mobile users have access to channels
              that are preassigned to groups of cells called meta-cells. This scheme relies
              only on localized information and hence has significant practical value. The
              PIs  describe their proposed sharing scheme in some detail, and show
              preliminary results which indicate that the scheme has the potential for
              significantly improving network performance, and can be used to help reduce QoS
              violations of existing users in the network.

Inter-cellular coordination for
              complete reuse:  Since the problem of globally scheduling all transmission
              requests with complete success in a cellular system is in general intractable,
              the PIs propose to tackle the problem by developing a simple intercellular
              coordination technique. In this technique, they propose to make a priori
              coordination arrangements between cells, so that a certain set of carrier
              frequencies in each cell are assigned to communicate at full power, while
              others communicate at a predetermined reduced power level. The PIs call this
              scheme a primary-secondary coordination scheme. For this scheme, they have
              shown preliminary work that the optimal scheduling solution based on user
              location, is in the form of a simple bang-bang control, which makes the scheme
              practically appealing. They propose to study joint optimization problems that
              maximize the network throughput under both location and QoS based constraints.
              Finally, the PIs propose to investigate the possibility of combining the ideas
              of sharing and primary-secondary coordination, to increase further the network
              utilization.

This award includes a subcontract to Mischa Schwartz, Columbia
              University.

