Title       : Elliptic Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9805629

Award Number: 9805629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65731              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian W. Knowles iwk@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               9805629
 Knowles

This project centers on parameter identification inverse
              problems.  Typically, in such a problem one is given certain information about
              the solution of a partial differential equation  and one is hopeful of using
              this information to compute one or more of the coefficients in the equation. 
              Such problems are typically  mathematically ill-posed and, to make matters
              worse, in processing the data in many practical applications, one must contend
              not only with measurement error but sometimes also with the fact that the
              readings may only be taken at a rather sparse collection of measurement points.
              In this proposal we outline a continuation of work on a new and very promising
              approach to a broad class of parameter identification problems.  At the core of
              the method is the Dirichlet principle for elliptic boundary value problems,
              that the solution may be obtained by the minimization of a certain energy
              functional; that the same energy functional can also be used to compute
              coefficients in the elliptic equation, if an appropriate constrained
              minimization is employed, is the significant observation that drives much of
              the work in this proposal.  Extensive numerical experiments have shown that 
              the same numerical stability that is associated with the Dirichlet principle
              approach to finding solutions is also present (assuming the  appropriate
              stabilization is employed) in the constrained minimization; in particular the
              method appears to be quite robust in the presence of noise in the data.  The
              parameter identification problems amenable to this approach are, roughly
              speaking, those that involve elliptic equations that may besolved by means of a
              Dirichlet principle; as is well known this is a large class, having
              considerable practical significance.  In addition, many parameter
              identification inverse problems involving parabolic (diffusion) and hyperbolic
              (wave propagation) equations  may be restated to a form covered by this theory,
              and thus the eventual impact is expected to be even greater.

The first part
              of the project involves producing working algorithms to identify, from easily
              obtainable measurements, the various parameters needed to quantify flow in
              porous media.  This is a crucial step in the modeling of underground water
              systems and a necessary first step when one wishes for example to manage water
              resources efficiently, or to predict the effects on an aquifer caused by
              environmental factors such as flooding or industrial pollution.  The second
              part of the project is concerned with the problem of imaging inside the human
              body with electrical impedance tomography.  Here, one attempts, by means of low
              voltage electrical measurements taken at the surface of a subject, to form an
              image of the interior.  Such imaging has the advantage of being both
              non-invasive and non-destructive, and inexpensive; current disadvantages
              include poor image quality, and it is hoped that improvements can be
              accomplished by methods related to those used above.  Related practical
              applications of these ideas include non-destructive evaluations involving the 
              determination of gas pores, impurities, and cracks in cast metals; such
              problems are of interest in a variety of manufacturing situations, including
              the inspection of airplane parts, and also in the manufacture and testing of
              nuclear reactor containment vessels.

