Title       : Statistical Field Theories and Collective Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9805833

Award Number: 9805833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehran Kardar kardar@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9805833  Kardar  Complex phenomena often emerge from the collective 
              interactions of simple underlying entities, such as atoms in  a crystal, or
              neurons in the brain.  Statistical mechanics  provides powerful tools for
              quantifying collective  phenomena, in both average behavior, and fluctuations
              around  average.  This research is aimed at understanding static and  dynamic
              fluctuation phenomena in polymers, flux lines,  surfaces, networks, and complex
              fluids.    The chief analytical tool for extracting universal features  of
              interacting systems is field theory.  Equations governing  the variation of a
              relevant field in space and time are  constructed on the basis of various
              arguments (symmetry,  locality, etc.) and then analyzed by well known
              techniques  such as perturbation expansions and renormalization group. 
              Numerical methods are also employed to simulate complex  systems.  Some less
              conventional approaches will also be  explored in this research: (i) standard
              field theory can be  regarded as a description of fluctuating linear objects 
              (world-lines).  A generalization to describe a class of  fluctuating manifolds
              (with fixed connectivity) of arbitrary  internal dimensions will be formulated.
              (ii) Path integral  methods are introduced to study boundary effects introduced
               by extended objects immersed in a complex fluid.  Even a  simple system such
              as a moving mirror in vacuum modifies the  quantum fluctuations of the
              electromagnetic field, leading  to forces and radiation phenomena that can be
              calculated by  this method.    Specific topics of study include: (i) flux
              phases in type II  superconductors: the modification of the phase diagram by 
              the combined effects of thermal fluctuations, pinning by  disorder, and
              destabilizing longitudinal currents. (ii)  configurations of polymers and gels
              with random interactions  and crosslinks. (iii) nonlinear patterns formed in 
              biological systems (cortical maps or microtubule  assemblies). (iv) description
              of nonequilibrium fluctuations  in growing sys tems and drifting aggregates.
              (v) fluctuations  of a single polyelectrolyte (charged polymer) and 
              interactions between several extended charged objects.  %%%  Complex phenomena
              often emerge from the collective  interactions of simple underlying entities,
              such as atoms in  a crystal, or neurons in the brain.  Statistical mechanics 
              provides powerful tools for quantifying collective  phenomena, in both average
              behavior, and fluctuations around  average.  This research is aimed at
              understanding static and  dynamic fluctuation phenomena in polymers, flux
              lines,  surfaces, networks, and complex fluids.  Specific topics of study
              include: (i) flux phases in type II  superconductors: the modification of the
              phase diagram by  the combined effects of thermal fluctuations, pinning by 
              disorder, and destabilizing longitudinal currents. (ii)  configurations of
              polymers and gels with random interactions  and crosslinks. (iii) nonlinear
              patterns formed in  biological systems (cortical maps or microtubule 
              assemblies). (iv) description of nonequilibrium fluctuations  in growing
              systems and drifting aggregates. (v) fluctuations  of a single polyelectrolyte
              (charged polymer) and  interactions between several extended charged objects. 
              ***
