Title       : Adaptive Change and Continuity in the Lake Baikal Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9805115

Award Number: 9805115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Ezzo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej Weber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Statistical Research (SR)
	      P O Box 31865
	      Tucson, AZ  857511865    602/721-4309

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Joseph Ezzo will conduct one season
              of field research in the Lake Baikal region of Siberia and analyze the samples
              he collects. As part of an international team of scientists he will conduct
              trace element analysis of human skeletal material derived from three distinct
              populations of foragers which occupied the region between 5,800 and 2,000 BC.
              Lake Baikal is the largest fresh water lake in the world and harbors a rich
              fish and mammalian fauna. Rivers which flow into it are likewise rich in edible
              resources. While people at a hunting and gathering level of subsistence
              organization have incorporated riverine and laucustrine items into their diets
              for thousands of years, it is unclear how important these items were. Some
              archaeologists believe they were abundant enough to constitute a reliable year
              round subsistence source which permitted fixed settlement while others believe
              they were not dependable enough to serve this purpose. Other than for recent
              time periods on the US and Canadian Northwest Coasts, surprisingly little is
              known about this prehistoric subsistence adaptation. Excavation by an
              international team in the Lake Baikal region has yielded a large variety of
              cultural remains which span three distinct groups. The researchers have also
              uncovered a number of human skeletons and these provide the subject of Dr.
              Ezzo's analysis.  Dr. Ezzo will collect a small bone sample from each skeleton
              and conduct trace element analyses, focusing in particular on calcium,
              strontium and barium. Foods eaten leave a chemical imprint on bone and it is
              possible to work from bone itself back to diet. Such data provide unique
              insight. Archaeologists often recover animal bone and plant remains from
              prehistoric sites and use these materials for dietary reconstruction. Both
              classes of data however are subject to strong preservational bias and the
              validity of such results  is questionable. Bone trace elements however are not
              subject to this limitation. To determine `ground truth` Dr. Ezzo will also
              collect soil, plant and animal materials from the region and analyze them at
              the University of Wisconsin Archaeological Chemistry laboratory.  This research
              is important because it will use a relatively new technique to gain insight
              into past human subsistence adaptations. It will help to evaluate the
              significance of riverine and lake resources in human prehistory.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
