Title       : Investigation of Cretaceous East Thethyan Mantle Sources Through An Isotopic
               Study of Yarlung-Zangpo Suture Zone Basalts, Tibet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9805318

Award Number: 9805318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Mahoney jmahoney@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805318
Mahoney
The mantle sources of Indian Ocean ridge basalts have a
              Pb-Nd-Sr isotopic signature distinct from those of the Pacific and North
              Atlantic ridges. The reason for the Indian Ocean mantle signature is unknown:
              it may have originated with the breakup of the supercontinent of Gondwana, or
              it may be an older feature inherited from the mantle of the now-vanished
              Tethyan Ocean which lay to the north of Gondwana in the Mesozoic. However, the
              nature of Tethyan mantle is poorly known as few isotopic or trace element data
              exist for the limited present-day exposures of materials derived from this
              mantle source. To address this gap in our knowledge, and in turn the larger
              issues of the unique isotopic signature of the Indian Ocean mantle, a
              systematic investigation of Tethyan Ocean crust, fragments of which are
              preserved on land in the South Tethyan suture belt of southern Asia, will be
              conducted. In a rare opportunity, the American investigators have been invited
              to join a Chinese expedition working on Tethyan seafloor fragments exposed in
              the Yarlung-Zangpo suture zone of southern Tibet, one of the longest stretches
              of the South Tethyan suture belt. Age-corrected Nd, Pb, and Sr isotopic ratios
              and a variety of trace elements will be analyzed by the US researchers on
              basalt and gabbro samples collected. These data will be obtained in conjunction
              with petrological, structural, and geochronological studies by the Chinese
              team. This project will provide new insights on fundamental questions of mantle
              evolution and dynamics while also promoting cooperation and scientific exchange
              between US and Chinese researchers and students.

