Title       : Quantitative Predictions of Phase Behavior and Mass Transfer for Complex Mixed
               Wastes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9805376

Award Number: 9805376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311146             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Celia celia@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1317,1325,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805376
Celia

Many contaminated sites involve non-aqueous-phase liquid
              (NAPL) pollutants that are complex mixtures of organic compounds.  Current
              methods for describing NAPL contaminants in subsurface systems do not
              adequately account for spatial and temporal variations in contaminant
              compositions.  An often-overlooked but important consideration is that NAPLs
              often contain compound that is solids in their pure forms at ambient
              temperatures, and which may solidify as the NAPL composition changes.  This
              phenomenon may have a significant impact on the long-term fate of some
              complex-mixture NAPLs in the subsurface environment, with associated
              implications for risk assessment and decisions on clean-up actions.  This
              project couples the thermodynamics of multicomponent phase equilibria with
              pore-scale computational models to investigate the fate of complex, mixed-waste
              NAPLs in subsurface environments.  The major objectives are: (1) Perform
              laboratory experiments to investigate phase behavior, mass transfer and NAPL
              solidification at the pore scale and column scale. (2) Develop a compositional
              pore-scale numerical model to simulate fluid flow, behavior, and mass transfer
              for multicomponent contaminants in multi-phase porous media. (3) Perform risk
              assessment calculations using the laboratory and computational results to
              estimate long-term risks associated with complex-mixture NAPLs, and the effects
              of solidification of NAPL components.  This projects focuses on NAPLs
              containing polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), because of their importance
              as environmental contaminants, their complex multicomponent nature which
              necessitates a compositional approach, and the importance of potential phase
              transformations.  To maximize inference ability in experimental investigations,
              a novel laboratory procedure is used which involves synthetic PAH-NAPLs to
              serve as representative yet well-characterized surrogates for environments
              contaminants.

