Title       : EPSCOR: Physiological Stress Responses, Aggression and Social Dominance in
               Wolves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a9805571

Award Number: 9805571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Creel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mont Univ Sys Office
	      307 Montana Hall
	      Helena, MT  596014132    406/444-6570

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT    Proposal Number 9805571    PI: Creel, Scott       
              This study will clarify how social status affects behavioral  and physiological
              responses to stress in free-living wolves.  In studies of captive rodents and
              primates, social  subordinates often show long-term increases in the secretion 
              of adrenal glucocorticoids, a primary constituent of the  stress response. 
              Recent studies of social birds and  mammals, conducted in the wild and
              captivity, show that  glucocorticoids are sometimes higher in dominant
              individuals  than in subordinates.  It is not yet clear what variables 
              determine these differences among species.  This research  will collect
              non-invasive measurements of glucocorticoids  from fecal samples collected from
              free ranging wolves, and  will quantify rates of aggression and other social 
              behaviors, to determine relationships between dominance,  aggression and the
              glucocorticoid stress response.    All animals, including humans, face a
              variety of stresses,  ranging from physical conditions like cold or hunger to 
              psychosocial stress due to aggressive interactions.  The  primary physiological
              response is an increase in the  secretion of glucocorticoids, regardless of the
              specific  stressor involved.  This response is beneficial in the short  term,
              but is harmful if prolonged (e.g. energy metabolism  becomes inefficient, the
              immune system is impaired, and  neurons in the brain atrophy).  Because
              glucocorticoids have  strong effects on reproduction and immunity, the study of
               social stress has broad ramifications for disciplines  ranging from
              evolutionary biology to human stress  management.
