Title       : POWRE: Facilitating Substrate Specificity of a Highly Conserved Protease
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9805853

Award Number: 9805853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janine E. Trempy trempyj@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9805853
Trempy
The highly conserved protease, Lon, regulates a diverse set of
              
physiological responses in Escherichia coli, including cell division, capsule
              production, plasmid stability and phage replication (corresponding Lon
              substrates: SulA, RcsA, CcdA, and lambda N, respectively).  Lon protease has
              been identified in every organism examined thus far, including Gram positive
              and Gram negative bacteria, yeast, plants and homo sapiens.  To date, very
              little is known about the mechanism of substrate recognition by Lon.  In an
              attempt to better understand the Lon-substrate interaction, point mutations in
              lon were 
generated which affected its substrate specificity.  One such mutant
              class (referred to as lon *) behaved phenotypically and biochemically as if it
              were a lon - mutant with respect to RcsA (mucoid), yet acted lon + with respect
              to SulA (resistant to DNA damaging agents).  DNA sequence analysis identified a
              single base change, leading to a single amino acid change within a highly
              conserved domain of Lon protease.  The objective of this research is to test
              the hypothesis that this highly conserved domain is involved in the recognition
              and capture of Lon's substrates. Specific amino acid residues in this highly
              conserved domain will be changed and the impact of this change on RcsA and SulA
              stability will be examined (monitored by mucoidyness and response to DNA
              damaging agents). Understanding the protein-protein interactions which
              contribute to substrate recognition and capture by a protease will provide the
              foundation with which to construct a plausible model describing how crucial
              regulatory proteins 
are selected for degradation. The knowledge gained from
              these studies will extend understanding as to how selective degradation impacts
              the 
cell's goal to survive and proliferate.  

This POWRE award will
              facilitate the PI's reinvigorating her research at a critical juncture in her
              career, thus it fits the POWRE criteria.

