Title       : ATM Rate Based Congestion Control and Routing with Cell LossPrevention/Bounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9805436

Award Number: 9805436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266468             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Gerla gerla@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The ATM network offers various types of services, with different levels of QoS
              guarantees. Two services which are gaining increasing importance are ABR
              (Available Bit Rate) and UBR (Undeclared Bit Rate). ABR and UBR are services of
              lesser quality than CBR (Constant Bit Rate) and VBR (Variable Bit Rate) in that
              they can use only the residual trunk bandwidth (left over by VBR and CBR).
              Since bandwidth is not reserved in advance (except for an optional Min Cell
              Rate, MCR), the network must protect itself from congestion caused by excess
              ABR and UBR input traffic. In UBR, excess traffic is simply discarded at
              overloaded nodes. In ABR, the network prevents congestion using a feedback
              control mechanism. Namely, the input rate of each ABR source is regulated so as
              to match the available bandwidth on the path. The main focus of this research
              will be the feedback rate control mechanism, called E-PRCA (Enhanced
              Proportional Rate Control Algorithm) and its properties and
              applications.

E-PRCA has been implemented in many versions. Most
              implementations converge to steady state and provide fair bandwidth sharing
              among competing ABR connections. However, few implementations prevent, or at
              least bound cell loss. Often, this cell loss problem is overlooked since ABR is
              "a best effort service" and thus the customer was not promised cell loss
              guarantees. However, a closer look reveals that it is beneficial to limit and
              if possible prevent ABR cell loss because: (a) Higher layer protocols, such as
              TCP, are impacted by cell loss; (b) In multicast connections, loss recovery at
              the application level is costly; and (c) ABR is becoming an attractive
              alternative (to VBR) for multimedia applications which tolerate adaptive rate
              regulation.

In this project, we propose four tasks:

ABR control with cell
              loss prevention/bounds: Starting point will be the SP-EPRCA scheme, a rate
              control scheme based on Smith Predictor and developed by this Investigator and
              his collaborator. Preliminary properties of cell loss prevention and bounds
              were already established for SP-EPRCA. We plan to explore the feasibility of
              cell loss bounds in other popular ABR rate control schemes (e.g., ERICA). We
              will evaluate the performance of various implementations (via analysis and
              simulations), deriving tradeoffs between key parameters (buffer allocation,
              throughput, stability, fairness, responsiveness, etc) for various network and
              traffic scenarios. Implementation complexity will also be evaluated.

ABR
              multicast : We plan to extend the E-PRCA control to multicast connections.
              Again, starting point will be an implementation recently proposed for SP-EPRCA.
              The main focus will be cell loss prevention, which is critical here since data
              multicast applications are not protected by TCP error and loss recovery.

ABR
              connection routing: We will attack the problem of optimally routing ABR
              connections subject to rate control with cell loss bound. Cell loss bounds make
              this problem more complex than merely finding the shortest path route with
              desired fair share bandwidth. We will explore both unicast and multicast
              routing, relying on efficient heuristics for the latter. 

Applications: We
              will evaluate the benefits of ABR cell loss prevention and routing in several
              applications including TCP/IP support. We will also compare the efficiency of
              ABR vs UBR or VBR as appropriate.



