Title       : Event-Based Simulation Studies of Structural Relaxation in Amorphous Silicon and
               Silica Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9805848

Award Number: 9805848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Normand Mousseau mousseau@helios.phy.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9805848  Mousseau    The PI will investigate amorphous materials, such as
              eSi:H  and silica glass, using a MonteCarlo technique developed by  the PI. The
              activation-relaxation technique (ART) was  designed to overcome large energetic
              barriers that naturally  occur in calculations of the structure and longtime
              dynamics  of amorphous materials. Objectives of the research include:  the
              identification of microscopic structural relaxation  mechanisms in amorphous
              silicon and silica glass, the  exploration of whether a wide range of amorphous
              structures  can be obtained in simulations using ART, to classify the  type of
              structural relaxation mechanisms that can take place  in good quality networks
              of amorphous silicon, to identify  (using this classification) candidates
              associated with the  creation of defect centers responsible for the 
              Staebler-Wronski effect in e Si:H, and to further develop  the ART.  %%%  This
              research by a bright young investigator is aimed at a  better understanding of
              amorphous materials, in particular  silica glass and amorphous silicon doped
              with hydrogen. The  arrangement of atoms of both of these materials is affected
               by illumination with light. The PI will investigate this  effect using a
              promising new computational algorithm that he  has developed. This new
              technique overcomes a central  difficulty of more commonly used methods to
              study amorphous  materials. The PI's research also involves further 
              development of computational methods for calculating atomic  arrangements and
              rearrangements in amorphous materials.  ***
