Title       : Canonical Models for Mathematical Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9805544

Award Number: 9805544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151755             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank C. Hoppensteadt fchoppen@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene Izhikevich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hoppensteadt  9805544       The investigators introduce a novel methodology for
              use in  mathematical neuroscience: Rather than studying a single model of  a
              particular brain structure, they consider the family of all its  models.  They
              use invariant manifold, bifurcation, and singular  perturbation theories to
              prove that under certain natural  conditions there is a continuous,
              noninvertible change of  variables that converts every member of the family
              into a  canonical model.  They derive canonical models for weakly  connected
              networks of excitable, oscillatory and bursting  neurons, arising in studies of
              the thalamus, hippocampus and  neocortex.       Exact equations are rarely
              known to describe biological  systems.  As a result, various people can use
              various models for  the same biological system, but obtain contradictory
              results.  A  reasonable way to resolve this is to study ALL possible models of 
              the same biological system at once.  The investigators develop and  use
              state-of-the-art methodologies in system science to show that  if a biological
              system is near a critical regime, then all its  models are related to a simpler
              one, called a canonical model.  An  advantage of this approach is that the
              plausibility of the  canonical model rests only on the plausibility of the
              critical  regime, but not on the choice of equations describing details of  the
              biological system.  This approach enables them to derive  simple but exact
              models for such complex brain structures as the  thalamus, hippocampus and
              neocortex operating near a critical  regime, such as the onset of rhythmic
              activity.  These models are  used to study attention, memorization and
              navigation in behaving  animals.  In addition, these studies may shed light on 
              neurocomputational properties of these brain structures with  possible
              applications to neuroengineering and computer design.
