Title       : Post-Doctoral Experimental Research for the Evaluation of Multithreaded
               Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a9805216

Award Number: 9805216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna M. Kavi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9192,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9805216  Kavi, Krishna M.  University of Alabama in Huntsville    CISE
              Postdoctoral Experimental Research for the   Evaluation of Multithreaded
              Architectures    Recent trends in technology have resulted in a widening of the
              performance gap between memory and processors. Multithreading has been touted
              as the solution to minimize the loss of CPU cycles due to memory latency by
              executing several instruction streams simultaneously. Over the past several
              years, the PI has been investigating multithreaded architectures, both based on
              dataflow paradigm and hybrid dataflow-control flow paradigms. This research led
              to the introduction of cache memories for dataflow architectures, coherent
              I-structure cache memories, and staggered allocation of DOACROSS loops for
              multithreaded architectures. The post-doctoral researcher will extend the work
              on trace generation tools to generate sufficiently large instruction traces for
              dataflow and hybrid architectures. Whenever possible, traces for conventional
              architectures will be converted into traces for dataflow and multithreaded
              systems. This will aid the PI's research significantly in evaluating the
              applicability of the dataflow/hybrid models and new architectural innovations
              such as scheduled dataflow, and speculatively preloading thread contexts for a
              wider range of programming models and applications. The successful completion
              of the research will have a broader impact on computer architecture research by
              facilitating the generation of large traces for innovative architectures
              without the need for compilers and runtime systems for experimentally
              evaluating the new architectures, and at the same time help to broaden the
              Postdoctoral Associate.
