Title       : POWRE: Effects of El Nino-Southern Oscillation Events on Food Production
               Instability in Indonesia: Developing Modelsfor Rice and Shrimp
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9805778

Award Number: 9805778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosamond L. Naylor roz@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1320,1592,5927,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study aims to measure the impact of El Nino-Southern Oscillation
              (ENSO)-related climate variation on the stability of food production in the
              developing world.  The research will focus specifically on rice and shrimp
              production in Indonesia; rice is the major staple crop for the country's 200
              million people, and shrimp is becoming a leading food export commodity. 
              Indonesia is a particularly interesting country to study because it is
              consistently and dramatically affected by ENSO events.  The eighteen- month
              research plan consists of two separate components.  Research in the first year
              will be devoted primarily to developing the analytical and methodological tools
              to work with ENSO climate models and to integrate output from these models into
              economic models of food production and price variability.   The remaining six
              months of funding will be used as seed money to explore the application of the
              ENSO climate-production variability framework of analysis developed for rice on
              the aquaculture shrimp sector in Indonesia.  Few published data or studies
              exist on acquaculture shrimp production and its vulnerability to climate
              variability in Indonesia; however, preliminary field work by the investigator
              and her colleagues indicate that extreme precipitation fluctuations may be a
              leading cause of virus outbreaks in the sector that have substantially reduced
              the production potential of the industry as a whole.  Acquiring the analytical
              and methodological skills to model the effects of short-run climate
              fluctuations on food production instability is important for future research on
              the economic and biological viability of intensive food crop systems, food
              security, and agriculture/aquaculture policies related to trade, storage, and
              breeding priorities in developing countries.  The research will focus mainly on
              developing the techniques for translating data on ENSO-related climate
              fluctuations into data that are relevant for economic and policy analyses in
              Indonesia; such techniques are also beginning to be developed for other regions
              of the developing world, such as Zimbabwe and the Guinea Coast.  By studying
              climate-production variability linkages in two markedly different crop
              systems-rice and shrimp-the goal is to develop a framework of analysis that can
              be used for a wide diversity of crops and aquaculture species in the region,
              such as maize, soybeans, oil palm, milk fish, and tilapia.  Understanding the
              vulnerability of different systems to climate fluctuations will be useful in
              directing agriculture/aquaculture research priorities in the future, for
              assessing future land-use changes related to agriculture and aquaculture, and
              for projecting income instability at the national, regional, and household
              levels.  By developing the analytical tools mentioned above, this award will
              enable the investigator to study a new domain of science that is becoming
              increasingly important in the fields of agricultural and environmental
              economics.  From a professional perspective, the development of knowledge and
              modeling skills in this area will enhance the investigator's prospects for
              promotion and eligibility for a tenure-track position in academia.  Finally,
              the models and insights developed during the grant period will be used as a
              teaching tool in agricultural and environmental courses at Stanford University.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
