Title       : Laminations and Foliations Conference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9805524

Award Number: 9805524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Milnor jack@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yair N. Minsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mikhail Lyubich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The concepts of lamination and foliation have recently been the focus of much
              attention. They have been incorporated into the renormalization theory of
              one-dimensional dynamical systems, played a crucial role in the foundations of
              higher dimensional holomorphic dynamics, enabled advances in long-standing
              problems in hyperbolic geometry, witnessed the solution of classical problems
              on analytic differential equations, and led to new concepts in  topology. The
              conference will bring together people looking at laminations and foliations
              from different points of view in the hope that it will create fruitful
              interactions between intimately related but somewhat separated fields.     
              Laminations and foliations play a fundamental role in the theory of dynamical
              systems, which is the general study of evolution of systems that change with
              time. Dynamical systems theory emerged, historically, in celestial mechanics,
              and has since found numerous further applications everywhere: in statistical
              mechanics, biology, chemistry, economics, and so on. It has deep implications
              for any aspect of science involving the time-evolution of complex systems.  The
              study of foliations is concerned with the way that a large system can be broken
              up into a family of smaller systems, like layers of dough in a pastry.  For 
              example, a physical system in which energy is conserved separates into thin
              layers, one for each energy level. The ability to analyze a system in this way
              is of crucial importance, and leads to deep connections between the dynamics
              and phenomena in other important subfields of mathematics, in particular, in
              geometry and topology. The broadly interdisciplinary nature of the subject was
              one of the main motivations for this conference.  With this in mind, the
              conference will be strongly directed towards the interests of graduate students
              and young researchers, who will have a chance to see a broader perspective of
              mathematics in its active development.  To support this educational goal, the
              conference will include , in addition to the customary research lectures, a
              number of introductory "mini-courses" which will provide participants with a
              more comprehensive outlook on different aspects of the field.
