Title       : Biogenic Sources of Atmospheric Acetone and Other Carbonyls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a9805191

Award Number: 9805191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Ray Fall fall@cires.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  This proposal addresses biosphere-atmosphere exchange of acetone, a volatile
              organic compound (VOC) that enters the Earth's atmosphere and is important in
              odd hydrogen radical (HOx) and background ozone formation in the upper
              troposphere and lower stratosphere. Acetone photochemistry also results in the
              formation of peroxyacetylnitrate, with resultant sequestering and transport of
              odd nitrogen (NOx) equivalents. While it is clear that these acetone-related
              processes affect the oxidative capacity of the atmosphere, there are
              significant uncertainties in the global acetone budget, estimated as 40-60 Tg
              yr-1, especially in the rates of biogenic acetone emission and the mechanisms
              of biogenic acetone formation.
    The major goal of the proposed work is to
              establish the underlying mechanisms of formation of acetone and methyl ethyl
              ketone in plant tissues, and to characterize the controls over their release
              from plant surfaces. We also want to determine if certain crops have been
              overlooked as major sources of carbonyl emissions. The project will include
              both laboratory experiments and field verification via examination of data sets
              from collaborative field experiments organized by scientists at the National
              Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR).  Planned laboratory, greenhouse and
              field experiments should produce much-needed data sets on biogenic carbonyl
              fluxes from vegetation, and should contribute to the development of an
              integrated plant VOC emission model to explain the partitioning of plant carbon
              into volatiles. This modeling could be significant, because plants often emit
              1-8% of fixed CO2 as VOCs, and an important aspect of biosphere-atmosphere
              exchange is to understand why and how plants commit resources to volatile
              secondary compound production. Such information is vital if we are to predict
              changes that will occur in the Earth's atmosphere as the result of human
              impacts of the biosphere.


