Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The Oxidation of Kerogen During Weathering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9805517

Award Number: 9805517
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66898              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy I. Eglinton teglinton@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805517
Eglinton

The geochemical carbon cycle exerts a major influence on
              the evolution of Earth's atmosphere (Po2, Pco2) over geologic time scales.  As
              part of this cycle, oxidation of sedimentary organic matter [SOM] comprises
              more than 80% of the total oxygen consumption required to maintain an equable
              Po2.  However, little prior effort has been made to examine the pathways,
              efficiency or rates of SOM oxidation, and thus an entire link in the
              geochemical carbon cycle remains poorly defined.  Oxidation of organic matter
              to carbon dioxide is assumed to be the overall, long-term weathering process,
              with the common expression CH2O +O2>CO2+H2O implying a single-step reaction
              acting on an homogeneous material.  The reality is that SOM is complex and
              heterogeneous, so that oxidation likely proceeds through an as yet undefined
              series of intermediate products and sequential oxidation reactions prior to
              conversion to inorganic carbon.  Thus, to better understand the process of SOM
              oxidation, detailed characterization of these structures and compositions
              obtained at various stages of SOM oxidation is required.

This study proposes
              to investigate the pathways, rates and efficiency of the chemical weathering of
              organic matter contained in black shales by characterizing uptake of oxygen and
              other oxidation/weathering reactions, which alter the molecular structure of
              SOM.  Samples have already been collected along weathering profiles developed
              on organic carbon-rich rocks.  The selected formations (Green River, Woodford,
              New Albany, and Monterey) represent specific end-members of mineralogy and
              organic matter type.  Thus, the results of this study will both reveal the
              sequence of progressively weathered SOM, and indicate the role that lithology
              and organic matter type may play in defining this sequence.   The rate of SOM
              weathering will be constrained by comparing pyrite loss between profiles and by
              examining profiles of known age.  Preliminary results from six shale profiles
              indicate between 70-90% loss of total organic carbon across a distance of 3-5 m
              during weathering.  A small but significant mass of relict organic matter
              remains at the surface of each profile, implying incomplete SOM
              remineralization efficiency.  Further analyses of the weathering profiles will
              determine elemental, isotopic and petrographic composition of the organic
              matter, along with shale mineralogy and physical data such as grain size and
              permeability.  Organic geochemical analytical tools, specifically nuclear
              magnetic resonance, infrared spectroscopy, and flash pyrolysis in tandem with
              gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, will be used to decipher molecular level
              structural characteristics such as carbon skeleton types and oxygen-containing
              functionality.  14C age dating will be used to distinguish samples contaminated
              by modern soil carbon.

By addressing the rate, efficiency and pathways of
              SOM weathering and supply of relict (radiocarbon dead) organic matter to
              contemporary organic carbon reservoirs (soils, lacustrine and/or marine
              sediments), this study will have a valuable impact on several disciplines of
              the Earth sciences including chemical oceanography, surficial geochemistry,
              geochemical cycle modeling, environmental geochemistry, and Quaternary geology.
               The collaborative nature of the project and the range of analytical tools,
              chemical techniques and numerical methods employed will generate a solid
              foundation of experience and knowledge for graduate students and undergraduates
              involved in this project.  This study of SOM weathering (including development
              of the project and preparation of this proposal) comprises a crucial part of
              the Ph.D. thesis research for a graduate student, Steven Petsch, and the
              inclusion of undergraduates in the research will enhance both their education
              and the research.

