Title       : Collaborative Research: Chemical Diversity in Crustal Magma Chambers: Synthesis
               of Plutonic and Volcanic Insights
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2000      
File        : a9805154

Award Number: 9805154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115095             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Eichelberger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jessica F. Larsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9805154
Eichelberger/Faust
The primary goal of this collaborative research
              between Franklin & Marshall College and the University of Alaska, Fairbanks is
              to understand processes in composite magma chambers that lead to compositional
              stratification, magmatic enclaves, and hybridization. The approach aims to
              reconcile the apparently conflicting insights from plutonic studies of magma
              chamber processes with insights from the study of active volcanic systems.
              Specific links will be established between comparable processes in plutonic and
              volcanic systems, for example, understanding the formation and fate of magmatic
              enclaves. The research will involve field, petrologic and geochemical studies
              of magmatic complexes where contemporaneous plutonic and volcanic rocks occur:
              (1) a Silurian complex on Vinalhaven, Maine, and (2) a Miocene complex on
              Unalaska Island, Alaska.  Analytical work will also be conducted on composite
              late Holocene volcanic systems, where the pristine character of glasses in
              enclaves, host lavas, and melt inclusions can be exploited to trace melt
              histories during magmatic encounters. There are two broader problems upon which
              this work bears. One is the issue of the triggering of eruptions and subsequent
              eruptive behavior (explosive vs. effusive) - How does input influence output? 
              The second is a part of the classic problem of igneous petrogenesis - Are the
              causes of chemical heterogeneity in large-volume eruption products and in
              plutons to be sought in in-situ differentiation in the source or host chamber,
              or in deeper, separate magma sources?

