Title       : Efficient Numerical Methods for Unsteady Viscous Incompressible Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1998      
File        : a9805621

Award Number: 9805621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Guo Liu jliu@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9215,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9805621       EFFICIENT NUMERICAL METHODS FOR VISCOUS INCOMPRESSIBLE FLOWS  
                                        Jian-Guo Liu                            Project
              Summary      This project will focus on continuing the development of
              efficient,  accurate, high order finite difference and finite element methods
              for  the unsteady viscous incompressible Navier-Stokes equations (NSE),  with
              emphasis on finding efficient time stepping procedures and new  formulations of
              the equations better suited to numerical computation.  Some practical aspects
              of the methods, including extensions to flows  in general 2D and 3D domains,
              and applications to more challenging  physical problems, will be investigated. 
              In the vorticity  formulation, a new time-stepping procedure is used for high
              Reynolds  number flows.  For such flows the convection and viscous terms are 
              treated explicitly. The stream function, and hence the velocity, is  then
              evaluated from the vorticity via the kinematic equation.  The key  to the
              efficiency of the new time-stepping procedure is that the value  of the
              vorticity on the boundary is obtained explicitly from the steam  function
              without any iteration.  This eliminates some traditional  difficulties
              associated with the vorticity formulation.  More akin to  the primitive
              variable formulation, the investigator is using a new  formulation of the NSE
              in the impulse density variable which differs  from the velocity by a gauge
              transformation. The gauge freedom enables  one to assign simple and specific
              boundary conditions for both the  impulse and gauge fields, thus eliminating
              some traditional  difficulties such as the pressure boundary condition.     
              This new class of efficient numerical methods has already been used  to study
              such real world problems as the investigation of the  mechanism of drag
              reduction on airfoils at high velocities, as well as  the development of severe
              storms in tropical latitudes.  These  methods provide an important tool that
              allow scientists and engineers  to study related  fluid problems in
              manufacturing and industry that  were previous unsolvable with currently
              available numerical  techniques.  They represent a significant step forward in
              the  efficient computation of solutions to such problems, and are naturally 
              suited for implementation on high performance massively parallel  computer
              architectures.
