Title       : Researching Scaling and Accountability of On-Line Science Curriculum for Maveric
               and Distributed Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2000  
File        : a9805472

Award Number: 9805472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1125338            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy B. Songer songer@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Perry Samson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 8888,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The scope of work presented here is one attempt to work with existing
              structures (the One Sky, Many Voices program, the Center for Learning
              Technologies in Urban Schools) to strengthen research and understanding of the
              value and challenges of reform programs such as ours, as we strive towards
              widespread adoption of our programs by the most diverse audiences possible
              through scaling.    One Sky, Many Voices is one year old synergy of educators,
              atmospheric scientists, software developers, interface designers, and
              curriculum designers who have developed and researched one model of emerging
              and reliable technology-rich, inquiry-based programs for a very wide assortment
              of learners, including both in and out of traditional schooling.  Our first
              goal is extensive investigations of the relationships, supports, and models of
              curriculum adoption necessary for widespread adoption of our programs.  In this
              proposal, we outline a plan for design-experiment research which would allow us
              to study and evaluate models for curriculum adoption, teacher  professional
              development, and technological tools which change with scaling.  To implement
              widespread adoption, we aim to contrast two effective means of scaling, the
              Maverick and Distributed models, to be better understand best means of reaching
              many learning communities.  We propose to use the cadre of returning teachers,
              students and schools who are regular subscribers to our programs (Mavericks),
              and the Detroit and Chicago Public Schools, through the Center for Learning
              Technologies in Urban Schools, (Distributed) to scale our work and study
              scaling research.    Our second goal is to directly confront accountability. 
              While programs such as ours are sometimes characterized as "successful", the
              systemic characterizations of "success" in programs such as ours is far from
              understood.  Continually, schools and others are asked for better definitions
              of the value of this work, and better justification for the widespread adoption
              of expensive and difficult techn ology-rich, inquiry-based programs.  To
              confront accountability, we wish to use our many diverse sites, our experience
              developing accountability measures, and new technological opportunities to
              design and implement a new system which will provide a range of customized
              accountability measures which work with and expand ideas of accountability
              beyond standardized testing.  In combining scaling rersearch on better
              accountability, we hope to simultaneously achieve adoption of our program by
              the widest possible audiences, as we provide a wider range of accountability
              measures demanded by the pressures on today's schools.
