Title       : Smoothing and Congestion Control Algorithms for Stored Continuous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9805185

Award Number: 9805185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261987             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Kurose kurose@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald F. Towsley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Future high-speed computer networks are projected to carry a dizzying array of
              networked multimedia applications including digital libraries, video and image
              servers, distance learning and collaboration, networked virtual environments,
              and entertainment.  A common thread among these applications is the so-called
              "continuous" nature of their data.   In continuous media (CM) data, strict
              timing relationships exist, which define the schedule by which CM data must be
              rendered (e.g., a video displayed or audio played out).  In a network setting,
              the playout timing constraints, the rate variability of specific CM such as
              variable bit rate (VBR) video, the possibility of packet loss and delay within
              the network, and the desire to use network resources efficiently together
              combine to make the transport of CM data an exceptionally challenging
              problem.

An important class of continuous media is stored continuous media. 
              This differs from live continuous media in several ways.  First, CM traffic
              characteristics are typically known ahead of time.  Second, CM data is often
              characterized by a more relaxed requirement as to when playout can begin. Last,
              unlike live CM data, stored CM data does not provide the opportunity for
              changing the encoding rate in response to network congestion.  In this proposal
              principal investigators (PIs) outline research aimed at the design and
              evaluation of algorithms and network transport protocols for supporting stored
              continuous media applications.  These algorithms and protocols accommodate and
              exploit the unique features of stored CM (e.g., known traffic characteristics
              and the ability to transmit data further in advance of its playout time, the
              time-sensitive nature of CM playout).

The proposed research divides broadly
              into two areas:

1) Smoothing of stored continuous media.  The PIs propose to
              develop and evaluate work-ahead smoothing algorithms for transmitting stored
              video to a client subject to client and network buffering constraints.  The
              goal is to develop algorithms that compute CM transmission schedules that
              require a minimal use of network resources (e.g., have the smallest peak rate
              requirement, the smallest bandwidth requirement variability, and the smallest
              buffering requirements).

 2) Congestion control for stored continuous media.
              The PIs propose to develop and evaluate rate control algorithms that adaptively
              vary the transmission rate of a stored CM source in response to congestion
              within the network.   Of particular interest are the resulting performance
              tradeoffs among interfering CM and non-CM connections.

The proposed research
              has a particular emphasis on performance -- evaluating and understanding
              performance in a wide variety of settings, as well as formally establishing
              properties (e.g., optimality) of specific approaches.  Other important themes
              in the proposed work include the importance of supporting client interactivity
              (e.g., developing approaches with small startup delays, examining the tradeoff
              between startup delay and resource requirements), the development of stored CM
              algorithms and protocols for a variety network settings (e.g., different
              network service models, as well as in unicast and multicast scenarios), and the
              complementary mix of theory and experimentation embodied in the proposed
              research.

