Title       : POWRE: Construction of an Infrared Spectroscopic Database for Direct Comparison
               with Astronomical Observations of Stardust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2001   
File        : a9805924

Award Number: 9805924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74061              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Hofmeister hofmeist@levee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1205,1215,1592,5946,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hofmeister
AST-9805924

Information on circumstellar dust particles pertains
              to basic questions of origin and process in the galaxy.  A first order problem
              is identification of "stardust" through comparison of astronomical infrared
              (IR) spectra to laboratory data on solids.  Although the concept is
              straightforward, implementation is problematic.  For example, dust features in
              the IR spectra of cold, carbon stars have been interpreted as
              hexagonal-rhombohedral SiC.  This result disagrees with identification of
              presolar SiC grains in meteorites as exclusively the cubic polymorph.  The
              discrepancy is fundamental because such stars are major dust producers.  The
              comparison of data  from thin film,  or raw dispersion spectra, for <O.1 micron
              grains to the data of carbon star spectra shows that circumstellar SiC is
              cubic, just as it is in meteorites.  Correct identification is crucial as
              presolar silicates have not yet been found in meteorites.  A matrix-free IR
              database will be constructed that can be directly compared with astronomical
              dust features, not only from distant stars, but also from near-by objects such
              as comets.  The thin film method provides randomly orientated particles, and
              hence "average" extinction coefficients, yet is quantitative.  Absorption data
              will be collected from the far-IR to the visible wavelengths, with emphasis on
              spectral regions frequently used in astronomy, remote sensing, and on materials
              expected to be fairly abundant in stardust. 
Determination of film thickness
              through interference fringes will yield the mass dependence of peak heights and
              indicate crystal sizes appropriate for bulk properties.  Over 100 complete thin
              film spectra will be collected from various planetary materials (e.g.,
              silicates, refractory substances, and phases found in meteorites and
              interplanetary dust particles).  Materials will be selected by consulting other
              scientists in the field.  The data will then be compared to astronomical
              spectra of stardust.

Of equal importance to the database is the
              understanding the physical processes producing absorption vs. scattering
              features in IR spectra.  Mie scattering theory will be modified to account for
              the presence of bulk absorption processes, and to test the model through
              comparison with reflection, thin film, and dispersion data from selected phases
              (e.g., SiC, SiO2, olivine and gamet).  The size of grains in the dispersions
              will be limited to sizes appropriate for surface effects, <0.05 micron.  The
              revised theory should allow calculation of spectra with variable amounts of
              scattering and absorption components from laboratory absorption data.  The
              results of the project will be useful in the fields of astronomy, planetary
              science, and remote sensing.  It will also be important to mineralogy, in that
              physical properties such as ordering or concentrations of hydrous species are
              currently extracted from dispersion spectra without accounting for the
              component of scattering inevitably present and without considering that
              particles with sizes more than three times larger than the skin depth can
              falsify peak profiles.

This research effort is a new, interdisciplinary
              direction involving an international collaboration.  Strong links with active
              research areas in the department will help to rebuild a graduate
              program.

The Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate of
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Division of International Programs
              are providing the funds for this award.
***

