Title       : High Order Number Schemes for Multi-Dimensional Systems of Conservation Laws and
               Conservative Schemes for MultiphaseFluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1998        
File        : a9805546

Award Number: 9805546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77252              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xu-Dong Liu xliu@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9215,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9805546  Xu-Dong Liu    This project is concerned with several new numerical
              methods for  solving multidimensional systems of conservation laws, including a
              new  fully conservative scheme for multi-phase fluid calculations. The first 
              contribution of this project is the extension of Friedrich's positivity 
              principle from multi-dimensional symmetric linear systems to systems of 
              conservation laws, which has become one of the guidelines for designing 
              numerical methods. A family of positive schemes is constructed.  Positive
              schemes are very robust, simple and of low cost. Many  numerical experiments
              have shown that positive schemes are among the  best 2nd order accurate high
              resolution methods. This is also the first  work of this type which contains
              theoretical results for scheme design  in multi-dimensional hyperbolic systems.
              The second contribution of  this project is the new Convex
              Essential-Non-Oscillatory (CENO) schemes  for multi-dimensional hyperbolic
              systems. The scheme can be implemented  in component-wise fashion. Therefore
              its apparent advantages are: (1)  No complete set of eigenvectors is needed and
              hence weakly hyperbolic  systems can be solved. (2) Component-wise limiting is
              twice as fast as  field-by-field limiting in each space dimension, which makes
              Convex ENO  one of the fastest existing schemes. (3) The component-wise version
              of  the scheme is simple to program. In addition, (4) the Convex ENO scheme  is
              very robust.  The third contribution of this project is the  introduction of a
              fully conservative method for multi-phase flow  problems. This new idea enables
              us to avoid the spurious oscillations  near material interfaces common to all
              other conservative schemes. This  is done through the addition of a general
              equation of state.  The new  scheme works essentially for mixture of any fluids
              such as gamma-law  gas, water and JWL (explosive material). The new idea works
              in any  space dimension and is scheme-independent, which means it should apply 
              to a typical users' existi ng code.  Preliminary numerical experiments  show
              that this scheme is very promising.    This project is aimed at solving real
              world problems and is intended to  have a significant impact on semiconductor
              device modeling, underwater  and solid explosives modeling, computational fluid
              dynamics,  magneto-hydrodynamics, and many other applications, which are all a 
              part of high-performance computing. The principal goals are: (1) to  design and
              improve numerical methods for more efficiency, simplicity,  and robustness; (2)
              to improve computer simulation of multi-phase  fluids. The methods reported in
              this project are a step towards this  goal.
