Title       : Molecular Probes of Cation-Arene Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a9805840

Award Number: 9805840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Gokel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on examining the role of the interactions between   alkali
              metal cations being transported through synthetic ion channels,   and the arene
              functionalities that make up the ion channel.   Synthetic   channels composed
              of diaza-18-crown-6 subunits connected by spacers of   various lengths will be
              synthesized to define the minimum length needed   to function as an ion
              channel.  Different arenes will be attached to the   channel opening, and by
              synthetic modification of the spacers,    incorporated into the channel
              interiors to elucidate the effect of   arene-cation interactions on sodium and
              potassium ion transport within   the channel.   Graduate and undergraduates
              students involved in the   research will be introduced to modeling an
              important, natural process by   means of model compounds and synthetically
              tailoring these compounds to   examine specific interactions involved in the
              process.     With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program 
               supports the research and educational activities of Dr. George Gokel of   the
              Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology at the Washington   University
              School of Medicine.  Dr Gokel will focus his research on the   synthesis of
              macromolecular systems composed of  a number of equivalent   cyclic subunits
              connected by molecular spacers that, in toto, are   referred to as ion
              channels.   These molecular systems, which mimic   naturally occuring
              biological systems, will be synthetically modified to   explore a specific
              interaction that affects the movement of sodium and   potassium ions through
              the channel.   Dr. Gokel's educational activities   will involve training
              graduate and undergraduate students in the   syntheses of these model systems,
              and their characterization as ion   conductors.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
