Title       : Generation of Overpressures, Fluid Migration, Mass Transport and Diagenesis
               Associated with Deformation and Dissolution of Allochthonous Salt Sheets in the
               Deep Water Gulf of Mx..
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a9805459

Award Number: 9805459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Nunn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Hanor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9805459
Nunn

Large-scale vertical and lateral migration of salt bodies in
              the Gulf of Mexico sedimentary basin has played an important role in the
              stratigraphic, structural, and hydrogeologic evolution of this portion of the
              earth's crust.  We propose to extend our previous work in older onshore
              sediments out into the deep water Gulf, where active salt deformation, fluid
              flow, and heat and solute transport makes it an ideal area to test hypotheses
              regarding coupling between fluid flow, mass transfer, diagenesis, and tectonic
              processes.

We will carry out a three-year study of fluid flow and chemical
              reaction on the tens of kilometer minibasin scale.  Numerical modeling will be
              used to investigate the generation of overpressure and compaction-driven flow,
              coupled density-driven and compaction driven flow, over pressuring and episodic
              fluid flow within ductile shearing zones, and physical controls on salt
              dissolution and pore water salinity on the minibasin scale.  Integrated into
              this work will be field-documented spatial variations in formation water and
              sediment properties derived from wireline logs and calculations of
              sediment-fluid diagenetic reactions in systems of widely varying
              salinity.

While our studies will be focused on the Gulf Basin, the results
              will be broadly applicable to any sedimentary basin containing salt.  Study of
              this currently active basin will provide important clues to the evolution of
              basins now tectonically inactive or which have been largely destroyed through
              major tectonic processes.

