Title       : STTR Phase II: Polarization-Independent Liquid-Crystal Fabry-Perot Tunable
               Filter for Wavelength-Division Multiplexing Network Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9805147

Award Number: 9805147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349530             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristina M. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Watson R. Henderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KAJ LLC
	      7217 Coyote Trail
	      Longmont, CO  80503    303/772-2665

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II project aims to  develop a
              polarization insensitive liquid-crystal Fabry-Perot (LC-FP) optical 
              demultiplexer for wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM) communication systems.
               LC-FP filters have significant advantages over current technology due to its
              large tuning range, high finesse and low-voltage operations, which can lead to
              high performance and lost-cost.  However, because this modulation is based on
              the optical anisotropy, only the extra-ordinary  wave can be modulated in the
              FP resonator.  This results in a polarization sensitive filter that greatly
              reduces its "field applications" in the WDM networks.  The Phase I work
              proposed a polarization insensitive filter by use of polarization optics to
              manipulate the arbitrary polarization light into the FP cavity.  The results of
              Phase I proved this concept by successfully demonstrating a LC-FP tunable
              filter operating on unpolarized light at 1.55 llm  wavelength with a free
              spectral range (FSR) of 4 nm and a full-width-half-maximum of 0.5 nm. The
              purpose of Phase II is twofold:  (1) Expand the FSR from 4 nm to 38 nm to make
              the device useful in WDM applications using Erbium doped amplifiers; and (2)
              Develop a procedure to mass-produce this WDM demultiplexer with consistently
              high performance at low-cost. Successful completion of this STTR program can
              resolve the polarization-sensitive drawback of the LC-FP filter and widen its
              application in WDM networks.
     The primary applications of this filter are
              the cable TV broadcasting, fiber-in-the-loop WDM networks, long distance
              telecommunication, and future all-optical networks. It can also be used in
              spectroscopic analysis and fiber-based environmental sensor applications.

  
                    

