Title       : Performance Analysis of Wavelength Routed Wide Area Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9805016

Award Number: 9805016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255384             (Estimated)
Investigator: George N. Rouskas rouskas@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry G. Perros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Wavelength routed wide area networks will be an integral part of the future of 
              all-optical network infrastructures.  It is envisioned that these networks will
              act as the backbone that provides the interconnection for local area lightwave
              sub-networks attached to them.  A significant amount of research effort has
              been devoted to the design and evaluation of wavelength routed architectures in
              recent years.  However, the deployment of an infrastructure that will enable
              large scale interconnection of optical networks raises a number of fundamental
              and challenging problems that require novel and innovative solutions.  The
              research plan outlined in this proposal identifies a number of significant but
              open problems arising in wavelength routed environments, and presents a
              comprehensive and novel approach to address them.  The outcome of the proposed
              research will be an analytical framework that will permit the researchers  to
              efficiently compute call blocking probabilities in wavelength routed networks,
              evaluate wavelength assignment policies and converter placement strategies,
              investigate routing algorithms for arbitrary network topologies, and study the
              performance of multicast calls.  One of the main objectives of the  work is to
              identify potential fairness problems that may arise in such an environment, and
              to employ a combination of routing , converter placement, and wavelength
              assignment strategies to alleviate these problems and ensure fair treatment for
              all calls.
