Title       : POWRE: Locomotor Transition in Fossile Sirenia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a9805793

Award Number: 9805793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emily A. Buchholtz ebuchholtz@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      106 Central Street
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    781/283-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805793
Buchholtz

Soon after the origin of the Order Sirenia in the Eocene,
              ancestral members of the group began the transition from terrestrial to
              obligate aquatic habits.  Among functional systems transformed during the
              transition was locomotion.  Ancestral members were terrestrial quadrupeds with
              paraxial oscillatory movements of the limbs; living descendants are aquatic
              axial oscillators.  The goals of this project are:
1) to document the
              locomotor style of individual transitional fossil taxa, 
2) to reconstruct the
              sequence of locomotor styles in Sirenia based on current understanding of the
              phylogenetic history of the group, and 
3) to compare the trajectory of the
              sirenian transition with that of an independent transition to axial undulation
              in the Order Cetacea, the subject of previous analysis.

Prediction of
              locomotor style will be based on analysis of the vertebral column.  Regional
              variation of the column is a powerful but underutilized tool for analysis of
              segmental neural supply, body regionalization, and postcranial mobility. 
              Paleoneorological methods developed during a study of marine Carnivora, and
              functional/morphological methods developed in the study of cetacean locomotor
              style will be used, adapted, and augmented for this project.  These techniques
              have been useful in the determination of size and innervation territory of
              limbs, the presence/absence of a fluke and peduncle, the degree of cervical
              shortening, the regions of prefluke stabilization, and the extent of anatomical
              (and functional) deviation from ancestral (terrestrial) patterns of vertebral
              regionalization.

Specimens of fossil Sirenia with significant postcranial
              material have been identified.  The necessity of examination of original
              specimens and the distribution of their repositories require that the principal
              investigator travel for data collection, but analysis of data can occur at her
              home institution.

Data analysis will include determination of fossil
              swimming styles and placement of those styles in phylogenetic context.  It will
              also include a comparison of the inferred Sirenian transition with that already
              predicted for Cetacea.  In cetacean history, axial undulation of the vertebral
              column preceded limb loss, and first served to propel enlarged hind feet that
              served as the propulsive surface.  Hind limbs were progressively reduced in
              size after they were replaced by the wide torso, and finally by the fluke as
              the dominant propulsive surface.  Origin of a peduncle postdated the fluke, and
              was accompanied first by elongation and finally by the secondary stabilization
              of the lumbos.

The comparison of two independent and broadly contemporary
              terrestrial/aquatic transitions from terrestrial paraxial to aquatic axial
              locomotion in taxa of different ancestry and lifestyle offers a test case for
              an examination of sequence and constraint in evolutionary transitions.

