Title       : Ceramic Interaction Spheres on the Pacific Coast of Guatemala: Neutron
               Activation Analysis of Pottery from the Santa Rosa Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9805176

Award Number: 9805176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7404               (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura J. Kosakowsky LKosakowsky@anthro.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francisco G. Estrada-Belli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Laura Kosakowsky and Francisco
              Belli will submit pot sherd samples from Middle American sites to Dr. Michael
              Glascock at the University of Missouri nuclear reactor for neutron activation
              analysis. He will provide trace element profiles which will allow determination
              of raw material similarity and the likely number of sources involved. This
              approach  permits one to determine whether pottery, which on the basis of shape
              and decoration appears similar, was in fact produced in a limited number of
              locations, or whether it was widely manufactured Widespread local production
              suggests a relatively egalitarian form of social organization in which
              individual areas are independent and self sufficient. Centralized production on
              the other hand indicates extensive controlled trade and often a form of more
              highly organized and hierarchical social and political organization.  Although
              the Mayans and Aztecs are the best known prehistoric Middle American
              civilizations, archaeologists have learned that similar entities existed in
              other portions of this region. Particular attention has been focused on the
              Pacific coast of Guatemala because it appears that a repeating cycle of state
              rise and fall occurred. The areas extent of these entities however is a subject
              of lively debate. Some researchers, on the basis of ceramic data have argued
              that their spatial scale is relatively limited. Others, such as Drs. Kosakowsky
              and Belli believe that trade networks were extensive and have supported this
              scenario on the basis of neutron activation analysis of a small sample of one
              pottery type. This award will permit them to expand their sample size and to
              include other kinds of ceramics. The results will provide new insight into the
              rise of complex society in Middle America and will be of interest to many
              archaeologists.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
