Title       : Microstructure: Dislocations, Creases, and Grains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9805422

Award Number: 9805422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Sethna sethna@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9805422
Sethna
This award supports research in the area of microstructure of
              materials that results from expulsion of external strain into sharp boundaries.
               This occurs at grain boundaries in crystals, at focal conic defects in smectic
              liquid crystals, at vortex lines in superconductors, and at creases in crumbled
              paper.  The PI will focus on specific projects in three areas: frustrated
              crystals, nonlinearities and dispersion, and paper crumbling.  The first
              focuses on new phases. Dislocation lines can relieve external strain, but can
              also form in response to frustration in the crystal structure.  The PI will
              introduce a term in the free energy of anisotropic, chiral crystals and aim to
              predict and characterize the resulting defect-lattice phases.  In the second
              area, the PI will study the perturbative  effects of nonlinearity and disperson
              on the continuum interactions between microcracks and observe a hitherto
              ignored term in the continuum energy.  This study is important to realistic
              simulation of interacting dislocation lines where connection between
              interactions at atomic scales to continuum elastic theory is required. The
              final area is concerned with the large scale dynamics of microstructure.  The
              PI will study a model motivated by the acoustic emission found during
              martensitic transformations and during the crumbling of paper. 
%%%
This
              talented PI will perform theoretical research aimed at a better understanding
              of the nature and formation of small scale structure that forms in association
              with defects in materials.  The research will also focus on the dynamics of
              this microstructure that is relevant to how paper crumbles and a class of
              structural transformations.  The proposed research also bears on how to include
              important information about materials at the atomic level to  describe
              correctly dynamical phenomena at intermediate and macroscopic length scales. 
              
*** 

