Title       : Collocation Methods for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9805827

Award Number: 9805827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Bialecki bbialeck@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Graeme Fairweather  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                From graeme@glenclova.Mines.EDU Sat Jun 27 16:02:38 1998  Date: Sun, 21 Jun
              1998 09:02:48 -0600 (MDT)  From: Graeme Fairweather
              <graeme@glenclova.Mines.EDU>  To: "John C. Strikwerda (MPS/DMS)"
              <jstrikwe@nsf.gov>  Cc: bbialeck@mines.edu, gfairwea@mines.edu  Subject: Re:
              NSF Proposal       Dear Dr. Strikwerda:  DMS 9805827    Bernard Bialecki and
              Graeme Fairweather       The focus of this project is on the formulation,
              theoretical analysis   and efficient implementation of orthogonal spline
              collocation (OSC)  algorithms for various partial differential equations
              arising in problems  of practical interest. Research will continue on the
              iterative  solution of OSC equations arising in second and fourth order  
              elliptic boundary value problems. Promising new methods have been  formulated
              for rather general second order linear elliptic problems, and  in a study of
              the OSC solution of nonlinear elliptic problems   the use of these methods will
              be addressed. The investigation of iterative  methods and nonlinear problems is
              expected to play an important role in the  development of OSC for nonlinear
              biharmonic and Stokes problems.   Work will  continue on Schrodinger problems
              in two space variables, in  particular, problems arising in plate vibration
              problems and nonlinear   problems. Algorithms developed for biharmonic problems
              will be used in  certain time-stepping procedures in cases where alternating
              direction  implicit methods cannot be formulated. A study of collocation
              methods   for solving partial integro-differential equations, including 
              problems with nonlocal boundary conditions, will also be undertaken.  
              Throughout this project, rigorous theoretical analysis will be combined with
              the  design and numerical testing of algorithms.    Many problems in science
              and engineering are modelled by partial  differential equations which fall into
              several distinct categories with  quite different characteristics. In this
              project, several types of  equations are considered, for example, biharmonic
              problems  which arise in  fluid dynamics and plate bending and are of
              particular interest in the  aviation industry, and Schrodinger equations  which
              model problems in quantum mechanics, underwater acoustics, plasma  physics,
              vibration problems and seismology. Some problems, such as  biharmonic problems,
              are steady state, that is, independent of time,   and investigations of these
              often provide insight into the handling of  time-dependent problems, like
              Schrodinger equations. Basic  models are  usually linear and techniques
              developed for their solution guide the  treatment of more realistic - nonlinear
              - situations.  Time dependent  problems which take into account the history of
              a process, as in   viscoeleasticity, result in partial integro-differential
              equations.   Because of the complexity of the partial differential equation
              models,  one must resort to computational techniques for their solution.  In
              this project, numerical methods called orthogonal  spline collocation methods
              will be developed for several classes of linear  and nonlinear, steady state
              and time-dependent problems of the form just  described.  These methods have
              several advantages over existing  techniques, including the ease with which
              they can be implemented on high  performance multiprocessor computers and the
              accuracy of the  approximations produced. The successful completion of this
              project will  provide efficient algorithms built on a strong theoretical
              foundation for  the solution of problems of much practical importance.
