Title       : Dissertation Research: Household Organization and Social Inequality at the
               Dionisio Point Village Site, Northwest Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9805019

Award Number: 9805019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11767              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Kintigh kintigh@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, Mr. Colin Grier will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation at
              Dionisio Point, located on Galiano Island in British Columbia. The site
              contains five large prehistoric house depressions and test excavations have
              produced radiocarbon dates ranging from 2150 - 1400 BP. This, in addition to
              stylistic analysis of artifacts recovered, places the site within the Marpole
              phase of Northwest Coast prehistory. It was during this time that
              ethnographically observed patterns first appear in the archaeological record.
              Because of the availability of rich and dependable ocean and riverine
              resources, especially salmon, Northwest Coast peoples reached a level of social
              complexity and social stratification unique among hunters and gatherers. They
              inhabited large permanent villages, constructed multi-family dwellings, had
              hereditary chiefs as well as slaves and waged organized intergroup warfare. Mr.
              Grier wishes to gain insight into the processes which led to this pattern. In
              particular he plans to examine how social inequality developed. Both
              ethnographically and at Dionisio Point large carefully constructed plank
              dwellings housed multiple families. Each had their own fireplace and occupied a
              separate area within the house. At one level the large household formed a
              cohesive functioning unit and it is highly likely that individual families were
              mutually independent. However within the household each maintained a separate
              identity and Mr. Grier wishes to determine the extent to which egalitarianism
              applied on both a social and economic level. It is during the Marpole phase
              that chiefdoms emerged on the Northwest coast and the underlying goal of the
              research is to examine the relationship between emerging chiefdoms and the
              nature of interaction between smaller constituent family groups. Because
              individual family space is so well defined archaeologically within each plank
              house, the site provides and excellent situation to study this question. Mr.
              Grier will excavate broad horizontal areas within several houses and collect
              both artifacts and faunal remains. Comparison of the nature and amount of these
              materials among family units within individual houses and then between houses
              will allow him to assess relative degrees of inequality.  This research is
              important for several reasons. It will provide insight into the changing roles
              of families in society as this larger entity increases in cultural complexity. 
              It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
