Title       : Robustness of Source Coding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9805342

Award Number: 9805342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98822              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhen Zhang zzhang@csi.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Under certain circumstances such as in mobile communication, one  needs to
              transmit compressed data through a very noisy channel.  Unless a very powerful
              error control coding technique is used,  the misdecoding error probability for
              a very noisy channel is  usually high. Since the use of very powerful error
              control coding  technique will offset a large part of the gain obtained in data
               compression, this is not what we are willing to do.  On the other hand, most
              of the efficient data compression  algorithms are very sensitive to channel
              errors. The  contradiction between high decoding error probability and 
              catastrophic behavior of compression algorithms is the main  problem we need to
              resolve in the study of transmission of  compressed data through very noisy
              channels.    In this project, we are examining an alternative approach to this 
              problem.   Instead of using source codes of small block length,  or powerful
              error control coding techniques, we are developing  robust data compression
              algorithms - algorithms which are  insensitive to channel errors. We give two
              definitions of  robustness of lossless data compression - the asymptotical mean
               robustness and the asymptotical mean semi-robustness - defined  with respect
              to certain distortion measures. The most important  distortion measures we use
              are Hamming distance and the so-called  insertion-deletion distance. In this
              project, we propose    1) to study the existence of asymptotical mean robust
              lossless  data compression algorithm that is also asymptotically optimal;  2)
              to develop practical asymptotically mean robust (semi-robust)  lossless data
              compression algorithms;  3) to study various important properties of
              asymptotically mean  robust (semi-robust) lossless data compression algorithms.
