Title       : POWRE: Nonlinear Dynamics in Ultrafast Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2001       
File        : a9805888

Award Number: 9805888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74839              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah R. Bolton sarah.bolton@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9805888  Bolton    An experimental study of nonlinear laser dynamics in the
              ultrafast (10-100fs) regime is proposed.  This cross disciplinary work will
              bring together knowledge from two very active fields, ultrafast lasers and
              chaos/nonlinear dynamics.  The opportunity to pursue this work arises due to
              recent advances in both fields.  In ultrafast lasers, the development of new
              systems which are both more versatile and orders of magnitude more stable than
              previous laser systems allows precise measurements of dynamics that were not
              previously possible.  In nonlinear dynamics, recent theoretical work on systems
              with many modes allows direct comparison of experiment with theory.  The
              proposed experiments have two main goals.  First, we will apply the techniques
              of nonlinear dynamics to ultrafast lasers, a highly nonlinear system with wide
              ranging technological importance.  This new approach to understanding ultrafast
              lasers has the potential to make a substantial impact on laser development. 
              Second, we hope to contribute to the field of nonlinear dynamics by providing
              precise dynamical measurements in a previously inaccessible regime.    This
              work will be performed at Williams College, a highly selective undergraduate
              liberal arts institution with a strong tradition of undergraduate research. 
              All of the experiments proposed will be carried out with undergraduate students
              in a central role.  By participating in this research, students will receive a
              broad research training in lasers, optics and electronics, as well as in
              developing computer control for running measurements and analyzing data.  The
              small scale of the experiments allows each student to perform complete and
              meaningful projects, including experimental design, data acquisition and
              analysis, and theoretical modeling.    The PI for this project is currently in
              her third year as an assistant Professor at Williams.  With the collaboration
              of four talented undergraduates, she has built an ultrafast laser system and
              started the developme nt of a series of novel measurement techniques which
              allow full analysis of the temporal, spectral, and spatial profiles of
              ultrafast laser pulse trains.  Preliminary results obtained in the lab indicate
              that the laser system indeed provides a rich and well controlled new dynamical
              model system.  Furthermore, initial use of our measurement techniques indicates
              their likely success.  However, in order to perform complete measurements with
              the precision necessary for dynamical analysis, we require more advanced
              equipment than is currently available in our lab.    The PI is entering the
              second half of her assistant professor years, and has shown significant promise
              in the classroom and in the laboratory.  A POWRE grant will provide the
              essential equipment , supplies and time to help keep The  PI focused in her
              academic career.
