Title       : POWRE: The History of Animal Models: Diversity in the Use of Animals in
               Experimental Physiology and Experimental Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9805968

Award Number: 9805968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48415              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl A. Logan Cheryl_Logan@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1353,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Most sciences seek generality of experimental results and theory.  However, the
              phenomena of life are highly variable, and life scientists must ask whether
              experimental results obtained under controlled conditions are broadly
              applicable to other, more complex contexts.  The specific test animal used in
              biological experiments may greatly influence the generality of laboratory
              results.  This research will examine the history of the development of
              experimental animal models in research in physiology and psychology in Germany
              and America between 1880-1900.  The investigator will focus on historical
              changes in the assumptions of generality associated with the early use of test
              animals in these fields to show that, though scientists at this time sought
              generality, they also placed great emphasis on species differences that could
              limit generality.  By 1930, however, the life sciences had seen a proliferation
              of a few common animal models.  After widely used animal models were
              selectively bred for research, assumptions about species differences changed. 
              The early emphasis on diversity and on circumstances that might render results
              obtained on one species inapplicable to another was lost.  Rather, later many
              scientists simply assumed generality.  That is, even before taking
              measurements, they often presumed that test animals were models that embodied
              commonalties shared by many different species.  In the life sciences, the
              unprecedented growth of the experimental method has led to the intensive
              investigation of a very few species under highly controlled artificial
              circumstances.  With the widespread use of a few test animals, fewer scientists
              explicitly address the problem of generality.  Yet, questions about the limits
              of generality are among the most troubling issues facing contemporary
              laboratory science.  Research on the history of changes in the use of animal
              models highlights the role of test animals in framing assumptions about
              generality and diversity.  These assumptions are particularly important in
              applied research, where the significance of findings for human health and
              adjustment depends directly on the utility of results obtained from animals. 
              This research examines historically whether assumptions about generality have
              become uncritically embedded in the use of test animals and assess events that
              may have led to these circumstances.  The work, there, addresses a fundamental
              problem in the life sciences: achieving the greatest scientific generality
              possible, given the manifest diversity of life.  The investigator has conducted
              scientific research on the reproductive and territorial functions of vocal
              signals in wild songbirds for twenty years.  While that program has been a
              successful one, changes in science and in the structure of her university have
              made it difficult to maintain.  Therefore, she is changing her career emphasis,
              shifting her central focus away from scientific research on animal
              communication to instead stress interrelations between the histories of
              experimental psychology and experimental physiology.  This award will enable
              her to draw on her scientific background in zoology, physiology, and psychology
              to contribute to an understanding of fundamental issues in American science. 
              In addition, because the project links German physiology to the changes in the
              animal model tradition in America, it meets the POWRE program's goal of forging
              international links between science in the United States and other countries.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
