Title       : STTR Phase II: A Fiber-Optic Probe for In-Situ Measurement of Thin Film
               Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9805281

Award Number: 9805281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Johnson ejohnson@ion-optics.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore F. Morse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ion Optics, Inc.
	      411 Waverly Oaks Road, Suite 144
	      Waltham, MA  02154    617/788-8777

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***           9805281  Johnson                               The performance of
              virtually all modem opto-electronic devices depends critically upon the ability
              to grow multi-layered, thin-film structures whose composition and thickness is
              precisely controlled. In production-scale  deposition processes, these cannot
              now be monitored and adjusted in real time. We will overcome the problem with a
              dual-light-source, fiber-optic, thickness and composition monitor operating
              simultaneously as an interferometer (measuring growth rate) and as a
              reflectometer (measuring composition and total thickness). A major advantage of
              such an instrument is its ability to provide the data needed to make
              instantaneous composition changes during growth to compensate for the effects
              of diffusion. Diffusion is an important factor when very thin adjacent layers
              of dissimilar composition must be deposited at relatively high temperature, as
              is the case for multiple quantum well devices.                      Phase I
              will combine laser and white light sources in a single diagnostic instrument
              compatible with high-temperature processes, immune to electromagnetic noise (a
              byproduct of rf wafer heating), and free of the  requirement for precise
              optical alignment. The basic concept of the fiber-optic monitor has been
              demonstrated in rudimentary pulsed laser experiments on a silicon nitride
              reactor at Brown University; the principal investigator has successfully
              extracted real-time layer composition from white-light reflectance spectra.
              Phase I will extend this earlier work to a practical dual-source configuration
              fast and accurate enough to track thin-film growth at rates typical of advanced
              devices.                         Feedback control is key as new
              optoelecelectonic devices place greater demands on growth processes; the annual
              market for reasonably priced, easy to use thickness and composition monitors
              will be several million dollars. A         less capable version would compete
              with quartz deposition gauges, with a market  of tens of millions per year.   
              ***
