Title       : POWRE: The Strategy of Urban Life: The Transition from Rural Migrant to Urban
               Citizen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9805965

Award Number: 9805965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheleen Mahar maharca@pacific.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pacific University
	      2034 College Way
	      Forest Grove, OR  971161753    503/357-6151

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1390,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research represents the final stage of a longitudinal ethnographic study
              begun in the 1970's on an urban migrant community outside of the city of
              Oaxaca, Mexico.  Specifically, the study will test whether and how migrants'
              visions of the future developed twenty years ago has impacted upon their
              participation in various social spaces today, how they assess their lives and
              the futures of themselves and their children, and what factors account for
              these assessments.  The investigator will return to Oaxaca and these same key
              families in order to assess how, after 20 years of familial life, as well as
              major economic and social transformations with Mexico as a whole, members of
              this particular settlement and their children understand their identities and
              their social situations now that they have become members of an 'urban
              underclass.'  This project adds an important intergenerational study to the
              existing body of literature on Oaxaca, particularly concerning the factors
              which have reshaped the lives of urban poor families and which has created a
              working class fraction of what might be termed globalized citizenship.  The
              lives of women are specifically featured, as their power and resource base with
              the urban poor family is singular and central.  The study also uses, for the
              first time in this context, an elaborated practice-theoretical framework with
              which to address the subject.  They key contribution of the research is in the
              area of changing urban identity and citizenship.  These are important issues
              with respect to national cohesion, crime, urbanization, and the overall
              economic and social development of Mexico.  The PI is the only anthropologist
              in a small liberal arts university and is responsible for all the teaching in
              the discipline.  Her advancement to the rank of full professor in such an
              institution will be dependent, in part, upon whether or not she has completed a
              satisfactory body of scholarly work.  This award will enable her to complete
              and publish her research and thus considerably strengthen her research record. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
