Title       : POWRE: Effects of Cytokines on Neuroendocrine Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1998    
File        : a9805789

Award Number: 9805789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74805              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Wayne nwayne@mednet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              It has long been suggested that stress, especially chronic  stress, can alter
              the way in which our bodies normally  function.  Stress (both physiological and
              psychological)  alters various immune functions, which could potentially be  an
              important factor in linking chronic stress to a variety  of physiological
              abnormalities.  More recently, scientists  have become interested in the
              interactions between stress,  the immune system, and the brain.  There is a
              growing body  of evidence that stress can stimulate chemical secretions  from
              immune cells (these chemicals are called cytokines),  and that these cytokines
              can in turn alter specific brain  functions. This POWRE award will investigate
              the  relationship among immune, neuroendocrine and brain  function. This
              project is particularly suited  for a POWRE  award because it will allow
              exploratory work to determine  the feasibility of a new line of inquiry for Dr.
              Wayne. The  purpose of the proposed work is to investigate the effects  of
              cytokines on the function of a subset of cells from the  brain - neuroendocrine
              cells that are responsible for  secreting a hormone that controls reproductive
              behavior. An  animal model with a simple nervous system, the marine  mollusk
              Aplysia, will be used.  The rationale for using  Aplysia in the proposed
              studies is that, unlike with most  higher organisms, their neuroendocrine cells
              can be easily  identified in living tissue.  That means that we are able to 
              monitor the physiological response of these brain cells to  cytokines; we can
              measure changes in both their electrical  and secretory activities in response
              to chemicals that are  secreted by stress-activated immune cells.  Furthermore,
               marine invertebrates have a primitive immune system that is  functionally
              analogous to that of mammals, including  cytokines and stress-related hormones
              that appear to be  structurally similar to their mammalian counterparts.  The 
              objective of this proposal is to develop the reproductive  neuroendocrine cells
              of Aplysia as a  model system to  understand the effects of cytokines, and in
              particular  interleukins and neurotrophins, on membrane excitability and 
              downstream neuroendocrine cell functions by addressing the  following specific
              aims: 1) determine the effects of  interleukins and neurotrophins on
              neuroendocrine-membrane  excitability and hormone secretion, and 2) determine
              the  effects of interleukins and neurotrophins on hormone mRNA  levels and
              hormone biosynthesis in Aplysia neuroendocrine  cells.
