Title       : An Integrated Quantitative and Qualitative Life Cycle Cost Assessment Technology
               for Cost Benefit Evaluation of Bridge Deterioration, Renewal, and
               Rehabilitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9805634

Award Number: 9805634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cornelia E. Demers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This database of bridge assessment is essential in determining which structures
              are most critical for limited monies.  However, an evaluation which would
              assess the various costs associated with the various repair procedures is
              unavailable.   Such an evaluation is highly needed to assist in the immense
              task of selecting economically smart repair/strengthen options available for
              these structurally deficient bridges.  This research will assist in the
              development of such an evaluation.  The life cycle cost assessment technology
              for cost benefit evaluation of bridge infrastructure
              rehabilitation/strengthening or renewal is based on technical acquisition and
              assessment of bridge design and repair options.  This research is a joint,
              integrated effort between Georgia Institute of Technology and University of
              Arizona.  For the construction industry, the life cycle cost benefit evaluation
              will provide a thorough and consistent assessment technology for handling the
              complex decisions and estimating in infrastructure renewal.  The life cycle
              cost benefit evaluation will allow construction and policy makers to
              potentially save millions of taxpayers' and industrial capital dollars.  The
              impact of the life cycle cost benefit evaluation will provide, for the first
              time, an assessment technology to evaluate various repair alternatives and
              emerging technologies on infrastructure renewal and the bridge construction
              industry.  To the academic and scientific community, the life cycle research
              will push the bounds of knowledge-based systems.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
