Title       : Computational Error Estimation and Adaptive Error Control for Numerical
               Solutions of Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a9805748

Award Number: 9805748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jong-Shi Pang                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Estep   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9805748  Estep    Systems of quasi-linear reaction-diffusion-convection
              differential   equations have widespread importance in  modeling physical
              phenomena in   such diverse fields as biology, chemistry, metallurgy, and
              combustion.   Some examples are shear flow in fluids with temperature dependent
                viscosity; Hodgkin-Huxley type models of nerve bundles; and models of   the
              spread of disease in populations.  Because such problems are   typically highly
              nonlinear and exhibit complex behavior, numerical   solutions of the
              differential equations have become the main tool for   investigation of their
              properties.  However, these same qualities give   rise to some fundamental
              scientific questions: How can reliable and   accurate estimates of the accuracy
              of information computed from   numerical solutions be obtained and how can a
              desired range of accuracy   be achieved?  The project will address these
              question on three levels: theoretical analysis; implementation in code;   and
              application to practical problems.      The proposed approach is based on
              developing an a posteriori theory of error   estimation in which the error is
              estimated in terms of quantities   depending on the numerical solution that can
              be computed or   approximated. The theory will then be used to develop methods
              of   computational error estimation and adaptive error control. The PI will
              also analyze the reliability and accuracy of the  computational error estimates
              and, because stability has a direct impact on the accuracy of numerical
              solutions, the preservation of stability properties of the differential
              equation under discretization. Practical goals of this project include; a 
              publicly-accessible code for solving general reaction-diffusion problems using
              computational error estimation and adaptive error control, applications to the
              practical models like   those mentioned above,  and an educational component in
              the form of a   textbook on the finite element method for the basic nonlinear
              models of   science.
