Title       : Integrated Sedimentologic/Magnetic Records of Late Paleozoic Climate, Western
               Pangea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9805130

Award Number: 9805130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerilyn S. Soreghan lsoreg@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Douglas Elmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805130
Soreghan

The history of late Paleozoic climate is of great interest.
               Polar glaciation characterized Pennsylvanian time, and continental assembly
              apparently initiated megamonsoonal conditions by Permian time.  These events
              are likely recorded by significant climatic trends and/or fluctuations, but the
              evidence for and character of these climate changes remain poorly constrained. 
              The objective of the proposed research is to (1) confirm the feasibility of
              obtaining paleoclimatic data from upper Paleozoic loessite using an integrated
              sedimentologic/rock-magnetic approach, and (2) apply these techniques to
              elucidating low-latitude paleoclimate of western Pangea.  Recent studies of
              Quaternary-Pliocene loess sequences in many regions have demonstrated the
              utility of rock-magnetic analyses for paleoclimate studies.  These studies
              indicate pedogenic production of ultra-fine and fine-grained magnetic material
              during relatively warm, wet (interglacial) periods.  Magnetic proxies signal
              climatically and temporally dependent soil formation even where sedimentologic
              evidence for pedogenesis is equivocal.  Our preliminary analyses establish that
              susceptibility enhancement linked to pedogenically formed magnetic material is
              preserved in very ancient loessite.  We propose to extend these analyses by
              collecting detailed sedimentologic and rock magnetic data from upper Paleozoic
              (Pennsylvanian-Permian) loessite sections exposed in Colorado and Utah.  In the
              lab, we will perform rock-magnetic analyses (e.g., normalized ferrimagnetic
              susceptibility, frequency-dependent susceptibility, anhysteretic remanent
              magnetization, low-temperature remanence) to access the origin of magnetic
              susceptibility variations, and integrate these data with
              sedimentologic/paleopedologic and diagenetic data to evaluate the paleoclimatic
              signal.  Ultimately, we hope to link these data to an improved age resolution
              in order to assess short-and long-term climatic trends across the middle
              Pennsylvanian-early Permian interval both within and between the target
              sections.  To our knowledge, our effort represents the first attempt to apply
              rock-magnetic techniques for paleoclimatic analyses in pre-Cenozoic
              (Plio-Pleistocene) loessite; we believe that demonstration of the applicability
              of an integrated sedimentologic/rock-magnetic approach to upper Paleozoic
              loessite will represent a significant (1) technical advance for paleoclimatic
              studies in very ancient strata, and (2) contribution toward our comprehension
              of the low-latitude paleoclimate of late Paleozoic western Pangea.

