Title       : Spaceship Earth: A Polar Network of Neutron Monitors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9805780

Award Number: 9805780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173218             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Bieber   (Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn T. Patterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Evenson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bartol Research Institute
	      University of Delaware
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1338,1339,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 OPP 98-05780

Spaceship Earth: A Polar Network of Neutron Monitors

PI: 
              John Bieber                   CO-PIs:   Paul Evenson
Ellen
              Patterson

ABSTRACT
This proposal is to study the acceleration and transport
              of solar energetic particles, the magnetic turbulence in the solar wind, and
              the mechanisms of transient cosmic ray variations. The data are from a network
              of cosmic ray detectors (neutron monitors) strategically located around the
              poles in order to gather information about the cosmic rays' angle of arrival.
              With such an array, the entire Earth acts as a directional cosmic ray detector.
              The fact that the Earth's magnetic field deflects the particles is used to
              determine the direction of arrival of energetic cosmic rays. Compared with
              cosmic ray detectors flown in space, this new "Spaceship Earth" enjoys counting
              statistics far exceeding current spacecraft capabilities. The Spaceship Earth
              network is an international project, with participation from US, Canada, Russia
              and Australia. It consists of 10 high-latitude stations, roughly equidistant in
              longitude (in Antarctica, in Russia, in Northern Canada).
The investigators
              will also examine the role of cosmic rays in the context of space weather. An
              advance warning of as much as 10 hours of potentially damaging magnetic storms
              might be possible. An innovative program of undergraduate education and public
              outreach in Space sciences, neutron detectors, and Space Weather is also
              planned. The present proposal requests funds to combine in real time the data
              from the widely spaced detectors, analyze the data in terms of the space
              physics and astrophysics applications mentioned above, distribute the data in a
              form that can be used by other researchers, and collaborate with Russian
              scientists to reactivate 2 inoperative stations in Siberia. 


