Title       : Structural Characterization of an Ancient Protein by MALD- MS: The
               Preservational State of Osteocalcin in Fossils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a9805417

Award Number: 9805417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peggy H. Ostrom ostrom@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Gage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Strahler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9805417
Ostrom

The primary objectives of this grant are to evaluate
              diagenetic changes in structure and preservational potential of the bone
              protein, osteocalcin (OC), using matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization
              mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS).  Our approach will be to analyze a time series of
              bison and deer bones (Recent to 100,000 yo) and samples resulting from a
              heating experiment to simulate diagenesis.  The use of osteocalcin and the
              application of MALDI-MS provide a unique position of strength for the proposed
              research.  Osteocalcin has several extremely important attributes which include
              intimate association with the hydroxyapatite mineral phase of bone,
              preferential preservation over time, exclusive occurrence in vertebrate
              mineralized tissues, absence in common contaminators including microbes,
              invertebrates and plants, immunological specificity of the intact protein via
              radioimmunoassay (RIA), and the existence of an extensive database of protein
              sequences for osteocalcin.  Furthermore, the MALDI-MS technique can identify
              very small quantities of protein (8 pmol of protein is typical) and is not
              confronted by the myriad of problems that confront traditional methods of
              protein sequencing.  Our preliminary work has confirmed the presence of
              osteocalcin via RIA in bones as old as 450,000 years.  In addition, we have
              generated other lines of evidence, including MALDI-MS data that suggests the
              presence of intact OC in 800 to 53,000 year old bones.  Owing to the ability of
              MALDI-MS with peptide mass mapping and post source decay analysis to provide
              protein sequence information, this approach will allow us to make a direct
              assessment of diagenetic changes in the primary structure of osteocalcin and to
              characterize modifications of individual amino acids throughout diagenesis. 
              Furthermore, this approach will revolutionize our ability to unambiguously
              identify an indigenous component from a fossil.

