Title       : Studies of Correlated Electron Effects in Anisotropic Metals and Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9805784

Award Number: 9805784
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles C. Agosta cagosta@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                     08/29/95                                             2  9805784  Agosta  
               This  experimental  research project focuses  on  the  correlated  electron 
              properties  of highly anisotropic materials,  including  organic 
              superconductors  and molybdenum  oxide  bronzes.  Highly  correlated  electron
              properties of interest include spin  density  waves, charge density waves, the
              quantum Hall effect and multiple  order  parameter superconductivity. The
              experiments utilize  high  magnetic  fields, obtained at a unique in-house 
              pulsed  magnetic  field facility, as well as at NHMFL. The studies also feature
              use  of high pressure and low temperature. High magnetic field is used  in 
              part  to  quench  the  superconducting  or  other  correlated  electron state,
              allowing observation of quantum oscillations  and  other  effects  to  probe
              the Fermi surface. The  RF  penetration  depth is measured in addition to
              electronic transport properties.  The results from this basic investigation may
              include fundamental  new  physical effects and also may provide insight into 
              electron  behavior in other systems including semiconductor microelectronic 
              devices.This  highly interdisciplinary project involves  graduate  students who
              pursue thesis research at both laboratory locations,  and  receive excellent
              training beneficial to a future career  in  industry, government or academia. 
              %%%  This  experimental  research  project  focuses  on  unusual   and 
              potentially useful electronic conducting materials, which  differ  from  common
               metals  such  as copper and  silver  in  two  major  respects. First, the are
              composed of organic molecules, or oxides  of metals. Second, they have very
              different electrical conduction  in   different   directions.  The  anisotropy 
              of  the   electron  conduction  in  some  of  these  materials  tends  to 
              favor  one  particular  direction,  so they are "one-dimensional";  in  other 
              cases planes are present which are highly conductive, and this is  a 
              "two-dimensional" conductor.  The behavior of  electrons  under  these
              conditions is often unusual, and this unusual behavior  and  the  reasons for
              it are the topic of the research. The  materials  of  interest  in  this
              project are mostly organic superconductors  and  molybdenum oxide bronzes.
              Measurements feature high magnetic  fields,  obtained  at  a  unique in-house
              pulsed  magnetic  field  facility, as well as at the NSF-supported National
              High  Magnetic  Field  Laboratory  (NHMFL) located at Florida  State 
              University.  Measurements   also  feature  use  of  high  pressure   and   low 
              temperature.  The  results  from  this  basic  investigation  may  include 
              fundamental new physical effects and  also  may  provide  insight   into 
              electron  behavior  in  other  systems  including  semiconductor    
              microelectronic    devices.     This     highly  interdisciplinary project
              involves graduate students  who  pursue  thesis   research  at  both 
              laboratory  locations,  and  receive  excellent  training  beneficial to a
              future career  in  industry,  government or academia.  ***
