Title       : A Quorum-Based Management Scheme for Ad-Hoc Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1998 
File        : a9805094

Award Number: 9805094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61575              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zygmunt J. Haas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              With increasing size and the rate at which their configuration change, mobility
              management in ad-hoc networks is expected to be one of the basic challenges in
              the design of this breed of networks. The basic shortcoming of the traditional
              HLR/VLR based mobility management schemes stems from two problems: nodes that
              serve as HLRs may be frequently unreachable (due to the intermittent wireless
              connectivity in such networks) and the association of a mobile with a
              particular HLR requires dissemination of this information to all  the network
              nodes, presence of which in the network may frequently change.    In the
              proposed scheme, a subset of nodes in the network dynamically assumes the
              function of the "Mobility Reporting Centers" (MRCs). The "location" of a mobile
              is reported to a set (quorum) of the MRCs. To locate a mobile, a set (quorum),
              possibly different from the reported-to one, is queried. As any two quorums
              intersect, the querying operation is ensured to produce the location of the
              mobile. As the quorums may overlap in multiple MRCs, loss of connectivity with
              a limited number of MRCs may have no effect on the ability of the scheme to
              locate a mobile. Finally, due to the "network-wide known" scheme for quorum
              creation, there is no need to disseminate the information of association of a
              mobile with a particular MRC - any reported-to and queried-from two quorums
              will produce the sought answer.     In the proposed one-year feasibility study,
              we will tackle the following topics:  (i) study of the complexity and
              associated overhead of the quorum-based mobility management scheme' (ii) quorum
              construction strategies that ensure high degree of reliability with limited
              network load and uniform MRCs' processing load; (iii) reduction of the
              probability of erroneous operations and/or inconsistent querying results during
              the reconfiguration periods;
