Title       : Stable Isotope Analysis of Early Hominid Localities in the African Rift: Tests
               of Environmental Hypotheses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2000   
File        : a9805846

Award Number: 9805846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Sikes nsikes@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Nancy Sikes will conduct carbon and oxygen isotope analyses on soil samples
              collected from four important paleoanthropological sites in East Africa. She
              will run ca. 250 samples, including 40 standards and duplicates and use this
              information to assess habitat diversity and change in environments occupied by
              hominids in the East African Rift system. These data, supplemented by
              traditional analyses of sediments, pollen and fauna will enable scientists to
              examine the relationship between hominid cultural and biological development
              and the variable and changing environments in which they lived. Stable carbon
              isotope analyses will allow estimation of the proportion of tropical woody
              plants in relation to more open country grassland species. In this way it is
              possible to distinguish between grassland and woodland habitats. Oxygen isotope
              ratios from soil carbonates will be used to reconstruct changes in local and
              regional climatic conditions, particularly temperature and rainfall. The four
              sites to be studied include: 1. the Chiwondo beds of Northern Malawi. These are
              associated with two species of early hominid and date to 2.3-2.5 million years
              ago (mya). 2. At Olduvai Gorge Dr. Sikes will examine a single strata which
              dates between 1.75 and 1.70 mya and has been the focus of extensive
              anthropological investigation. 3. At the younger site of Olorgesailie she will
              focus on sediments which span the 1.2-0.049 mya sediments in areas which have
              yielded archaeological remains. 4. Finally she will study a ca. 1.6 my artifact
              rich paleosol at the site of Peninj in northern Tanzania.  Paleoanthropologists
              have recovered extensive fossil and artifactual remains from sites in Eastern
              Africa and on this basis traced, in general outline, changes in hominid culture
              and physical form over a four million year period. However the causes for these
              changes and the environments in which they occurred are poorly understood. Many
              scientists look to the environment which in Eastern Africa underwent extreme
              alternations between drier and wetter conditions as an explanatory factor. Dr.
              Sike's research will provide important insight into conditions at sites of
              particular paleoanthropological significance.    - À- v- +- ±@                 
                                                        +   _                      Ûª? ÑOh ª'
               +'ª?0   Ý           +       Õ               $       H       l        +       ¢
                    ?                       D       h       +                                
                        R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
