Title       : Pollination, Plant Fitness, and Population Dynamics: How Strong are the Links?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1998 
File        : a9805034

Award Number: 9805034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary V. Price   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison K. Brody  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Diane R. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nickolas M. Waser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Price  9805034    Planet earth is graced with over 250,000 species of flowering
              plants, most of which rely for pollination and seed production on visits by
              insects and other animals.  Pollination and seed production have been the focus
              of intense scientific study over the past few decades, but there still are gaps
              in our knowledge.  For example, biologists have assumed that the success of
              plants in attracting pollinators will translate not only into more seeds
              produced, but further down the line into more offspring plants flowering in the
              next generation.  But there are no experimental data to confirm this
              assumption, and some good reasons to expect that the assumption is too
              simplistic.  For example, biologists know (and any person tending a garden can
              confirm) that most seeds perish before they germinate, and most germinated
              seedlings perish before they reach adulthood. Furthermore, mortality of seeds
              and seedlings is higher when they are crowded.  So plants in nature enjoying
              higher pollination success might not enjoy the anticipated edge in surviving
              offspring, because of crowding and mortality of their seeds and seedlings.  For
              questions of pure ecology, and also of the conservation biology of endangered
              plant species, we need to know how crowding and other ecological interactions
              alter the links between pollination success and numbers of offspring surviving
              to flower one generation later.    This research project uses long-term
              experiments in natural plant populations to explore links between pollination
              and offspring survival and growth.  The study is centered on a native
              wildflower of the western USA, the scarlet gilia (Ipomposis aggregata), and its
              hummingbird and insect pollinators.  Past work with this system has shown that
              pollination success varies among weeks, years, sites, and individual plants at
              a site.  Previous research has also identified how pollination success
              translates into the number of seeds a plant produces.      To understand the
              link between seed number and number of  surviving offspring the investigators
              will carry out three new experiments.  First, they will sow seeds of scarlet
              gilia into study plots at a variety of densities that spans the 40-fold range
              that occurs in nature.  By mapping all seedlings that emerge subsequently and
              following them through several years until they mature and flower, the
              investigators can determine at what density offspring mortality begins to rise
              due to crowding.  Second, they will sow seeds at two densities chosen from the
              natural range of densities and from the first experiment, in this case
              replicating the treatments at several sites over two years.  The fates of
              individual mapped seedlings in "low-density" and "high-density" plots will be
              related statistically to local crowding and other environmental factors around
              each plant.  Third, the investigators will sow seeds with known genetic markers
              into replicate plots to mimic a situation in which one parent plant is
              attractive to pollinators and enjoys high success, whereas its neighbor is
              unattractive.  Offspring will later be assigned to parents based on genetic
              markers; this will allow investigators to determine how pollination success
              translates into Darwinian fitness (number of surviving offspring one generation
              later).      Finally, the information from these three experiments will be used
              to construct a computer model of plant population dynamics.  The model will
              enable exploration of the link between pollination success and offspring
              survival.  The aim is to produce a tool that other biologists and conservation
              managers can use to predict how population growth and Darwinian fitness will
              respond to pollination levels in their particular plant species.
