Title       : Interior Point Methods for Nonconvex Nonlinear Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9805495

Award Number: 9805495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94500              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Shanno shanno@rutcor.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                DMS-9805495    David F. Shanno  Interior Point Methods for Nonconvex Nonlinear
              Programming      Abstract:      The research is concerned with studying
              logarithmic barrier methods for  nonconvex nonlinear programming. The problem
              studied is the problem of  minimizing a nonlinear objective function subject to
              nonlinear inequality  constraints. Topics to be studied include merit
              functions, trust regions,  and matrix modification methods for nonconvex
              problems. A topic of extensive  study will be higher order methods for solving
              the nonlinear system of  equations arising from the first order conditions for
              the problem, with  particular emphasis on extending Mehrotra's
              predictor-corrector method to  nonconvex problems. The general nonlinear
              programming problem, which has  equality contraints, bounds and ranges as well
              as inequality constraints   will be adapted so as to be solvable with the
              algorithms developed. Careful  study will be made of the problem of determining
              infeasiblility and   unboundedness for nonconvex nonlinear programs. Special
              algorithms will be  developed for problems where second derivatives are not
              available. All   developed algorithms will be coded and extensively tested.    
                  Nonlinear programming problems arise in a wide variety of applications 
              drawn from a broad spectrum of engineering and science problems, statistics 
              problems, economics problems, and logistics problems to name a few of the  
              many areas where such problems are common. For example, drawing inference from 
              data bases is a statistics problem that often requires the minimization  of a
              nonlinear likelihood function subject to parametric constraints. This  problem
              becomes particularly difficult when the dtabase is very large. The  proposed
              research will develop methods for these nonlinear problems that are  akin to
              the interior point methods that have proved so efficient for very  large scale
              linear problems. These methods are also highly applicable to  solving nonlinear
              partial differential equations with n onlinear boundary  conditions, which are
              used in everything from aircraft design to design  of structures such as
              bridges to estimating the reserves in an underground  groundwater or oil
              reserve, as a few examples of the myriad applications. Part  of the project
              will be to collect as broad a problem set of real applications  as possible to
              adapt the algorithms to be efficient for these problems, and  to demonstrate
              the use of the algoritms across the widest possible spectrum  of applications.
              In all cases, the the algorithms will be designed to   solve very large
              problems efficiently, as these methods are proving extremely  efficient for
              large problems on high performance computers.
