Title       : POWRE: Semantic, Discourse-Pragmatic, and Syntactic Predictors of Lexical
               Subjects in Conversational English
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9805829

Award Number: 9805829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura A. Michaelis michaeli@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In conversation, speakers are constrained to ensure that their linguistic
              productions are maximally easy to process.  Research in functional syntax has
              shown that speakers tend to formulate their conversational utterances so as to
              abide by a principle which Lambrecht states in terms of a maxim: Do not
              introduce an entity and say something about it in the same clause.  This
              constraint underlies the strong dispreference for speakers in conversation to
              place lexical noun phrases in subject position; speakers tend strongly to place
              such noun phrases in object position.  This project will focus on the
              relatively small set of conversational productions which contain lexical
              subjects.  The investigator will use a large on-line corpus of American English
              telephone conversations to explore the syntactic, semantic and
              discourse-pragmatic properties of these productions.  From these properties,
              she will seek to isolate those aspects of the linguistic and conversational
              context which might serve as predictors of the occurrence of a lexical (as
              opposed to pronominal) subject.  The hypotheses regarding potential predictors
              will be based upon the tendencies predicted by a diverse set of theoretical
              frameworks.  This project brings together analytic tools and computational
              resources that have not been combined previously.  It will produce a large
              database of conversational English based on theoretically valid categories, and
              will strongly contribute to the development of a methodology for measuring the
              psychological factors which influence the forms of linguistic productions.  The
              results will also provide tools for a diverse set of projects in cognitive
              science.  The results could, for example, provide a benchmark to
              acquisitionists studying the development of referential syntax in children and
              to those studying the dimensions of impairment in conversation among Broca's
              aphasics.  These results would also apply to linguistic engineering problems
              like that of automatic speech recognition (ASR); many ASR algorithms involve
              probabilistic models which use local lexical constraints to predict the words
              in the sentence.  Thus, the results may be relevant not only for model-building
              in cognitive science, but also for the design of human-computer interfaces. 
              All of these projects benefit from a grounding in conversational usage
              patterns.  As a woman academic beginning an assistant professorship in
              linguistics, the investigator finds the POWRE program to be ideal for the
              methodological advance she has in mind.  While her training focused on language
              use from a literary perspective, advances in functional syntax increasingly
              require the ability to work with large samples of conversational data.  This
              ability increasingly requires knowledge of corpus methodologies.  This research
              will enhance not only her own professional and scientific growth, but also the
              computational infrastructure of her field and the computational literacy of her
              students.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
