Title       : Application of Optical Dating to Fossil and Tool-Bearing Cave Sediments at
               Atapuerca, Spain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a9805174

Award Number: 9805174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103034             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn W. Berger gwberger@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Glen Burger will conduct two
              seasons of field research in the Atapuerca region, located 14 km East of
              Brugos, Spain. An abandoned railway trench cuts through a series of caves which
              hold extremely important hominid materials and the goal of this research is to
              date them accurately. Although anthropologists know that hominids evolved in
              Africa and left this continent as early as 1.8 million years ago, until
              recently the earliest securely dated materials in Europe dated to less than a
              half million years in age. It appeared that hominids entered this region only
              relatively late in their evolutionary history.  In this context, a series of
              recently excavated sites in the Atapuerca region are particularly important
              because they contain an abundance of hominid skeletal material as well as stone
              tools and associated faunal remains. Based on paleomagnetic evidence it is
              clear that the oldest of these occurrences exceed 780,000 years in age. Dr.
              Berger will analyze the sediments from two sites using IR-OSL to determine the
              relative - and hopefully the absolute - ages of levels from two of these sites.
               Pleistocene age sediments older than 40,000 years - the effective range of
              radiocarbon - and not associated with volcanic materials are extremely
              difficult to date. The experimental techniques currently employed often do not
              yield consistent information. Dr. Berger is working to develop an optically
              stimulated thermolumenescent technique which can be applied to feldspar rather
              than more commonly studied quartz crystals. Thermolumenescence dating measures
              time dependent radiation induced damage which accumulates in crystals.
              Sunlight, it is believed, wipes the slate clean and sets the clock to zero.
              Thus in dating sediment, one in fact determines not the age of the particles
              themselves but rather the last time they were exposed to the sun. In
              archaeological situations where sediments associated with bones and cultural
              material are buried under successive layers of dirt, last exposure to the sun
              is useful information. The problem however is that sunlight may not always set
              the clock to zero and Dr. Berger, in addition to collecting buried materials
              from the Atapuerca sites, will initiate a broader program of geological survey.
              He will collect exposed sediments identical to those buried in the sites and
              use these as controls.   This research will not only provide age estimates for
              important hominid and associated cultural remains. It will also further
              development of the thermolumenescent dating technique which is potentially
              applicable in many anthropological, geological and paleontological contexts.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
