Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Modeling Permain Ocean Stagnation and Anoxia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1998    
File        : a9805139

Award Number: 9805139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97203              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee R. Kump lkump@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Arthur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond G. Najjar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              805139
Kump

Intervals of significant biotic and climatic change, such as
              those occurring in the Neoproterozoic, the late Ordovician, the latest Permian,
              and the Cretaceous/Tertiary boundary, are commonly associated with marked
              excursions in the chemical and isotopic composition of the ocean.  Some
              explanations of these events have been based largely on intuitive reasoning
              that invokes dramatic decreases in the rate of thermohaline circulation, i.e.
              "ocean stagnation." Rarely have physical oceanographic constraints, such as
              heat, salt and momentum balance been brought to bear on such problems.  We
              therefore request funding to conduct a suite of dynamic ocean
              circulation/biogeochemical model simulations to quantitatively assess the
              efficacy of these "ocean stagnation" hypotheses.  Although we focus our efforts
              on the Late Permian event, the results will be broadly applicable to other
              intervals of Earth history as well.

The GFDL Modular Ocean Model will be
              used to study the three-dimensional general circulation of the Late Permian
              ocean, with atmospheric boundary conditions being provided through
              collaboration with our colleagues at the University of Wisconsin and University
              of Chicago.  These boundary conditions are expected to yield both vigorous and
              sluggish thermohaline circulation states.  A small number of biogeochemical
              constituents will be added to this model, allowing us to assess the spatial
              distribution of anoxia.  The circulation fields generated by the 3-D model will
              then be zonally averaged and used in a 2-D, multi-constituent biogeochemical
              model to study the biogeochemical consequences of sluggish circulation.  In
              addition to phosphate and oxygen, the 2-D model will calculate distributions of
              dissolved inorganic carbon, sulfur and strontium isotopic compositions.  Thus
              we will be able to investigate the hypothesis that an invigoration of ocean,
              releasing toxic amounts of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, and to compare the
              predicted and observed isotopic records of such an event.  A number of
              sensitivity analyses will be performed, including the model response to
              variations in riverine and hydrothermal input, to various kinetic and isotopic
              parameters, and to the drift of Pangea off the South Pole.

