Title       : Investigation of the Magnetic Anistropy and Magnetic Phase Transition using
               Stepped Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9805222

Award Number: 9805222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zi Qiang Qiu Qiu@physics.Berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Qiu  9805222  This is a fundamental research project in the field of magnetism. 
              The  research  is  focused  on  the  properties  of  artificially  structured
              thin magnetic films. The objective is an understanding  of   the  role  of 
              lattice  symmetry-breaking  on  the  magnetic  anisotropy in these materials.
              The magnetic anisotropy is a major  determinant   of  the  magnetic  properties
               of  the   materials,  particularly there properties as candidates for magnetic
               storage  media. Nanometer-sized atomic steps on a controlled surface  will  be
               created to break the four-fold rotation symmetry to induce  a  uniaxial 
              magnetic anisotropy within the film plane.  This  step-  induced magnetic
              anisotropy and its effect on the two-dimensional  (2D)    magnetic   phase  
              transition   will   be    investigated  systematically as a function of the
              step-density. A novel  aspect  of  the  project is to employ a curved substrate
               as  a  possible  means  of  controlling the step-density in a continuous way. 
              All  samples  will  be  grown  by Molecular  Beam  Epitaxy  (MBE)  and 
              characterized  by  Reflection  High-Energy  Electron  Diffraction  (RHEED), 
              Low-Energy Electron Diffraction (LEED), Auger  Electron  spectroscopy (AES) and
              Scanning Tunneling Microscopy  (STM).  The  magnetic  properties  of the films
              will be measured  in  situ  by  Surface Magneto-Optic Kerr Effect (SMOKE)
              technique.  %%%  This is a fundamental research project in the field of
              magnetism.  Rapid  development in the information storage technology  demands 
              an  understanding  of the magnetic behavior of materials  at  the  atomic 
              scale.  The goal of this proposal is  to  gain  a  deeper  understanding on how
              the magnetic anisotropy of a magnet will  be  affected  by  limiting  the size
              of the magnetic  at  the  atomic  scale.  To realize this goal, well-defined
              atomic steps  will  be  used  to  break the rotation symmetry of the continuous
               surface.  The  step  induced magnetic anisotropy and its effect on  the  2D 
              magnetic   pha se   transition   will   then   be   systematically 
              investigated  as a function of the step-density. State-of-the-art  techniques
              such as the Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) and  Scanning  Tunneling  Microscopy
              (STM) will be applied to  this  project  to  fabricate  and  characterize the
              thin films at the atomic  scale.  Success  of  this  project  will be important
               not  only  to  the  understanding  of  two-dimensional magnetism,  but  also 
              to  the  development of new magnetic devices for practical applications.  ***
