Title       : POWRE: Molecular Mechanisms of Thyroid Hormone Action on Stem Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9805900

Award Number: 9805900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Hoskins sallyh@scisun.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9805900   HOSKINS      In the study funded by this POWRE award,  Dr. Hoskins
              will examine the molecular basis of changes that occur  in the frog eye during
              metamorphosis.  The eyes of young tadpoles  are situated on the sides of the
              head and the two eyes view non-  overlapping regions of the visual world. 
              During metamorphosis,  the head changes shape, and the eyes move together, with
              the  result that adult frogs have binocular vision -- parts of the  visual
              world are seen with both eyes, as is the case in humans.  During the transition
              from tadpole to frog, which is brought about  by thyroid hormone, numerous
              changes occur both within the eye and  in the connections between the eye and
              the brain.  Previous work  from the Hoskins laboratory showed that thyroid
              hormone induces a  specific new pattern of retinal growth, and that a new set
              of  optic nerve axons are produced during metamorphosis.  These new  studies
              will address the question of how thyroid hormone triggers  changes in retinal
              growth, and how the new axons formed during  metamorphosis are able to connect
              to their proper targets, which  differs from the pattern of connections made by
              tadpole axons.  Thyroid hormone acts through a receptor that is capable of 
              changing the pattern of gene expression; it therefore seems likely  that
              hormone-induced genes expressed in the retina will play a  role in the
              metamorphic transformations in the visual system.  The  nervous systems of all
              animals, including humans, are dependent on  thyroid hormone for proper
              development.  Dr. Hoskins' experimental  system offers a uniquely accessible
              and manipulable model for  examining the mechanisms of thyroid hormone action
              during  development, and the results of these studies are expected to be 
              relevant to its general roles in neuronal development.    This POWRE award will
              allow an excellent investigator with  substantial teaching duties to begin a
              research project using new  molecular methodology on a system and a question
              with in which she  has had a long -standing interest.
