Title       : Oxide/Metal Interfaces and their role in the Performance of Coated Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9805188

Award Number: 9805188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony G. Evans   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9805188  Evans    This GOALI project will relate the results of quantum
              mechanical  calculations to macroscopic adhesion measurements made on the  same
              oxide/metal interfaces with the long range goal of  understanding and improving
              coatings for automotive applications.  Greater reliance is being placed on
              these coatings to serve  thermomechanical functions.  Functions such as thermal
              and  abrasion protection have already been realized, but the coatings  have yet
              to achieve their full potential because of limited basic  understanding about
              their cohesion and adhesion.  Most coatings  are non-equilibrium assemblages of
              metals and oxides, with their  interfaces exerting a dominant influence on
              performance.  Segregants have a dramatic effect on the adhesion of such 
              interfaces.  Segregant-free interfaces are typically ductile and  tough,
              whereas segregants of carbon, sulfur, etc. can lead to  weak, brittle
              interfaces.  The interactions that cause segregant  embrittlement have yet to
              be clarified and understood. The  research has two synergistic elements:  1) It
              puts in place the  linkages needed to connect the physics of bond rupture with 
              continuum level interface fracture mechanics. This would be done  through a
              combination of measurements performed on metal/oxide  interfaces relevant to
              coatings, in conjunction with first  principles bonding calculations, coupled
              with crack growth  simulations; and 2) The results would have direct relevance
              to  coating technology through the laboratory and field testing  conducted at
              GM in both their Research Laboratory and Powertrain  Division.  %%%  The GOALI
              research would exploit new capabilities in first  principles bonding
              calculations to develop a basic understanding  of the adhesion of interfaces
              having technological importance for  coatings used in the automotive industry. 
              It would involve a  collaboration between the PI and J. R. Smith of General
              Motors,  as well as with Hutchinson (Harvard) and Ruhle (Stuttgart).  The 
              GOALI collaboration will inclu de quarterly meetings involving the  industrial
              and academic researchers, the graduate student  spending time between semesters
              at the GM research facility, and  Dr. Smith acting as co-advisor to the
              graduate student.  In  addition, GM will provide a summer internship for an 
              undergraduate to conduct projects at GM.  This project is co-  funded by the
              Ceramics Program of the Division on Materials  Research and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the  Mathematical and Physical Sciences
              Directorate.  ***
