Title       : Nonlinear, Glassy, and Relaxor Behavior in Ferroelectrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9805272

Award Number: 9805272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275500             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. Hugo Schmidt schmidt@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George F. Tuthill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9805272
Schmidt

In this project the properties of three classes of
              ferroelectric (FE) materials. will be investigated.  They include  proton
              glasses and related crystals, relaxor ferroelectrics, and titanyl
              ferroelectrics.  Proton glasses and related H-bonded crystals show such
              phenomena as ergodicity, proton tunneling, phase coexistence, and fast ion
              conductivity.  The titanyl family, prominent because of excellent second
              harmonic generation properties, has questions concerning FE domains and
              one-dimensional conductivity, while relaxor ferroelectrics (crystals with
              unlike-valence cations randomly located at appropriate sites) pose problems
              relating to partly or fully suppressed FE transitions.  Different materials
              belonging to any one of these three categories will be investigated.  Specific
              studies involve the use of various techniques such as,  calorimetry,
              quadrupole-perturbed nuclear magnetic resonance, atomic force microscopy, Raman
              and Brillouin spectroscopy and optical measurements, and others.  The research
              benefits from the participation  of a large number of collaborators who bring
              additional experimental and theoretical expertise to this project.  Among the
              benefits that will result from this research are improved understandings of the
              behaviors of a large variety of ferroelectric materials. This will facilitate
              their incorporation in advanced technological devices.  Graduate students and
              post doctoral research associates will receive training in an technologically
              important area with exceptional employment opportunities in the 21st
              Century.
%%%
This is a fundamental study of crystalline ferroelectric
              materials. The research is conducted with graduate students, post doctoral
              research associates and external collaborators.  The benefits accruing from
              this project will be new, improved technological devices. Students and post
              doctoral research associates will receive excellent training in an area with 
              exceptional employment opportunities during the 21st Century.
**

