Title       : Modeling and Computational Studies of Cell and Tissue Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9805494

Award Number: 9805494
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans G. Othmer othmer@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean C. Bottino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eirikur Palsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Othmer  9805494       The principal investigator and his colleagues formulate
              and  analyze mathematical models for the motion of individual,  non-interacting
              cells and for the collective motion of cellular  aggregates in which cells
              interact strongly.  They use the  cellular slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum
              as the model system  because it exemplifies both the free-ranging movement of 
              individual cells and the collective motion of aggregates, and  because it is
              widely used as a model experimental system for the  study of cell movement. 
              There is a large body of experimental  data on this system, and several labs
              have agreed to share their  new data as it becomes available.  Three
              complementary  subprojects are pursued in parallel.  The first is to
              investigate  an individual cell-based model that incorporates internal 
              structure and active force generation and allows the  investigators to evaluate
              various theoretical proposals for  individual cell movement.  The second
              involves the formulation of  a higher-level, cell-based model used for
              analyzing the  collective motion of many cells, and the third employs a 
              continuum approach in which the cellular system is modeled as a  viscoelastic
              fluid with contributions to the stress tensor from  both the intracellular
              stress and the viscoelastic interactions  between cells.  Current information
              on the movement is used in  the formulation of the models, and the ongoing
              interaction with  experimental groups provides feedback on the validity of the 
              models and enables the investigators to suggest experiments to  test the
              models.  However, what is learned on cell and tissue  movement not only is
              applicable to Dictyostelium discoideum, but  also can be used in several other
              contexts, including embryonic  development, wound healing, and the immune
              system.       Cell and tissue movement plays a vital role throughout the 
              lifespan of many organisms.  Bacteria and other single-cell  organisms find
              food and avoid repellents by swimming in favorable  directions,  and cells such
              as macrophages in the human immune  system must detect sites of infection and
              move toward them in  order to ingest bacteria and cellular debris.  At the
              tissue  level, the coordinated movement of aggregates of cells plays a 
              critical part in such diverse processes as early embryonic  development and
              wound healing.  Thus it is important to develop a  better understanding of cell
              movement and its control, both in  the low-density regime where cells move
              individually, and at  tissue-level densities where cells interact strongly and
              move  collectively.  Mathematical modeling can play an important role in 
              understanding these processes by testing hypotheses that are  difficult to test
              experimentally with current technology.  A  better understanding of how cells
              and tissues move will lead, for  example, to a better understanding of the
              formation and control  of bacterial biofilms, which are deleterious in contexts
              such as  medical transplants, but valuable in contexts such as pollution 
              control and drug production.
