Title       : El Palmillo: A Household Perspective on the Classic-Post- classic Transition in
               Oaxaca
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9805288

Award Number: 9805288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1998   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96221              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Feinman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Gary Feinman and his collaborators
              will conduct archaeological research at the site of El Palmillo, located in the
              Valley of Oaxaca in central Mexico. The goal is to look at a poorly known and
              understood period in Middle American prehistory known as the
              `Classic-Postclassic transition.` Across a number of cultures the Classic
              period witnessed the height of state development and major cities and
              monumental constructions in both the Mayan lowlands and Mexican highlands date
              to this time. As the term `Classic` suggests, archaeologists see this time as
              the high point in Mesoamerican civilization. At the end of the Classic period
              many large sites were abandoned large scale monumental construction ceased and
              people dispersed into smaller settlements. For this reason the transition to
              the Postclassic is often referred to as a `collapse.` In the Valley of Oaxaca
              this general pattern holds true and the Classic period site of Monte Alban was
              one of the major centers of power in Mexico. Extensive research has been
              conducted at Monte Alban but the Postclassic prehistory of the region is poorly
              known. Dr. Feinman's research will help to remedy this situation.  Dr Feinman
              notes that although political fragmentation took place in the Oaxaca
              Postclassic, population growth occurred, economic specialization appeared to
              have increased and both local and long distance trade flourished. In this
              region at least, the concept of `collapse` is likely inappropriate. In 1997 Dr.
              Feinman has located a large site which spans the Classic Postclassic at El
              Palmillo and with NSF support he will conduct excavations there. In Middle
              America the local household served most often as the locus for craft
              production. Dr. Feinman will excavate a series of these to determine the range
              of manufacturing activities which took place, their intensive and their
              distribution across households.   This research is important because it will
              provide insight into a major transition in the history of the development of
              civilization. It will supplement extensive work in the region and provide data
              of interest to many archaeologists.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
