Title       : The Dynamics of Economic and Sociopolitical Structure in Late Prehistoric
               Hawaii: An Emergent 'Archaic State', Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9805754

Award Number: 9805754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137135             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick V. Kirch kirch@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Patrick Kirch and his colleagues
              will continue their highly successful archaeological research at sites located
              on the Hawaiian islands of Moloka'i and Maui. The team and others have located
              a number of house compounds and ritual structures which date from the period
              between A.D. 1200 - 1795 and these will form the focus for excavation. The
              group will collect both cultural and ecofactual data to: determine variability
              in territorial settlement  patterns over time; reconstruct the chronology of
              settlement and land use;  analyze architectural,  food resource and
              prestige-good variation within household units; determine the distribution of
              non-  local stone resources between territorial units; examine the agricultural
              and marine resource  production base which supported the economy; learn how
              ritual architecture changed over time and  space; and study the environmental
              effects of intensive land use.   For many years anthropologists  have used
              Polynesia as a unique test case to determine how state level societies evolved.
              The  Polynesian islands were settled by a single cultural group over a
              relatively short period and at the  time of contact they evidenced forms of
              social organization which varied greatly in complexity.  Through carefully
              controlled comparisons scientists have attempted to place them in a
              developmental  sequence and to explain the different stages reached in
              environmental terms. The highest degree of  complexity was reached in Hawaii
              and ethnographers believe that in late prehistoric times a state  level of
              organization was achieved. Dr. Kirch wishes to examine this process. He
              correctly notes that  only archaeology can produce the data which can trace
              this step by step, and the goal of the research  is to recover such
              information.  This research is important for several reasons. It will yield
              insight  into the processes of state formation an will provide data of interest
              to many archaeologists.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
