Title       : Reef Corals: Symbiotic Dinoflagellate/Host Combinations and their Physiological
               Response to Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0137007

Award Number: 0137007
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $698846             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Fitt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory W. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1650,4444,9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The growth, calcification, nutrition, reproduction, health and, in many cases,
              morphological form of reef corals and related cnidarians is the result of their
              mutualism with symbiotic dinoflagellates of the genus Symbiodinium, often
              referred to as "zooxanthellae". Several different species of Symbiodinium, as
              well as dozens of genetically different types within at least five molecular
              "clades" have been described within the past 30 years, with at least a quarter
              of coral species able to harbor more than one type of Symbiodinium within their
              gastrodermal cells. New molecular techniques have enabled coral reef biologists
              to make rapid progress in distinguishing genomic similarities and differences
              among Symbiodinium symbionts, but research on differences in algal physiology
              and its repercussions on host coral physiology (photosynthesis, growth rates,
              reproduction, and general health of the host) lags far behind. Without such
              information, it is impossible to project what benefits to the symbiosis (or
              coral host) come from having which specific combinations of
              Symbiodinium.
	Coral reefs comprise one of the world's most diverse
              ecosystems, both in terms of number of species and complexity of interactions
              among genera. Yet, coral reefs worldwide are deteriorating: the coral colonies
              that provide reef framework and habitat to multitudes of fish and invertebrates
              are decreasing in percent cover, experiencing unprecedented incidents of
              disease, and showing obvious signs of stress largely in response to ocean
              warming. Especially alarming is the increased occurrence of coral bleaching in
              which symbionts are lost as the principal contributors of carbon (from
              photosynthesis) for host growth, reproduction and development. Upon severe
              bleaching, when the white skeleton shows through the animal tissue as symbiont
              densities decline, coral tissue biomass and energy stores decrease, host growth
              ceases, reproduction is impaired, and portions or entire colony may die. It is
              also thought that stressed (i.e. bleached) corals are more susceptible to
              disease.
	Understanding of the causative factors for the decline of corals and
              the processes that might promote their recovery is very poor. Particularly
              little is known the of the complexity and specificity of the integration of the
              different types of Symbiodinium with their hosts, especially which combinations
              of symbionts lead to greater host growth, reproduction and survival and how
              such optimal combinations are established and maintained.
	This research is
              designed to resolve the complexities of the coral host/symbiont relationship,
              in terms of documenting the ability of different symbionts: (1) to provide
              nutrition to their host (photosynthesis of symbiont and translocation of
              photosynthate from alga to host), (2) to influence growth of the host, (3) to
              stably inhabit (=infect) different hosts, (4) to provide protection from
              ultra-violet light by the production of various 'sun screens', (5) to survive
              periods of higher-than-normal temperatures, (6) to photoadapt to different
              light conditions. The overall goal of the experiments is to be able to model
              seasonal and long-term changes in symbiont-host combinations, especially in
              regard to changes in the intact system in response to environmental change that
              might lead to greater or diminished physiological performance (including
              survival) of the intact association.  The data will allow us to predict which
              associations are capable of surviving conditions expected in the world's
              tropical oceans over the next 50-100 years of global warming, and whether
              "switching" to algal types with higher tolerance levels might be a viable
              outcome.

