Title       : Coupling of Trace Metal Micronutrients and Phytoplankton Dynamics - A Focus on
               the Bering Sea and the Role of Iron
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0137085

Award Number: 0137085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth W. Bruland bruland@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0137085


An exciting research frontier in ocean sciences
              involves the role of micronutrient trace  metals such as Fe, Mn, Zn, and Co in
              affecting the structure and function of plankton  communities.  Certain
              bioactive trace metals - in particular iron - can influence marine 
              phytoplankton at the molecular, cellular, community and ecosystem levels. Of
              particular  importance is the critical role trace metals such as iron play as
              biolimiting micronutrients,  especially in areas where macronutrients are
              provided to the surface waters by upwelling or  vertical mixing at high
              rates.

The focus of this project is a major month-long field effort to the
              Bering Sea in July 2003  to investigate the role of micronutrient trace metals
              (with a focus on Fe) in influencing  phytoplankton communities. Researchers at
              the University of California at Santa Cruz will study the major high-nutrient,
              low-chlorophyll  regions of the oceanic Bering Sea gyre and the western
              subarctic gyre - regions that they believe are Fe-limited.   They will also
              examine the Bering Sea Shelf - a productive region that covers almost half of
              the Bering Sea.  This is an extremely wide continental shelf, ranging from 500
              to  over 800 km in width.  There has been mention of an "iron curtain"
              occurring over the inner  shelf of the Bering Sea, although there are no data
              available to confirm this idea.  There is a  "Green Belt" of high chlorophyll
              and primary production that occurs throughout the summer at  the shelf break
              which must receive adequate Fe along with macro-nutrients to sustain itself. 
              An  emphasis of this study will be to examine the distribution of Fe (and other
              micronutrient trace  metals) relative to the macronutrient distributions in
              order to gain insight into the relative supply  and demand of micro- and
              macronutrient elements in the various regions of the Bering Sea.  

In
              addition to the major field effort in the Bering Sea, these researchers will
              conduct a study to address the role of iron in influencing phytoplankton
              communities in the central California upwelling  system. 


