Title       : RUI: Engineering the Imperative Mood: The Wartime Nexus of Economics,
               Statistics, and Control Engineering, 1940-1960
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0137158

Award Number: 0137158
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy L. Klein jklein@mbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mary Baldwin College
	      
	      Staunton, VA  24401    540/887-7235

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES Proposal 0137158
RUI: Engineering the Imperative Mood:
              The Wartime Nexus of Economics, Statistics, and Control Engineering,
              1940-1960
Judy L. Klein, Mary Baldwin College


This project investigates
              how scientists drawing on three disciplines -- economics, statistics, and
              control engineering -- shaped a new applied mathematics as researchers designed
              mechanisms for warfare that controlled rather than simply recorded. Norbert
              Wiener described the contrast in what these scientists sought as that between
              new mechanisms in the "imperative mood" versus earlier devices that operated in
              the "indicative mood." The significance of the shift is broad. In the course of
              designing physical devices in the imperative mood, researchers constructed
              mathematical models and algorithms that social scientists later appropriated.
              As they were passed between engineering and economic applications, similar
              models took on deterministic, stochastic or adaptive forms. The process of
              solving problems for a military client, which 
involved reasoning with
              physical analogies and tailoring the solution process to computational
              resources, changed the use and construction of models in applied mathematics,
              and ultimately changed the idea of what was a solution to an applied
              mathematical problem. By 1960, the imperative mood had spread beyond the
              devices under initial study to the analytical disciplines
              themselves.

Through cases of specific mathematical protocol, Klein uses
              World War II and cold war documents in the National Archives, the RAND
              Corporation Archives and the Economist Papers at Duke University to investigate
              the transformation in economics, statistics and control  engineering to
              modeling optimal, multistage decision processes. These protocols include
              sequential analysis, exponentially weighted moving averages, optimal inventory
              control, dynamic programming, the Kalman filter, and adaptive models in
              general. In addition to
researching the material origins of these model and
              algorithms, Klein examines the stages of formulation, user needs, media, and
              government financing that stimulated their diffusion to the managerial and
              social sciences. 

Outcomes of the research include a monograph, pedagogical
              examples for undergraduate courses in applied statistics and economics, and a
              treatment, of the case of the exponential smoothing circuit in lead gun sights,
              for consideration by the Public Broadcasting Service.

