Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0137542

Award Number: 0137542
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry D. Kurtz hkurtz@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1681      ADVANCE - FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1681,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will examine microbial diversity and ecology on a portion of the
              Colorado Plateau in Utah. First, it will expand and characterize an existing
              culture collection, which will serve as a resource to the research community
              interested in bacterial taxonomy and natural products. Data obtained from the
              characterization of this culture collection will allow the distribution of
              novel microbes found in this study to be examined. Second, a survey of
              community complexity will be conducted using molecular techniques to obtain
              qualitative and quantitative data about the structure of these microbial
              communities. Finally, the role of these microbial communities in stabilizing
              the friable sandstones of the region will be investigated. Experiments
              measuring the strength of the microbial communities when grown in a sand and
              sandstone environment will provide an estimate of the mechanical strength
              provided by the microbial community to the sandstone.

Microbes impact our
              environment in multiple and quite often subtle ways. These subtle impacts are
              seen throughout our National Parks and Monuments located on the Colorado
              Plateau of Utah, Colorado, Arizona and New Mexico. Microbial communities found
              in this region live within the pore spaces of the sandstones that dominate the
              area (cryptoendolithic communities). These organisms exert a nearly
              imperceptible influence on the rate of erosion through their growth. It is this
              change in erosion rate that results in the various land forms found on the
              Colorado Plateau. Studies have been conducted to examine the microbial
              diversity within these communities, but these studies have focused on the
              photosynthetic components while this study focuses on the organisms that use
              carbon compounds for energy (chemoheterotrophs). Results from this project can
              be used for a variety of purposes, including the design of better management
              practices for the National Park Service, better methods to control beach
              erosion, and advances in natural products discovery.

