Title       : Theoretical and Computational Methods for Long-Distance Electron Tunneling in
               Biological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0137652

Award Number: 0137652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexei A. Stuchebrukhov stuchebr@chem.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded jointly by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division, the Computational Mathematics Program of the
              Division of Mathematical Sciences, and the Molecular Biophysics Program in the
              Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Stuchebrukhov will develop
              theoretical and computational methods to study long-distance electron tunneling
              in biological systems.  The Tunneling Currents Method, developed earlier by
              Stuchebrukhov, will be further tested and applied to specific experimental
              systems.  Among the issues this work will focus on are refining the
              computational approach to make it useful for calculating very small tunneling
              interactions and incorporating the inelastic effects that are due to protein
              nuclear dynamics.  The work will examine a number of issues that are important
              to experimentalists, such as how protein dynamics affect the rates of
              long-distance electron transfer, whether electron-transfer pathways are real or
              not, and the problem of coupling proton-transfers with electron transfer steps
              over long distances.  

This project focuses on improving the accuracy of
              calculating electron transfer rates in biological systems, an important problem
              at the interface of chemistry and biology.  The issues examined relate to
              understanding the function and dynamics of a number of important systems whose
              molecular structures have recently become known, such as photosynthetic
              reaction centers, allowing a comparison between theory and experiment. 
              Ultimately this work is valuable in understanding how to utilize new
              technologies, including nanoscale science and biotechnology, as well as in
              training undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students in the applications
              of theoretical and computational chemistry to important problems in
              contemporary science.  

