Title       : The Dynamics of Political Attitude Formation in a Milieu of Multiple Weak
               Parties: A Context-Sensitive Analysis of Voting Behavior in Two Brazilian
               Cities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0137088

Award Number: 0137088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry C. Ames barrya@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

This research studies the determinants of electoral choice in emerging
              democracies, where the number of parties is large, there is a low degree of
              partisanship, and volatile electorates. In such environments, how do citizens
              learn about issues and candidates? How do social background and economic
              circumstance combine with partisan ties, ideological predispositions, and
              media-delivered information to shape mass political behavior? What are the
              effects of conversations with neighbors and political activists? Is there
              accountability in electoral processes with these microfoundations? 
This
              project tests a comprehensive model of political attitude formation and change
              in Brazil, a country ideal for the study of mass behavior under multiple
              parties and weak partisanship. With the nation about to embark on its fourth
              presidential campaign since redemocratizing, the number of parties is high but
              stable. Although a rough left-right continuum differentiates the major parties
              and many voters, only a small minority of citizens expresses any partisan
              identification. The media are politically and technologically sophisticated,
              and civil society is increasingly mobilized. At the same time, more Brazilians
              point to informal conversations with friends, family and colleagues as their
              main source of political information than to any other source. The result is
              that Brazil, like many countries with weak, multiple parties, has very volatile
              and unpredictable election campaigns. Finally, Brazil is also ideal for testing
              the institutional sources of mass political behavior because it varies
              internally in terms of partisan alignments, individual party strength and
              electoral rules. 
To capture these various influences on mass political
              attitudes, this project proposes a context- sensitive panel study during the
              elections of 2002 in two Brazilian cities: Juiz de Fora (Minas Gerais) and
              Caxias do Sui (Rio Grande do SuI). Neighborhoods will be sampling units: 100
              adults, enough to establish aggregate neighborhood opinion, will be interviewed
              in each of 20 neighborhoods in each city. The first wave will take place before
              the campaign begins, in March. The second wave will be just before the first
              round of the election, and the third wave will be after the second round, in
              the middle of October. About 800 "discussion partners" of the main respondents
              will also be interviewed. Concurrently, print media sources, TV news, and
              party-controlled TV programs will be content analyzed. Finally, members of the
              associations Iand political organizations that comprise each neighborhood's
              "political context" will be interviewed. 
This project will produce the first
              theoretically and empirically grounded model of vote choice in a milieu of
              numerous weak parties; that is, the first model including all the major factors
              potentially influencing electoral behavior. Because the Brazilian environment
              is matched by many emerging democracies in Eastern Europe and Latin America,
              our results will illuminate questions of democratic accountability, media and
              campaign influence, and the effects of political and social networks in many
              other settings as well.

