Title       : Stress Induced Coral Mortality: The Role of Opportunistic Bacterial Infections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0137748

Award Number: 0137748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391715             (Estimated)
Investigator: Forest Rohwer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Coral reefs have declined dramatically over the last three decades. Several
              factors may have contributed to this process, including over-fishing,
              increasing CO2 levels, changes in sea surface temperatures, eutrophication,
              sedimentation, and pollutants. However the causal relationship between most of
              these stressors and reef decline has yet to be established.  There has also
              been an alarming increase in coral disease incidence during the last two
              decades. The causes of the majority of these diseases remain unknown yet the
              diseases continue to cause massive die offs of corals. Of the 29 coral diseases
              that have been reported, only two pathogens have been isolated which fulfill
              Koch's postulates. Are some of the undiagnosed diseases caused by
              opportunistic, rather than specific, pathogens?
	Coral disease incidences and
              human activity are correlated. Again, the causal connection, if any, between
              these two observations is not known.  Dr. Rohwer and associates suggest that
              corals exposed to anthropogenic and environmental stressors become susceptible
              to opportunistic infection resulting in coral mortality and disease.   In
              preliminary studies, they have found that the microbial community normally
              living on corals consists of specific bacteria growing at a controlled rate.
              For example, corals living on reefs as far apart as Bermuda and Panama have
              characteristic microbiotas, that are specific to individual coral species. They
              have also observed that bacterial numbers and growth rates are very similar
              between healthy corals.
	The relationship between the coral and its associated
              microbial community rapidly changes when the coral is exposed to stressful
              environmental or anthropogenic conditions. In experiments, additions of organic
              nutrients rapidly lead to coral death, which was prevented by adding
              antibiotics. This strongly suggests that bacterial overgrowth is responsible
              for the stressor-induced mortality. Other investigators have shown that coral
              mortality caused by stressors, including sedimentation, crude oil, and copper
              sulfate, could be prevented using antibiotics.   The investigators have also
              documented that both bacterial numbers and production rates increase by over an
              order of magnitude on diseased, as compared to healthy, corals.
	In this
              research, they will characterize the normal range of microbial growth
              parameters and prokaryotic diversity on healthy, unstressed M. franksi. They
              will then treat corals with a number of potential stressors to determine which
              kill corals by causing microbial overgrowth. Finally, they will monitor changes
              in bacterial growth and community composition that occurs with opportunistic
              bacterial infection.   This research will improve our understanding of the
              relationship between a coral and its associated bacterial community, and how
              this relationship changes with stress and disease. This research will also
              provide a better understanding of the connection between human activities and
              the incidence of coral disease, providing important data for the conservation
              and management of coral reefs.

