Title       : Production and Exchange at Cancuen: Reconstructing the Classic Maya Political
               Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0137639

Award Number: 0137639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur A. Demarest arthur.a.demarest@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Dr. Demarest and his team will direct two seasons of NSF-sponsored
              archaeological and ecological investigations in the Upper Pasion River valley
              of the Peten rainforest of Guatemala.  This multidisciplinary research will be
              the first intensive study of this region, which is located at the interface of
              Central America's largest rainforest zone and the mountainous volcanic
              highlands to the south.  Investigations will begin at the site of Cancuen, an
              area of ruined elite and residential architecture that covers over five square
              kilometers.  Cancuen was located precisely at the "head of navigation" of the
              Pasion/Usumacinta River system, the major trade and transport artery of the
              ancient Maya world.  Dr. Demarest hypothesizes that highland jade, pyrite,
              obsidian, and other volcanic rock were transported by foot to Cancuen through
              the highland passes to the south.  From there these materials, or finished
              products, were exchanged along the Pasion/Usumacinta River route to the rest of
              the ancient Maya world.  Preliminary research has uncovered evidence supporting
              this hypothesis, including domestic workshops in jade, obsidian, pyrite, and
              other hard stone surrounding Cancuen's monumental royal palace.  We also
              uncovered a protected formal river portage connected by causeways to the palace
              and workshop zones.

	The 2002-2003 NSF field seasons will investigate
              residences and activity areas throughout Cancuen, allowing statistical
              assessment of economic activities and their correlation to status levels and
              group affiliations, as determined by associated artifacts, architectural
              features, proportions of exotic materials, and osteological studies, including
              isotopic, micropathology, and paleopathology analyses of nutrition and diet. 
              Extensive horizontal excavations of activity areas will explore workshops, and
              formal, statistical, and microwear study of recovered artifacts will be used to
              assess production technologies and organization, as well as the status and
              other activities of the artisans.  In turn, these results will be compared to
              studies throughout the urban zone to characterize the nature of this ancient
              economy, including attached versus independent specialists, degree of  state
              control, and the economic strategies of the artisan/producers themselves, as
              well as overall organizational structure and distribution of finished products.
               Correlations with the subsistence economy of Cancuen will be based on
              ecological analyses and reconstruction.  Ceramic, lithic, and figurine data
              will be subjected to a variety of chemical compositional analyses to determine
              source areas and exchange systems.  

	The findings will clarify the role
              that trade and production of goods played in the rise, maintenance, and decline
              of Classic Maya civilization.  In turn, the results contribute to our
              understanding of the nature of ancient economies and the impact of economic
              factors in the development and decline of complex societies.  

