Title       : Taxation, Redistribution, and Provision of Public Services in a System of
               Jurisdictions with Mobile Citizens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2002    
File        : a0137304

Award Number: 0137304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Romer romer@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It has long been recognized that actual and potential movement of households and
              factors of production across jurisdictional boundaries may have a significant
              impact on the politics and policy choices of subnational governments. Analysis
              of public good provision is increasingly based on models that characterize
              self-selection of citizens into municipalities and collective choice via
              majority rule within municipalities. This project combines a theoretical
              framework of interjurisdictional sorting with a newly-developed empirical
              strategy that takes sorting effects into account. 

The theoretical model
              yields strong predictions about the distribution of households by income within
              and across jurisdictions. These distributions can be; matched with empirical
              income distributions observed in a sample of communities. The key
              methodological insight is that matching income distributions allows us to
              characterize boundary indifference loci of adjacent communities, as well as
              loci of pivotal voters within each community in locational equilibrium. The
              estimator proposed here controls for both observed and unobserved heterogeneity
              among households, observed and unobserved characteristics of communities, the
              potential endogeneity of prices and expenditures and the self-selection of
              households into communities of their choice. The structural parameters of the
              model are estimated using data of the Boston Metropolitan Area and the project
              extends the analysis to other settings. 

The extent to which mobility
              constrains the choices of a jurisdiction depends not only on actual mobility,
              but also on how political actors or citizens perceive the impact of mobility on
              their communities. The project formulates and tests various hypotheses about
              voter behavior, with special focus on the extent to which voters in a community
              take mobility by others into account when making political decisions. The
              project also investigates the importance of clustering in communities by income
              or other characteristics, such as race or ethnicity. 

