Title       : ADVANCE Fellows: Effects of Host Age-Structure on the Development and Evolution
               of Infectious Diseases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0137687

Award Number: 0137687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maia N. Martcheva mayam@duke.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1681,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0137687
PI: 			Martcheva, Maia 
Institution:
              		Polytechnic University of New York
Program: 		Infrastructure
Program
              Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: ADVANCE Fellows Award: Effects of Host
              Age-Structure on the Development and Evolution on Infectious Diseases

The
              research component of this project focuses on the study of the role of disease
              regulation and coevolution of host-parasite systems in populations with
              structure through the use of partial differential equations and dynamical
              systems theory. Research on this central objective is carried out through three
              specific systems. The first model elucidates the role of disease progression
              (age of infection)  and super-infection in generating complex dynamics and
              multiple equilibria with alternating stability. The second investigates the
              impact of host heterogeneity on the evolution of infectivity and multiple
              infections of the same host. The third application is concerned with the role
              of host heterogeneity in the genetic diversity of a disease pathogen. The
              impact of age-structure on coexistence of competing strains of the same
              causative agent is investigated and so are the effects of complex dynamics on
              the coevolution of microparasite virulence and host heterogeneity. The
              educational component of this project is concerned with the integration of
              mathematics and scientific computing, and their application to life sciences, 
              in the early and later stages of postsecondary education and training. As part
              of the project the investigator will work for the incorporation of MATLAB into
              the calculus curriculum through development of appropriate instructional
              materials. The investigator will also give lectures and mentor  student 
              research projects  in a REU program in computational, mathematical and
              theoretical biology at Cornell University. 

Maia Martcheva proposes
              activities to develop an academic career in Mathematical Biology. The research
              plan focuses on the study of the role of disease regulation and coevolution of
              host-parasite systems in populations with structure through the use of
              mathematical modeling. Historically  strategies for disease control have relied
              on threshold conditions, the most well-known of which requires that the
              reproductive number of the disease (given by  the average number of secondary
              infections caused by one infective in a population of susceptibles)  be smaller
              than one. The models considered in this project  demonstrate that this
              threshold condition may not be  sufficient for the eradication of the disease,
              particularly in case of  diseases with high mortality. An alternative threshold
              requires that the reproductive number is reduced below another value (smaller
              than one), called transmission threshold. The transmission threshold may be
              difficult to calculate but an underestimate can be computed which gives a
              threshold condition  leading  to the eradication of the disease. Martcheva's
              educational activities include curriculum development and mentoring
              undergraduates in mathematical biology.   




Date: January 28, 2002

