Title       : Femtosecond Studies of Coupled Electron-Lattice Dynamics in Doped Perovskite
               Manganites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  2002   
File        : a0137322

Award Number: 0137322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunter Luepke luepke@as.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This condensed matter physics project seeks to elucidate electron-lattice
              coupling, soft mode dynamics, and spin-flip processes near the metal-insulator
              phase transition in doped perovskite manganites.  Femtosecond time-resolved
              optical response techniques will be employed to measure the dynamics of the
              various processes that dictate the unusual transport properties of the
              manganese oxides.  The primary objective is to study the coupled dynamics of
              the charge carriers and that of the lattice deformations, which surround them. 
              The advantages of the time-domain approach to investigate these heavily damped
              responses are clear, especially near structural phase changes where the soft
              modes are characteristically heavily damped or over damped.  Magneto-elastic
              coupling is important to understand the low-temperature spin dynamics of
              manganite.  Information about the spin dynamics will be used to test various
              theoretical approaches that sensitive to this parameter.  A femtosecond-tunable
              laser system will be employed for impulsive-stimulated Raman scattering (ISRS),
              pump-probe transient reflectivity and magneto-optical Kerr-effect experiments.
              Systematic studies of the natural frequency and damping of the soft optical
              phonon modes by ISRS measurements will provide new information about electronic
              and structural instabilities and phase changes of these strongly correlated
              electron systems.  The goal of our magnetic field-dependent studies is to
              elucidate correlation effects of the mobile charge carriers and their
              dependence on the magnetic structure of the doped manganese oxides. The
              students involved in this project will be trained in an interdisciplinary field
              including modern optics, material science, and computational
              modeling.

Interest in the manganese oxides as exceptional candidates for
              magnetic sensors and detectors has been rekindled because of the colossal
              magnetoresistance effect observed in these materials at room temperature. Thin
              films open up new possibilities for applications in diverse areas of technology
              such as magnetic random access memories and read heads for hard disk drives.
              The goal of this research program is to elucidate the unusual magneto-transport
              properties of doped manganese oxides by studying the coupled dynamics of the
              charge carriers and that of the lattice deformations that surround them. 
              Femtosecond time-resolved optical response techniques will be employed to
              measure the dynamics of the various processes that dictate the unusual
              transport properties of the manganese oxides.  The goal of the magnetic
              field-dependent studies is to reveal correlation effects of the mobile charge
              carriers and their dependence on the magnetic structure of the doped manganese
              oxides.  Experimental studies of the spin dynamics can be used to test various
              theoretical approaches that are sensitive to this parameter.  These fundamental
              studies will provide new information about the mechanism that governs the large
              spin-dependent transport in this strongly correlated material system.  The
              training that graduate and undergraduate students will receive while working on
              this project will prepare them for attractive material science or optics
              related careers in industry, academe, or government.

