Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Iron Age Archaeology in The Gambia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0137956

Award Number: 0137956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7590               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla Sinopoli sinopoli@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Carla Sinopoli, Ms. Lawson will carry out analyses of
              archaeological materials recovered during fieldwork in The Gambia, West Africa.
              Lawson's fieldwork in the Gambia Valley, conducted between 1998 and 2000,
              represents one of the first attempts to systematically study the archaeology of
              this region of West Africa. Long known for its mysterious stone circle and
              tumulus monuments built in the first and early second millennia AD, very little
              is understood about the people of the Gambia Valley responsible for building
              these monuments, which often house human burials. In order to understand
              prehistoric polities in the region more fully, Lawson conducted a survey of
              archaeological sites located in the stone circle and tumulus zone. Over 60
              village and associated iron-working sites were recovered, along with numerous
              monumental sites. Archaeological excavations were conducted at three of the
              village sites and at one iron-working site.

National Science Foundation
              funds will be used 1) to conduct analyses of artifacts recovered during
              excavation and 2) to obtain radiocarbon dates from charcoal samples taken
              during excavation. Artifact analysis will concentrate on faunal and botanical
              remains. The analysis of such remains will give us a much better idea of the
              subsistence practices common in the Gambia Valley in the past. The
              identification of species utilized by past inhabitants will also help to
              reconstruct the natural environment at the time of site occupation; the
              environment has been subject to rapid deforestation in recent decades and so is
              different now than it was 500 or 1000 years ago. The attainment of radiocarbon
              dates from the excavated sites will allow for the construction of a regional
              chronology. Radiocarbon dating is one of the best dating techniques for
              archaeological sites, which are more than 500 years old. Because the Gambia
              Valley is so understudied, until Lawson's work only one radiocarbon date was
              available for the entire country (from a stone circle monument). By obtaining
              radiocarbon dates for each site excavated, it will be possible to study how
              politics and society have changed over the last 1,500 years in the Gambia
              Valley. Radiocarbon dating will also provide absolute dates for ceramic
              assemblages; changes in ceramic style are often chronologically sensitive. With
              the dates of ceramic assemblages firmly established, it will be possible to
              estimate the date of archaeological sites from surface finds alone.

When the
              Portuguese first reached the Gambia River in the 1450's, they found it to be
              part of a dynamic trading system and home to many independent polities.
              Lawson's archaeological work in The Gambia will help to flesh out our
              understanding of how these Gambian polities developed and the changing roles
              they played in regional African trading systems, the trans-Saharan trade, and
              the later Atlantic trade. Knowledge of Gambian prehistory will add to the
              growing corpus of African archaeological data.

