Title       : Collaborative Research: Topics in Factor Analysis of Large Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a0137084

Award Number: 0137084
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219620             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jushan Bai jushan.bai@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An inevitable outcome as we move forward in calendar time and as information
              technology advances is an increase in the volume of data available. Methods
              previously developed for handling a few variables are not adequate for
              analyzing hundreds of variables. This research is motivated by the need for
              empirical tools that can synthesize the data concisely and in ways that
              facilitate economic analysis.  The focus of  this research is on factor models.
              In a factor framework, components that have explanatory power in a large number
              of series are distinguished from the idiosyncratic ones that do not have
              pervasive effects on the data. This common-idiosyncratic decomposition provides
              an effective way of compressing a large volume of data to a manageable
number
              of factors.  Statistical results currently available for factor analysis assume
              either the time or the cross-section dimension of the panel is small. This
              research develops tools for factor analysis when both dimensions of the data
              panel are large. We show how the common and idiosyncratic components, although
              unobserved, can be consistently estimated from the data by the method of
              principal components whether or not the data are stationary. We will develop
              statistical criteria for determining the unknown number of factors from the
              data. We will also develop tests to determine whether non-stationarity in the
              observed data is of the common or idiosyncratic type. We will establish
              statistical properties of the principal components estimator. Different methods
              of estimating the common factors will also be considered.

Many issues in
              macro and financial economics can be studied within a factor framework. For
              example, business cycles are characterized by the co-movement of a large number
              of economic time series. Asset returns have been shown to have a factor
              structure, with idiosyncratic variations being diversifiable, while systematic
              ones are not. Notions such as global trends and worldwide economic downturns
              are used frequently. The factor framework provides a formal treatment of these
              concepts.  By providing the statistical foundation for factor analysis of large
              dimensions, our results enable researchers to use hundreds of series over
              decades, thousands of asset returns over years, and hundreds of country level
              series over centuries, to estimate the factors and conduct inference. The 
              results of this research will make it possible to make maximum use of
              information available without having to choose subjectively which series are to
              be analyzed. 

