Title       : Rare Earth Elements and Nd Isotopes in Hydrothermal Metalliferous Sediments:
               Pleistocene and Cenozoic Paleoceanography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0137350

Award Number: 0137350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodey Batiza                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183197             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Sherrell sherrell@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this study, the PIs will test and develop a new paleoclimate proxy- Rare
              Earth Element (REE) abundances of carbonate sediments that contain
              metalliferous sediment originating from hydrothermal plumes. In combination,
              the PIs will use Nd isotope values (?Nd) as a proxy to help unravel differences
              in weathering rates and sources from variations in seawater REE abundances due
              to other causes. The short residence times of the REE (<1-4 Ka) mean that
              potentially, these proxies could provide high resolution data. Preliminary data
              show that metalliferous sediment records bottom water REE patterns and that the
              REE patterns are virtually identical for the Atlantic and Pacific. The entire
              REE pattern is reflected in differences in Nd/Er. Preliminary data for a core
              for the last 135 Ka indicate that Nd/Er and ???O are well correlated, showing
              good potential for the proxy. Additional preliminary data for a longer period
              (last 28Ma) show interesting patterns and large changes in  ?Nd  and Nd/Er for
              this period, again arguing that these combined proxies have potential to
              identify changing weathering inputs to the ocean. In order to further evaluate
              this proxy, the PIs will analyze hydrothermal plume material from additional
              hydrothermal vents in the northern and  southern EPR, carry out lab experiments
              of REE uptake in vitro, calibrate the Nd/Er proxy using Holocene core tops from
              SEPR cores, evaluate possible diagenetic effects on the preservation of  the
              proxy signals using cores with known and diverse diagenetic histories, and
              explore the behavior of  both proxies on Ma to 10 Ka time scales for large
              climatic variations in the Oligocene and Miocene.

