Title       : Agriculture, Paleoenvironment, and Human Occupation in the Pacific Coastal
               Lowlands of Southern Mesoamerica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0137413

Award Number: 0137413
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66816              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector Neff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Arroyo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah M. Pearsall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Hector Neff and his collaborators
              will complete the analysis of five sediment cores from Pacific coastal
              Guatemala that are known to span the time periods when people first began
              modifying the landscape for agriculture and other subsistence purposes.
              Preliminary results from one location suggest that people brought maize or a
              direct ancestor of maize to the region before 5000 B.C. and that dramatic
              agricultural intensification took place beginning around 3500 B.C. 

The
              signal of human modification and other landscape changes can be detected in
              sediment cores via the changing frequencies of plant microfossils (phytoliths
              and pollen) and charcoal together with variation in sedimentation rates. When
              people cut or burn down the tropical forest for agriculture, weeds and charcoal
              become more common in the record as trees and other forest species decline.
              Sedimentation rates also tend to increase as forest cover is removed. Maize and
              other agricultural crops can be identified both from pollen and phytoliths, the
              combined evidence providing the most secure identification (phytoliths are
              microscopic silica bodies that accumulate growing plants). These changes are
              placed in a chronological context by AMS radiocarbon dating of organic matter
              from selected levels in the cores. 

The period between 3500 B.C. and 800
              B.C. in Pacific coastal Guatemala is of particular interest because it was
              during this period that many of the distinctive characteristics of Mesoamerican
              complex societies coalesced. By the end of the period, people in most locations
              depended heavily on maize agriculture, large sites with monumental architecture
              and elaborate stone sculpture were being constructed, and social stratification
              had appeared. The fundamental shifts in subsistence, the increased tethering of
              people to specific locations, and the beginning of major investment in
              architectural infrastructure constituted the emergence of Mesoamerican
              civilization. Unfortunately this Pacific region has been relatively
              understudied and details of the sequence are poorly known compared, for
              example, to the Olmec heartland on the Gulf Coast of Mexico. The work of Dr.
              Neff and his colleagues will both establish an environmental context for this
              cultural progression and provide insight into the process itself.



