Title       : ADVANCE Fellows: Bilingual Processing and Acquisition in Multidisciplinary
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0137851

Award Number: 0137851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244189             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irina A. Sekerina sekerina@postbox.csi.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Staten Island
	      2800 Victory Boulevard
	      Staten Island, NY  10314    718/982-2254

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1681,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
This project concentrates on broad aspects of bilingual research and has two
              goals: 1) to investigate bilingual processing in a series of language
              experiments and 2) to pilot the eye-tracking technology with bilinguals as a
              special population.  Bilinguals represent a special population group due to a
              characteristic of their communicative abilities referred to as "performance
              deficit."  Four experiments will examine how general and language-specific
              sources of information influence processing performance of bilingual
              Russian-English adults and how on-line processing mechanisms are developed by
              bilingual Russian-English children using free head-mounted eye-tracking
              technology. By monitoring the eye movements during listening, much can be
              inferred about language interpretation in processing and development.  The
              benefits that this technology can provide for research on very diverse classes
              of subjects, such as special needs populations, foreign speakers, and minority
              groups with cultural and language considerations will be explored.  This
              research program will also help train graduate students in the
              multi-disciplinary areas of linguistics, neuroscience, and cognitive
              science.

This award is supported through the NSF ADVANCE Program. The
              overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of
              women in the scientific and engineering workforce through the increased
              representation and advancement of women in academic science and engineering
              careers. 

