Title       : Regions: A new architectural capability in networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0137403

Award Number: 0137403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1035878            (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen R. Sollins sollins@lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Naive pictures of the Internet frequently portray a small collection of hosts or
              LAN's connected by a "cloud" of connectivity. The truth is more complex. The
              IP-level structure of the Internet is composed from a large number of
              constituent networks, each of which differs in some or all of transmission
              technologies, routing protocols, administrative models, security policies, QoS
              capabilities, pricing mechanisms, and similar attributes. On top of this, a
              whole new structure of application-layer overlays and content distribution
              
networks, equally diverse in the sorts of ways mentioned above, is rapidly
              evolving. Virtually any horizontal slice through the current Internet structure
              reveals a loosely coupled federation of separately defined, operated, and
              managed entities, interconnected to varying degrees, and often differing
              drastically in internal requirements and implementation. Intuitively, it is
              natural to think of each of these entities as existing in a region of the
              network, with each region having coherent internal technology and policies, and
              each region 
managing its interactions with other regions of the net according
              to some defined set of rules and policies.

The thesis of the present
              proposal is that this basic, general notion of a region is a powerful tool for
              managing the increasingly complex demands on the Internet and its successors,
              and thus should made into an explicit, first-class component of the network
              architecture. It is suggested that the many uses of the region concept share a
              well-defined set of core ideas and operations, and that it is therefore useful
              to separate the concept of "region" from any specific use of the concept and
              provide it as an independent, reusable abstraction. It is further suggested
              that the region abstraction can be implemented as a concrete software entity,
              and that doing so will provide protocol designers and implementers at all
              levels of the stack with logically structured, scalable, high-performance
              access to an important classof functionality.

The region is a generalization
              of a group and a bound in some space. The two defining concepts of a region are
              a set of contained members, which share some common invariants, and a boundary,
              which allows us to capture the notion of actions taken when entering and
              leaving the region. Furthermore, it is capable of self-adaptation to changes in
              its size or usage patterns, allowing the same abstraction to apply under widely
              differing demands on scalability, performance, and efficiency.  Ideas are found
              useful in many places in networking 
to address problems such as scaling,
              distribution, efficiency, heterogeneity, cost recovery, and many others.

It
              is proposed in this research to define and develop the region abstraction and
              explore its utility as a general mechanism in networking.  The research will
              proceed through several phases of three interrelated activities.  The first is
              the development and definition of the region abstraction itself, with focus on
              requirements, choice of capabilities, abstract operations, and related issues.
              The second is designing and building a prototype implementation of the region
              entity, with focus on appropriate algorithms and adaptation strategies.  The
              third is to examine and validate the region concept through use in three
              example problems. 
The examples serve two purposes, to explore the utility of
              having regions available and to further refine and improve the definition of a
              region.  They are chosen specifically to stress different aspects of the region
              abstraction.

The intention is that the region is a neutral mechanism
              provided to address many problems, both within a single network layer and
              across layers.  The research will lead to a better understanding of management
              of multiple layers and the impacts that one can have on another in a controlled
              way.  The research is expected to lead to a framework for decision-making about
              adaptation to changes in size and usage patterns.  Finally, the research is
              expected to provide a better understanding in each of the example areas of the
              problems that arise there and how to address them.



