Title       : SGER: Integrating Actor Model with Real-Time Elastic Control Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0137090

Award Number: 0137090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lui Sha lrs@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gul A. Agha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2878      SPECIAL PROJECTS - CCR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1658,1667,9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The rapid advancement of networking technologies and increasing use of embedded
              devices has extended the scope of traditional computational systems to include
              intelligent control of physical environments. There are many challenges in such
              embedded hybrid control systems. Traditionally, the programming language
              community focused on modeling and reasoning about the semantics of interactions
              between distributed agents, while the real-time computing community focused on
              how to manage CPU and network communication resources so that real-time tasks
              can predictably meet their end-to-end timing constraints.  

This proposed
              effort integrates the Actor theory with the theory of real-time elastic
              control. Real time elastic control theory is an innovative approach that
              integrates the design of a feedback controller with the design of a real-time
              scheduler. Traditionally, feedback control is a prototypical example of hard
              real-time applications. This work allows the controller to adapt to
              unpredictable surges in workload by slowing down its sampling frequencies and
              adjusting its gains. Such workload surges are unschedulable without the
              controller adaptation. The word "elastic" refers to the dynamic changes of
              controller deadlines to improve the management of available computing
              resources. This work broke the barrier between real-time scheduling theory and
              feedback control theory. By integrating this theory with Actor model, the
              barriers between programming language and concurrency control theory, real-time
              scheduling theory, and feedback control theory will be broken.  In addition to
              the usual qualitative properties (such as eventuality) handled by current
              formalisms for distributed systems, this work will lay the foundation for a
              unified framework that will allow users to reason about quantitative properties
              including whether the timing requirements can be met and the physical system
              under control is stable.  

