Title       : Documenting the History of Physicists in Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0137113

Award Number: 0137113
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130759             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. JOSEPH ANDERSON RJA@AIP.ORG  (Principal Investigator current)
              Spencer R. Weart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Physics
	      One Physics Ellipse
	      College Park, MD  207403842    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Abstract
SES Proposal 0137113 
Documenting the History of Physicists
              in Industry
Joseph Anderson, American Institute of Physics

Corporate R&D
              represents a major segment of the American science establishment, and
              our
nation's prosperity rests in large part on a brilliant century of
              industrial research and innovation.
However, the history of industrial R&D is
              one of the least documented segments of American
society.  The Center for
              History of Physics of the American Institute of Physics (AIP) proposes
              to
conduct a three-year project to 1) create new sources of information
              through oral history
interviews, surveys, and site visits; 2) identify extant
              sources; and 3) study how to preserve the
history of industrial R&D on a
              continuing basis.  The project examines 15 of the 25 companies that employ more
              than half of the Ph.D. physicists in American industry. With lead support
from
              the Science and Technology Studies program of the National Science Foundation
              to cover
the salary and fringe benefits of the project historian for the first
              two years of the project, AIP
provides funds for other project activities,
              with additional support from other funding agencies.

The most important
              result of this undertaking is a new and original evaluation of ways
              to
preserve the history of industrial research. American industrial growth has
              been based on
knowledge and innovation, and these processes have created vast
              amounts of records,
anniversary and historical publications, and other
              sources. Many of these materials have
disappeared but some have survived. In
              addition, recent developments, especially maturing
electronic records systems
              and more stringent contractual requirements for documenting R&D,
offer
              opportunities for creating new approaches to preserving the history of
              industrial research on
an ongoing basis. The project explores past and present
              patterns and new developments.  Products include findings and recommendations
              based on an analysis of the records-creation
patterns, information needs, and
              extant historical records of some of the most important research-
centered
              U.S. corporations, as well as transcripts of the oral history interviews
              with
approximately 100 senior scientists and science administrators. This  is
              the first systematic oral history program to document industrial R&D. The oral
              histories are to be made available to researchers at the conclusion of the
              project, along with catalog of extant records identified during site visits and
              interviews.

The immediate products of the project 1) give corporate
              scientists and managers a variety of
approaches to preserving their heritage,
              2) make available to historians new sources for studying
the history of
              industrial R&D, and 3) provide archivists and other information professionals
              with
new approaches and new tools to appraise and preserve records.  Long-term
              products could include 1) an increased attention on the part of the private
              sector to preserving their heritage and 2) the integration of industrial
              research and development into mainstream science and technology studies.  The
              project builds on the History Center's extensive experience in exploring
              neglected areas in the history of science and creating strategies for
              documenting them. The design and
methodology are modeled on our successful
              ten-year Study of Multi-Institutional Collaborations,
and we expect the
              findings and recommendations of this project to have an equally important
              impact in documenting the history of science. The project staff is assisted by
              an Advisory Committee composed of distinguished industrial scientists, leading
              corporate archivists, and historians who provide advice and recommendations on
              the companies to be studied, the scientists to be interviewed, the
              administrators to contact, and the questions to ask. 

