Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Lesson Study in Mathematics Teacher Education,
               Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a0137345

Award Number: 0137345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail F. Burrill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 5921,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0137345
Burrill

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan seminar on lesson study in mathematics teacher education to be
              held in Park City Utah from July 12-18, 2002.  The co-organizers are Dr. Gail
              Burrill of the Mathematical Sciences Education Board at the National Academy of
              Sciences (NAS) and Professor Toshiakira Fujii of Tokyo Gakugei University in
              Japan.  The goal of the seminar will be to discuss in detail how the concept of
              lesson study can be framed as a medium for professional development, to
              identify common research priorities related to lesson study, and to explore
              possible areas of joint research cooperation.  The meeting will focus on lesson
              design and classroom practice, considering K-8 teachers in each country, and
              how lesson study might be adapted for use at the secondary level.  The framing
              of the seminar will be done jointly by educators from both countries under the
              direction of a Steering Committee representing the different constituencies and
              considering balance factors.   

The seminar will provide an opportunity for
              mathematics educators from the United States to probe into the underpinnings of
              lesson study, to learn how the Japanese think about mathematics and teaching
              mathematics, how they orchestrate discussion among teachers, and how they
              consider what is implicit in lesson study that helps teachers understand what
              it takes to teach well.  The results can serve as the focus of follow-up
              activities in the U.S., stimulate teacher educators into thinking differently
              about their practice, and lay the groundwork for research concerning questions
              about the role of lesson study in professional development.  Participants will
              be selected to include both ethnic and geographic diversity considerations as
              well as women and young researchers. The proceedings will be made available on
              the National Academy of Sciences web site.

