Title       : New Directions in Accounting and Traffic Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0137102

Award Number: 0137102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $649754             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Varghese varghese@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Accurate network traffic measurement is required for accounting, bandwidth
              provisioning, and detecting DOS attacks. However, keeping a counter to measure
              the traffic sent by each of a million concurrent flows is too expensive (using
              SRAM) or slow (using DRAM). The current state-of-the-art (e.g., Cisco NetFlow)
              methods which log periodically sampled packets are slow, inaccurate, and
              memory-intensive. This proposal introduces a paradigm shift by concentrating on
              the problem of measuring only "heavy" flows | i.e., flows whose traffic is
              above some threshold such as 1% of the link. After showing that a number of
              simple solutions based on cached
counters and classical sampling do not work,
              the resarchers describe two novel and scalable schemes for this purpose which
              take a constant number of memory references per packet and use a small amount
              of memory. Further, unlike NetFlow estimates, we have provable bounds on the
              accuracy of measured rates and the probability of false negatives. The
              researchers propose to implement, evaluate, and fine-tune these new ideas.     
                                                                                             
                   Using these ideas as a basis, the researchers also propose to investigate
              the following questions. First, they will investigate a new form of accounting
              called threshold accounting in which only flows above threshold are charged by
              usage while the rest are charged a fixed fee. Threshold accounting generalizes
              the familiar notions of usage-based and duration based pricing. Second, they
              propose to investigate a more general question: the computation of flow
              statistics at very high speeds using very small amounts of high speed memory.
              Examples of other potentially useful flow statistics include the number of
              flows, the standard deviation of flow sizes, the average duration of a flow
              etc. Naive algorithms to measure such quantities all scale linearly with the
              number of flows. Finally, with colleagues at CAIDA, the researchers plan to
              deploy our algorithms in real-time on 5 traffic monitors placed at strategic
              Internet sites (AIX, the UCSD backbone, and possibly on Abilene).              
                                                                                             
                                                            The potential impact of this
              proposal is the development of novel and practical tools for accounting,
              measurement, and security. These are three central problems as the Internet
              transitions from a research network to a commercial enterprise.
