Title       : The Quality Control of Oceanic CO2 Measurements: Preparation and Distribution of
               Reference Materials.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0137287

Award Number: 0137287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $669837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Dickson adickson@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0137287

In this project, scientists at the Scripps
              Institution of Oceanography will continue to produce and distribute a standard
              reference material for the quality control of oceanic carbon dioxide
              measurements, in particular those that are made as part of international global
              programs.  This will help to ensure that such measurements are comparable and
              accurate although made in different laboratories at different times; and will
              be an important factor in the design of a Global Ocean Observing System.  To
              achieve this, the Scripps laboratory will prepare standard materials (seawater)
              and certify them for the following parameters of the oceanic carbon dioxide
              system: total dissolved inorganic carbon, total alkalinity, hydrogen ion
              concentration, pH, and d13 C for a sample of sea water.  These reference
              materials will be distributed to US and international investigators to assist
              in the quality control of oceanic CO2 measurements. They will also be used to
              provide test samples for use in collaborative studies of the analytical methods
              that are used to determine these various parameters.  As part of this work, the
              scientific team plans to organize various such collaborative studies and will
              collaborate with the various investigators to ensure that the experience gained
              is documented in reports and in written methods that are widely disseminated. 
              

An important part of the project involves planning for the future. It is
              essential to assure a long- term supply of reference materials for future ocean
              science research, and it will be necessary to identify an agency or company
              that will take on this responsibility.  To encourage this, the investigators
              propose to interact with the U.S. National Institute for Standards and
              Technology, as well as with Ocean Scientific International (the IAPSO Standard
              Sea Water Service) and with various Japanese investigators to assess and
              recommend a plan for the future. 

