Title       : Temporal Constraints on the Delivery of Terrestrial Organic Carbon to Marine
               Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0137005

Award Number: 0137005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499773             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy I. Eglinton teglinton@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Konrad A. Hughen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0137005


In this project, researchers at the Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution will attempt to quantify the residence times of
              terrestrial vascular plant biomarkers between their synthesis on land and
              deposition in marine sediments.  The approach will involve ultra-high
              resolution sampling of anoxic, annually laminated sediments and
              compound-specific AMS 14 C dating of leaf waxes and lignin phenols. 
              Above-ground nuclear weapons testing peaked in 1963, creating a large and
              abrupt peak in atmospheric 14C concentration that is discernable well above the
              uncertainty in compound- specific AMS 14 C measurements.  The radiocarbon "bomb
              spike"  individual biomarker compounds (or compound classes) will be identified
              with near-annual sampling resolution.  The calendar age of the 14 C peak
              identified in the biomarker compounds will be compared to the known 1963 age
              layer in annually laminated sediments from four different marine sites to
              derive biomarker residence and transport times with precision as high as 1-2
              years.

A modeling approach will be used to examine the characteristics of
              the bomb spike curve, in order to distinguish between eolian and riverine
              transport pathways, as well as periods of storage in reservoirs (e.g., forest
              litter, soils, river beds, floodplains and lakes).  In addition to timing of
              the bomb spike, the high-resolution sampling will permit identification of
              details of the magnitude and shape of the curves, key diagnostics for reservoir
              storage time as well as contamination with ancient organic compounds.  The
              study locations will encompass a transect of climatic zones from the tropical
              Cariaco Basin (Venezuela), across the temperate United States (Pettaquamscutt
              River, RI; Santa Barbara Basin, CA; Eel River basin, CA), up to the boreal
              Saanich Inlet (British Columbia, Canada).  These study sites vary according to
              drainage basin (area, topography), climate (mean annual temperature,
              precipitation), vegetation cover (tropical rainforest, semi-arid scrubland,
              temperate deciduous forest, boreal evergreen forest), and degree of human
              land-use impact.  This proposed work should provide insights into a wide range
              of environmental and anthropogenic impacts on the residence times of
              terrestrial organic carbon, allowing results to be scaled globally.  In
              addition, accurately quantifying terrestrial biomarker residence times will
              contribute greatly to the development of these compounds as geochronological
              and paleoclimatic proxies. 

