Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award: Continuing and Enhancing a Career in Arctic Ecology
               Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0137832

Award Number: 0137832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449478             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Gough gough@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1681      ADVANCE - FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,1681,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
0137832
Gough

Terrestrial arctic research has tended to focus on plant
              populations or the entire ecosystem, with community patterns and processes less
              well studied, generating a lack of predictive ability of effects of climate
              change on different arctic plant communities and potential biotic feedbacks to
              an altered environment. This proposal seeks better understanding of vegetation
              patterns at the community level as well as of how processes at the ecosystem
              level are influenced by plant community composition. The PI currently has two
              NSF-funded research grants. One project is examining two common arctic plant
              communities in northern Alaska, moist acidic and moist non-acidic tundra. By
              monitoring plant responses to nutrient and temperature manipulations in both
              communities, and conducting experiments to examine germination and survival of
              important species, the PI is determining how the communities are maintained and
              how they respond differently to manipulations. The differences are being linked
              to ecosystem function through collaboration with an ecosystem ecologist. The
              second NSF grant is examining competition among seven clonal sedge species in
              southeastern Michigan calcareous wetlands. Although clonal growth is the
              dominant method of production of new individuals by plants in many ecosystems,
              including tundra, its effects on plant community structure remain unclear.
              Using community and individual-level experiments, the PI is examining both
              short- and long-term effects of competition among species that differ in clonal
              growth form; the results of this project are being used to generate new
              hypotheses to be tested in arctic plant communities. From this work, the
              population-level processes that have been well documented for some arctic plant
              species can be explicitly linked to the community and the ecosystem, thus
              providing better understanding of patterns and processes at all levels of
              organization, as well as predictions for biotic feedbacks to the changing
              arctic environment.

This award is supported through the NSF ADVANCE Program.
              The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of
              women in the scientific and engineering workforce through the increased
              representation and advancement of women in academic science and engineering
              careers.

