Title       : Collaborative Research: Patterns and Processes of Landscape Change in the
               Brazilian Amazon: A Longitudinal, Comparative Analysis of Smallholder Land Use
               Decision-Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0137020

Award Number: 0137020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78420              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Walker rwalker@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Land use decisions by smallholders are an important influence on landscape
              change in the Brazilian Amazon and are a major cause of forest clearance.  This
              research project will examine the factors that influence smallholder land use
              decisions to enable a fuller understanding of the patterns and processes of
              landscape change underway in this area.  The 27-month project will begin with
              two follow-up surveys for previous studies to provide a systematic,
              longitudinal and comparative analysis of changing patterns of household land
              use in areas undergoing intensive deforestation pressures.  These studies will
              be a 10-year follow-up survey of 240 rural households in Rondonia and a 5-year
              follow-up survey of 261 rural households in Para.  The panel data collected
              will then be used to specify a dynamic behavioral model of landscape change.
              Using GIS software, this predictive model will be used to simulate the
              landscape evolution arising from the aggregated impacts of individual household
              land use decisions. The model will be validated using remote sensing data, and
              adapted into a visualization program to aid researchers and policy-makers in
              understanding the landscape impacts of different factors affecting smallholder
              land use decisions. Ultimately the research will explore new theoretical ground
              at the nexus of neoclassical economic, demographic, and political ecology
              interpretations of landscape change.

Rising rates of tropical deforestation
              in the Amazon region, and elsewhere, raise concerns about loss of biological,
              genetic, and cultural diversity, increasing carbon dioxide emissions and global
              climate changes, and a host of regional impacts from soil erosion and river
              contamination to disruptions in local meteorological regimes. Between 30% and
              50% of the forest clearing in the Amazon is caused by small-scale commercial
              shifting cultivators and ranchers.  Although such "smallholders" have been the
              subject of considerable field research, surprisingly little is known about the
              dynamics of their farming systems and land use decision-making. With a few
              exceptions, most of this research has focused on one-time case study
              "snap-shots", in which long-term patterns are inferred from cross-sectional
              data. This project will provide a genuine longitudinal analysis of data drawn
              from two distant and different settlement frontiers in the Amazon, capturing
              the range of diverse factors influencing the process of landscape change in
              this imperiled rainforest region.

