Title       : ADVANCE: Retroviral Systems for the Transgenesis of Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0137629

Award Number: 0137629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon Isern sisern@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1681      ADVANCE - FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1681,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project proposes to evaluate the utility of retroviruses for the
              transgenesis of invertebrates. Transgenesis is a powerful technique that allows
              the manipulation of an organism's genome and experimental access to its genetic
              function. Despite the fact that among multi?cellular organisms, invertebrates
              dominate both in terms of biomass and species diversity, most transgenesis
              studies have been performed in vertebrates due to their possible relevance to
              human health. The primary challenge in transgenesis is the introduction of
              genetic material into the cells of an organism. To this end, vectors have been
              constructed from retroviruses, parasitic microorganisms that permanently
              (heritably) insert their genetic material into the chromosomes of host cells.
              This study will determine whether retroviral vectors will function in a diverse
              group of invertebrate organisms ranging from sponges to insects via a systemic
              analysis beginning with virus entry and culminating in gene expression in host
              cells.

Even though invertebrates overwhelmingly contribute to the Earth's
              biomass and function as important model organisms for development, evolution,
              parasite?host relationships, and environmental changes, their genetics as a
              whole has been grossly understudied. This study will examine the utility of
              retroviral vectors in invertebrate systems leading to a better understanding of
              these vectors and the development of generic transgenesis vectors. The routine
              transgenesis of invertebrates will permit critical functional genetic studies
              of invertebrate organisms of vast biological, economic, and environmental
              importance. 

