Title       : Identification and Estimation of Industry Dynamic Models with Persistent and
               Hidden State Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0137048

Award Number: 0137048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Campbell jcampbe@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project focuses on the formulation and estimation of structural
              models of producer entry, growth, and exit.   The data source is new; a file of
              alcohol tax returns that contains the date of birth, date of exit, and a
              complete monthly history of the dollar value of alcohol sales for all licensed
              restaurants and bars in Texas. In the model, a firm's sales is proportional to
              its profits, but transitory cost shocks make it an imperfect indicator of
              profitability's persistent component. Because of this imperfect observation,
              the model's state variable is both persistent and hidden. The state variable's
              persistence distinguishes this model from the many estimable models of dynamic
              discrete choice that incorporate Rust's (1987) conditional independence
              assumption. To disentangle the persistent and transitory components of
              profitability, this project uses the fact that producers' exit decisions depend
              only on the persistent component. In the model with normally distributed
              shocks, the information in producers' exit decisions identifies the parameters
              describing both the persistent and transitory components of profitability as
              well as the producer's optimal exit threshold. An important component of this
              research project is the extension of this identification proof to
              semi-parametric and non parametric environments. The project's initial
              empirical research focuses on distinguishing Gaussian models of entrepreneurial
              learning similar to Jovanovic's (1982) from models with perfect entrepreneurial
              information, such as Hopenhayn's (1992). Additional information in the data set
              describing each restaurant or bar's location and the characteristics of its
              parent firm suggest further generalizations of the model and estimation
              technique.
