Title       : Grandparents as Buffers of Family Disruption and Social Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0137195

Award Number: 0137195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merril Silverstein merrils@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0137195
Merril Silverstein
University of Southern California

The goal
              of this research is to investigate the role that grandparents play in promoting
              the well-being of their grandchildren who experience the marital disruption of
              their parents. Grandparents are considered latent resources who help their
              grandchildren adapt to stressful events such as divorce, single parenting,
              negative parental attachment styles, and problematic environments. The aims of
              the research are to better understand (1) how the investment of time, emotion,
              and support by grandparents buffers the impact of family disruption and other
              family stressors on the psychological, social, and material well-being of (a)
              pre- adolescent grandchildren as they make the transition to adolescence, and
              (b) adolescent children as they make the transition to adulthood and
              middle-age. Outcomes include self-esteem, depression, anxiety, affect balance,
              teen-age childbearing, delinquency, educational achievement, and occupational
              mobility. 

Two longitudinal data sets will be used.  These include a
              long-term study of several cohorts of adolescent grandchildren surveyed along
              with their parents and grandparents over the last 30 years (the Longitudinal
              Study of Generations), and a nationally representative five-year, soon to be
              fourteen year, longitudinal study of pre-teen and adolescent grandchildren, and
              their parents (National Survey of Families and Households). Longitudinal models
              predict change in prospective outcomes as a function of the statistical
              interaction between grandparent involvement and family stressors experienced by
              the grandchild. Transitions over three, five, fourteen, and twenty-six years
              will be analyzed to investigate the short-term and enduring contributions that
              grandparents make to the well being of their grandchildren. Multiple
              regression, logistic regression will be used to estimate the strength of these
              effects. This research will extend our understanding of the value of extended
              family relations by documenting how and with what effect grandparents buffer
              the impact of social change on family systems. The knowledge gained through a
              rigorous investigation into the role played by grandparents as a resource to
              grandchildren will help expand the analytic lens of family sociology to include
              extended kinship relationships. 

