Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award: Molecular Ecology Techniques Based on Ribosomal RNA
               Detection of Microbial Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0137368

Award Number: 0137368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431895             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reyes Sierra rsierra@email.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1440,1681,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0137368  Sierra  The objective of the research is to develop a biomineralization
              process in high-rate sulfate reducing bioreactors applicable to the removal and
              recovery of heavy metals from aqueous waste or process streams. Metal
              immobilization will be stimulated by biogenic sulfides produced by sulfate
              reducing bacteria. Copper (Cu) was chosen as model metal, since this
              contaminant is present at high concentrations in many industrial effluents
              (e.g., mining, semiconductor, metallurgical and metal-finishing industries) and
              is a particularly toxic priority pollutant.

The project will be initiated
              with continuous anaerobic bioreactors to determine the most suitable electron
              donor for sulfide production in mesophilic and thermophilic systems. The
              experiments will also assess the main factors controlling Cu removal from
              synthetic effluents. Molecular methods based on rRNA detection, electron
              microscopy and X-ray spectroscopy, will be used to evaluate the structure and
              function of the microbial population and to determine the speciation and
              distribution of the minerals in the anaerobic biofilm system.  The knowledge
              gained will be applied to elucidate the underlying mechanisms-and identify the
              key microorganisms responsible for Cu removal in sulfidogenic bioreactors.  In
              addition, a chemical equilibrium model will be developed to simulate Cu
              partitioning and removal in the bioreactors in order to facilitate process
              optimization. In the final part of the project, the treatment of a
              Cu-contaminated stream generated in semiconductor manufacturing (i.e., chemical
              mechanical planarization (CMP)) will be investigated to determine the
              efficiencies of Cu removal under practical conditions.  CMP effluents were
              selected because of their significance to the host institution's State and to
              enhance collaboration with the NSF/SCR Center.  It is anticipated that this
              research will lead to improved scientific and technological understanding of
              the potentials of sulfate reducing bioprocesses for metal decontamination.

