Title       : ADVANCE Fellows: Marine-Protected Areas, Geographic Information Science, and
               Civil Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0137458

Award Number: 0137458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383141             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Walker bwalker@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1681,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This ADVANCE Fellows project examines the convergence of two relatively new and
              increasingly popular trends in state-led environmental resource management:
              marine protected areas (MPAs) and Geographic Information Science (GIS).  It is
              argued that the combination of state-mandated MPAs and GIS has fostered
              political struggles and organized resistance among stakeholders (including
              fishers, environmentalists, and the state) unlike any previous marine resource
              regulations.  While there has been a recent explosion of natural science
              publications on various dimensions of MPAs, studies on the social dimensions of
              MPAs are lacking.  This project addresses these issues in a  comparative study
              of two recently designed MPAs in the lagoon of Moorea, French Polynesia, and
              the Channel Islands National Marine Sanctuary, California.  This comparison is
              useful because the processes of designation MPAs in each locale were strikingly
              similar, yet there are differences between the "First" and "Third Worlds," and
              different scales which will afford compelling analyses.  The current
              conjuncture of the rising popularity of MPAs and the growing adoption of
              state-based GIS decision-making and management makes this research timely and
              precedent-setting.

This award is supported through the NSF ADVANCE Program.
              The overall mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of
              women in the scientific and engineering workforce through the increased
              representation and advancement of women in academic science and engineering
              careers. 


