Title       : An Ecosystem approach to Hominin Environments in the East African
               plio-Pleistocene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a0137235

Award Number: 0137235
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135096             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rene Bobe bobe.rene@nmnh.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anna K. Behrensmeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The study of human adaptation and evolution is intimately tied to knowledge of
              the environments in which humans evolved. These environments have space-time
              dimensions that must be understood in order to answer key questions about how
              environmental change affected early human evolution. According to one
              hypothesis, global climatic change between 2 and 3 million years ago was
              responsible for a major evolutionary radiation of mammals in Africa that
              included our direct ancestors. It is likely that climate did affect human
              evolution in some way, but exactly how and when this happened remains
              controversial. Some researchers believe that empirical evidence has not yet
              demonstrated the role of climate change in African mammal evolution.
              Preservation biases in the fossil record, differing data-collection methods,
              and varying levels of chronological and spatial resolution across fossil
              localities in Africa must be carefully examined and controlled in order to
              rigorously test the climate change hypothesis. This project will test the
              linkage between the global climatic record and changes in mammal faunas from
              terrestrial ecosystems in Africa between 5 and 1 million years ago. The focus
              will be on the Turkana Basin of Kenya and Ethiopia and the Hadar-Dikika region
              of northern Ethiopia, two of the major sources of fossils of human ancestors
              (hominins) as well as a rich record of other mammals. The Turkana Basin
              Paleoecology Database will be assembled from existing separate datasets, museum
              collections, and new field initiatives that use standardized sampling of
              selected stratigraphic intervals. Comparisons with the Hadar-Dikika region will
              draw from the existing Hadar Faunal Database and new data collected in the
              field. The resulting information will demonstrate what environments were
              inhabited by early hominins in East Africa and how these environments changed
              through time, what mammal species early hominins were most closely associated
              with, and how global climate records correlate with terrestrial faunal and
              archeological change at different spatial and temporal scales. Information and
              interpretations derived from this research will be made available to the public
              via scientific journals, public science education media, and the internet. 
