Title       : Lagrangian Balloon for Atmospheric Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0137589

Award Number: 0137589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Voss p_voss@huarp.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the design, construction, and testing of a balloon for
              atmospheric sounding that has an active buoyancy control to enable it to move
              with the wind.  By faithfully tracking the air motions, it provides a so-called
              Lagrangian frame of reference for measurements of temperature, pressure,
              humidity, ozone, and other trace gases.  These measurements are needed to
              observe the histories of air parcels as they undergo photochemical and cloud
              physical processes in the high atmosphere.  For example, important details in
              the formation of polar stratospheric clouds are lacking because the temperature
              histories of the air parcels in which these clouds form are not known with
              sufficient accuracy.  Moreover, uncertainties in air parcel motion in the
              tropics mask the mechanism by which water vapor enters the stratosphere,
              confounding attempts to predict how the ozone layer will respond to climate
              change.  The Lagrangian balloon is of "pumpkin" design, nine meters in
              diameter, equipped with an interior servomechanism to change its volume in
              response to vertical air motions relative to the balloon.  The buoyancy is
              continually adjusted to minimize the vertical air motion, so that the balloon
              tracks the air with a relative velocity held as near to zero as possible.  The
              balloon can carry a light payload of instruments for measuring the vertical air
              velocity relative to the balloon, thermodynamic variables, and a satellite
              modem for communicating with the ground.  Students from the University of
              Massachusetts and the Picker Engineering Program at Smith College will
              participate in the project.
