Title       : Phase Behavior, Chain Packing, and Local Dynamics in Solid Polyolefin Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0137968

Award Number: 0137968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery L. White jeff_l_white@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to understand the role of polymer composition, chain
              architecture, and individual chain dynamics in determining local structure at
              length scales less than the radius of gyration in the solid state for
              polyolefin blends.  Solid state nuclear magnetic resonance will be the chief
              tool used to interrogate the morphology and dynamics in selected blends. 
              Magnetic resonance is ideally suited for selectively probing structure and
              dynamics in macromolecules, even for polymer blends prepared without any
              special isotopic labeling schemes. The result of this work will be a detailed
              understanding of structure/miscibility relationships for solid polyolefin
              blends at the chain level, which should lead to novel blend compositions based
              on designed chain architectures, and therefore, new and industrially useful
              materials. Graduate and undergraduate research students will apply the latest
              instrumentation and polymer synthesis techniques, and strong industrial
              relationships in this area will afford ample opportunity for working
              collaborations.  In turn, they will share these experiences with middle school
              students in the North Carolina State University  area as part of a project to
              develop programs for exposing these students to exciting aspects of polymer
              science.

Polymers are a class of materials made from extremely large
              molecules that find applications in many important commercial areas ranging
              from food packaging to aerospace composites. Within this class of materials are
              the saturated hydrocarbon polymers, or polyolefins, which are among the most
              economically important industrial polymers. The research students trained in
              the "science" of designing new polymeric materials will be very competitive for
              employment opportunities in both the industrial and academic sectors.

