Title       : US-Jordan Cooperative Research: Experimental and Modeling Studies of Surface
               Growth on TiO2 Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0137689

Award Number: 0137689
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Feke dlf4@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip W. Morrison  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5988,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0137689
Morrison 

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Professor Philip Morrison, Department of Chemical Engineering, Case
              Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio and Dr. Lua'y Zeatoun, Department
              of Chemical Engineering, Jordan University of Science and Technology (JUST),
              Irbid, Jordan.  In recent work at Case Western, a piston compression method was
              used to study high partial pressure kinetics of TiCl4 oxidation, and by
              analyzing the data a model was developed for predicting the fractional
              conversion of TiCl4.  This work does not take into account heterogeneous
              reactions that will occur on the surfaces of the TiO2 particles as they
              nucleate. In this research the collaborating scientists plan to study the role
              of surface reactions in TiO2 formation by conducting experimental and modeling
              research.  Dr. Morrison's team at Case Western will measure experimentally the
              surface reaction rate by seeding the reactive gas with TiO2 particles and
              performing compression experiments. Dr. Zeatoun's team at JUST will perform
              numerical simulations of the diffusion-reaction process occurring in both the
              gas phase and on the surface reactions.

Scope:  The two collaborators plan
              to combine their expertise in experimental work and in mathematical modeling in
              dealing with an interesting scientific problem. The PI has considerable
              experience and has access to extensive facility at Case Western.  The Jordanian
              scientist has experience in modeling.  This research should improve our
              understanding of the process of formation of TiO2b particles and should be
              especially useful in applications of nano-scale.  The project meets INT
              criteria for support of cooperative projects that are mutually beneficial.
              Support for this project is provided by the Office of International Science and
              Engineering and the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems. 

