Title       : Transportation and Land Use: A Comparative Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0137029

Award Number: 0137029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Genevieve Giuliano giuliano@rcf.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Contemporary U.S. metropolitan areas are characterized by decentralized or
              dispersed patterns of land use, have generally low average densities, and are
              dominated by private vehicle travel.  Explanations for these trends in the U.S.
              include an array of policy decisions that have promoted decentralization and
              made the private vehicle easily accessible.  Increasing rates of car ownership
              and use is a world-wide phenomenon, however, suggesting that per capita income
              growth and basic economic and social trends may be key explanatory factors. 
              This research project will investigate the relationship between mobility and
              urban form using international comparative analysis.  The project will develop
              and estimate models of individual travel behavior and will test hypotheses
              regarding the extent to which land use characteristics explain travel patterns.
               Using person-level travel survey data from the U.S., Great Britain and the
              Netherlands, individual mobility patterns will be examined.  The following
              questions will be addressed:  To what extent to differences in metropolitan
              spatial form explain differences in mobility?  What local spatial
              characteristics affect mobility, and do these differ across countries?  To what
              extent do differences in transportation supply characteristics explain
              differences in mobility?  How important are these factors relative to
              demographics and socioeconomic factors?  Do relationships differ by travel
              purpose?  International comparative analysis will permit examination across a
              wide variety of spatial forms and transportation system characteristics as well
              as across very different policy environments.  This broader approach should
              lead to greater understanding of the underlying processes that lead to observed
              travel outcomes.

Mobility generates great benefits to individuals and
              society, but it also generates significant costs.  Many critics argue that
              current trends are not sustainable and that coordinated policies must be
              developed to reverse current land use and transportation patterns.  Policies to
              increase the density and mix of activities are proposed as effective strategies
              for achieving sustainability goals, as increased accessibility should reduce
              private vehicle use and increase use of transit and non-motorized modes.  
              However, rising per capita incomes, economic restructuring and globalization,
              and changing demographics may make restrictive policies either less effective
              or less acceptable.  Thus it is not clear that efforts to change land use
              patterns would lead to significantly different travel patterns.  This project
              will provide a careful and comprehensive empirical analysis that is necessary
              for understanding the role of spatial form in travel behavior, thereby
              broadening fundamental understandings of these interrelationships and helping
              to guide future policy development.

