Title       : 2000 U.S. Census Data Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a0137019

Award Number: 0137019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Myron P. Gutmann gutmann@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Granda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) will
              make data from the 2000 Census of Population and Housing of the United States
              available to social and behavioral scientists at colleges and universities
              throughout the country.  In doing so, it will collect, preserve, enhance, and
              distribute data developed by the U.S. Census Bureau.  In addition, ICPSR will
              provide training to data users and data librarians in the academic community in
              order to ensure the most effective use of these data by the largest possible
              number of users.  The project will enable researchers to use these data
              efficiently and economically for research and instructional purposes.  This
              project has six key activities:  (1) Acquisition and long-term archiving of
              substantially all data produced by the 2000 Censuses of Population and of
              Housing; (2) Re-formatting census data to facilitate use in statistical
              analysis programs; (3) Development of standardized documentation for census
              data that is compliant with the Data Documentation Initiative (DDI) standard; 
              (4) Development of new data products, including special subsamples and special
              summary files, that serve the needs of academic researchers; (5) Provision of
              web-based access to the data that will include a data-finder and custom
              subsetting capabilities; and (6) Provision of training and outreach activities
              to encourage use of the data.

The Census is a unique source of data for a
              wide range of research topics about the United States.  The 2000 Census of
              Population and Housing will constitute the single most important starting point
              for basic and applied social research during the decade of the 2000s.  Census
              data have value in many ways, but in brief they enable three basic research
              undertakings:  (1) By themselves they are the basic source for research about
              the attributes of the U.S. population, housing stock, and economy, for the
              nation as a whole as well as its regions.  Only the Census permits comparable
              research in depth for the entire country and its regions, and it includes
              detailed information for minority and other special populations.  (2) Census
              data will be needed to provide contextual information for other types of
              investigations, such as research on school, hospital, and administrative
              records.  Census data also provide denominators for calculating rates and
              proportions in many areas of research, not to mention the traditional role in
              apportioning legislative representation, and in the study of reapportionment. 
              (3) The data will be vital to the design of research, including as the most
              obvious example the drawing of survey samples.  This project will collect and
              preserve those data, add them to ICPSR's large collection of data from earlier
              censuses, and widely distribute those data and information about them.
