Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award: Investigating the Origins of Orbitally Forced
               Paleoclimates: The Interplay of Climate Response, Geodynamics, Astrodynamics
               and Earth Noise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a0137799

Award Number: 0137799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400707             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda A. Hinnov hinnov@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1681      ADVANCE - FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1681,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hinnov
0137799

This ADVANCE Fellows career-development plan centers on an
              investigation of orbitally forced paleoclimate signals as carriers of first
              order geodynamical and astrodynamical information. Geodynamical theory predicts
              that the Earth's tidal dissipation and dynamical ellipticity will perturb the
              Earth's axial precession rate and tilt. The perturbations should appear in
              paleoclimatically recorded orbital modes as phasing irregularities. Observation
              of these irregularities depends upon the accuracy of the timescale assigned to
              the paleoclimate record. This typically involves adjusting an interpreted
              orbital signal in the record to a "target" curve based upon an assumed climate
              response to orbital forcing. If the target is wrong, however, timing errors
              will corrupt the true phasing of the recorded orbital modes. Until this source
              of error can be effectively managed, no firm conclusions about the Earth's
              physical behavior should be drawn from the paleoclimate record.
              

Astrodynamical theory indicates that long-period amplitude and frequency
              modulations in the Earth's orbital modes track planetary orbital motions; these
              should be detectable in very long paleoclimate signals. Some planetary orbits
              resonate, e.g., Earth and Mars; in the remote past, the orbits of Mars and
              Earth may have moved chaotically between two resonance states. Verification of
              this behavior using the paleoclimate record is therefore a top priority in
              astrodynamics. Complicating the extraction of this information, however, is low
              frequency "Earth noise" that can interfere with long paleoclimate signals.
              

To unravel these problems, a multi-task computer model will be developed
              that calculates insolation at any geographical location over any timescale, and
              is linked to adjustable rotational-orbital parameters that include effects from
              the Earth's tidal dissipation and dynamical ellipticity. The model will be
              explored in a series of sensitivity experiments, then evaluated against
              paleoclimate records using advanced time series analysis.

