Title       : Reshaping Civil Society: Islam, Democracy and Diversity in Istanbul
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0137060

Award Number: 0137060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159181             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna J. Secor ajseco2@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,1371,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A global wave of democratization has transformed the political geography of
              Latin America, Central and Eastern Europe, Asia and Africa, but the Middle East
              has remained dominated by authoritarian regimes, with Turkey appearing as a
              regional anomaly. However, Turkish democracy remains riddled by problems. This
              research project will focus on civil society in Istanbul, Turkey's largest and
              most diverse city, as a window into the problem of democratic consolidation in
              Turkey.  Civil society, most often defined as the realm of associational life
              distinct from both family-life and the state, has been identified as an arena
              in which values and attitudes that are conducive to democratic governance, such
              as trust, cooperation and tolerance, are reproduced. In the Middle East, the
              failure of democracy to take root has often been attributed to the presence of
              "weak" or disorganized civil societies incapable of acting as countervailing
              forces to strong states, and to the role of Islam in public life. The central
              research questions of this study concern the form and extent of civil society
              in Istanbul, the relationship between civil society and the consolidation of
              democracy, the diversity of modes of participation in civil society across
              neighborhood contexts and different groups (based on gender, class, ethnicity,
              migrant status and religion), and the role of Islamist networks as an
              alternative avenue of public participation. These research questions will be
              addressed through a multi-method research design that includes both
              quantitative and qualitative methods.  Seventy-five Istanbul neighborhoods will
              be selected based on the stratification of all municipal neighborhoods using
              rates of population change (as an indicator of in-migration) and land-value (as
              an indicator of class-status).  A survey will be administered to a random
              sample (proportionate to population within the sampled neighborhoods) of voting
              age residents, for a total sample of 4,000 respondents. In the second stage of
              the project, ten focus groups of population sub-groups (e.g. women, migrants,
              high socio-economic status residents, Kurds, Alevis etc.) will be used to
              explore the meaning and implications of differences across groups in their
              engagement in civil society, their use of urban space, and their relative
              acceptance of democratic values.  Finally, a case study of Islamist networks in
              the city will be conducted through interviews with Islamist leaders and
              activists. This final research stage will provide greater insight into how the
              Islamist networks and associations function in the city.  While the survey data
              will be analyzed using multi-level logistic modeling techniques, the focus
              groups and interviews will be discursively analyzed to provide qualitative
              depth to questions of Islam and difference in Istanbul.

This study will
              offer a new understanding of the architecture of civil society, the variety of
              associations, relationships, and local contexts that comprise it, and the
              relationships between Islam, civil society and democracy in Turkey.  Democracy
              in Turkey is of critical human, geopolitical, and theoretical importance. From
              a Turkish perspective, the consolidation of democracy has been an ongoing goal,
              not only of the state but also of civil societal elements concerned with human
              rights and free expression. Turkish democracy is also of international
              interest, with Turkey's bid to join the European Union hinging on the country's
              democratic consolidation. Further, as a secular democracy, Turkey is a model
              for the Muslim-majority countries of the Middle East and Central Asia and.
              Based on what has so far been established by the civil society literature, it
              is probable that the future of Turkish democracy will pivot on whether or not
              democracy takes root in the public sphere, in the values and attitudes of
              individuals and social groups. This project will be able to offer a clear
              indication of the level of civil societal activity, its geographical and social
              distribution, and the relationship between civic engagement (in a range of
              arenas of civic engagement, including Islamist associational life) and
              democratic values in Istanbul. This project will contribute to empirical and
              comparative analyses of the forms and intensity of civil society in different
              contexts, and to analyses of the relationships between civic engagement,
              Islamist associational life, and the creation of democratic values.  In
              addition to these empirical contributions, this project will enable the
              extension of current theories of civil society beyond the historical
              limitations of Western models, not only by virtue of exploring these
              relationships in a Muslim-majority society, but also by focusing in the effects
              of locality, gender and diversity on civic participation and its
              significance.

