Title       : Sequential Degradation of Oligosaccharides from the Reducing End
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a0137986

Award Number: 0137986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad K. Bendiak Brad.Bendiak@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 The objective of this work is to develop a degradation method which will
              allow monosaccharides to be sequentially removed from the reducing end of
              oligosaccharides.  Monosaccharides will first be removed from oligosaccharides
              containing 4-7 sugars and experiments will be performed to understand the
              mechanism of one of the key degradation reactions.  The method will then be
              extended to oligosaccharides which contain sugars with nitrogen substitutents
              and protecting groups.  The overall utility of the method is two fold: 1) it
              will provide a technique for structural elucidations for unknown
              oligosaccharides and 2) it will provide a preparative method for the generation
              of new oligosaccharides by the removal of one or more monosaccharide units from
              the reducing end.

  With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular
              Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Brad K. Bendiak of the
              Department of Cellular and Structural Biology at the University of Colorado
              Health Sciences Center.  Dr. Bendiak will develop a new chemical degradation
              method to be used primarily for determining the structures of polysaccharides
              (sugars).  However, the overall utility of the method to be studied is two
              fold: 1) it will provide a technique for structural elucidations for unknown
              polysaccharides and 2) it will provide a preparative method for the generation
              of new polysaccharides by the sequential removal of one or more monosaccharide
              units from the starting sugar.  Students trained as a result of working on this
              project will gain experience in bioorganic and supramolecular organic
              chemistry, hence they will have skills needed by the pharmaceutical and
              speciality chemicals industries.
