Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0137617

Award Number: 0137617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristin C. Gunsalus kcg1@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1681      ADVANCE - FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1681,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The completion of several genome sequencing projects has resulted in a wealth of
              new information that raises two major challenges: to discover the function of
              all the DNA sequences, and to organize functional data so that all life
              scientists can benefit from them.  Different aspects of gene function are now
              being characterized at a genomic scale in a number of organisms.  New tools
              that are widely accessible to the scientific community are needed to facilitate
              their integration and analysis.  Development of such tools, which will require
              close collaboration between biologists and computer scientists, will help
              transform the rapidly growing volume of "functional genomic" data from
              information into knowledge that can be used to the  broad benefit of both basic
              and applied disciplines of science research.

The aim of this project is to
              develop new bioinformatics tools to help integrate functional data from diverse
              genome-wide studies.  The soil nematode C. elegans has been used as an animal
              model system in genomic studies and provides an exceptional platform for the
              development of integrative tools.  The initial focus will be development of a
              public database of gene knockout phenotypes generated in C. elegans using a
              rapid method called "RNA interference (RNAi)".  These data will be used along
              with other genomic data, such as gene expression patterns and protein-protein
              interaction maps, to develop modular bioinformatics tools capable of addressing
              questions that combine these different "layers" of functional information from
              C. elegans and other organisms.  Finally, these tools will be made accessible
              to non-programmers through development of a user-friendly interface for the
              integrated analysis of functional genomic data.

