Title       : Southwestern Pueblo Subsistence, Diet, and Health Under Spanish Colonization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0137200

Award Number: 0137200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63379              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. Spielmann kate.spielmann@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Katherine Spielmann, her students,
              and colleagues will analyze large collections of animal bones and botanical
              materials from seven years of excavation at three pueblo sites in the Salinas
              area of central New Mexico. These sites were missionized by Spanish friars in
              the 1620s, and provide a unique opportunity to investigate how Pueblo
              populations modified their subsistence practices and diets in response to
              Spanish demands on their labor and resources. Spanish records document that
              tribute in the Salinas area was taken in corn and antelope hides, and that
              governors of the province required Pueblos to collect and transport pinyon nuts
              and salt. The documents do not discuss how Pueblo people modified their
              hunting, gathering, and farming in light of these demands. Two possibilities
              are evident. On the one hand, lack of time and labor to pursue agriculture
              sufficiently to meet their needs may have caused Pueblo peoples to rely further
              on wild, collected famine foods. On the other hand, time and labor may have
              been increasingly focused on agricultural production, with traditional
              gathering practices curtailed. Hunting may have focused on large game for their
              hides, rather than the more abundant small game available in the area. Analyses
              of the kinds of plant and animal remains present in Pueblo middens before and
              after Spanish missionization will allow them to evaluate these possibilities.
              The impact of subsistence changes on Pueblo health will then be investigated
              through a synthesis of a number of analyses of human skeletal remains from one
              of the sites.

Previous interdisciplinary research in the southeastern and
              Plains areas of the United States has demonstrated marked variability in
              indigenous responses to European colonization.  Thus far, however, indigenous
              changes in subsistence and diet have not been studied for the southwestern U.S.
              This project provides an unparalleled opportunity to undertake such an
              analysis, and to compare native responses in different environments and under
              different conditions of colonization across North America.

