Title       : Microbial Observatories: Linking Microbial Community Structure and Function in
               Contaminated Aquifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0137210

Award Number: 0137210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kate M. Scow kmscow@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krassimira Hristova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Kate Scow and Krassi Hristova of the University
              of California at Davis to study the diversity of microbial communities in
              uncontaminated and contaminated shallow groundwater aquifers. 

Groundwater
              communities are surprisingly diverse, both taxonomically and functionally, and
              reflect the considerable heterogeneity in geology, hydrology, and geochemistry
              found below the surface.  Aquifers are sources of a major portion of the US
              drinking water supplies and aquifers directly connect with surface water
              environments.  Many aquifers in urban and agricultural areas are polluted with
              organic and inorganic contaminants; their potential for recovery in part
              depends on the diversity of its microbial communities. The objectives of this
              study are to characterize community and discover new organisms in shallow
              groundwater aquifers, measure how petroleum contamination (including the fuel
              additive methyl tertiary butyl ether-MTBE) changes microbial diversity, and
              link community composition with environmental factors and process rates.
              Approaches used will include traditional culture-based methods, DNA
              fingerprinting coupled with cloning and sequencing, lipid analysis and
              measurements of process rates.
Groundwater aquifers are important microbial
              habitats with potentially large impacts on society and the environment;
              understanding of the microbial ecology and diversity of these environments lags
              far behind that of soil and aquatic ecosystems.  From an evolutionary
              perspective, contaminated aquifers are relatively new ecosystems and thus
              provide opportunities to study microbial adaptation. In addition to discovering
              new microbial diversity in shallow groundwater aquifers, other contributions of
              this study will include measuring how diversity of microbial communities
              responds to contamination and developing tools for linking ecosystem processes
              to specific groups of microorganisms.  This knowledge has broader significance
              because many of the earth's ecosystems are perturbed by human activities. 
              Understanding microbial adaptation to contaminants and other stresses will help
              in the rehabilitation and restoration of damaged ecosystems.

