Title       : Empirical Evidence on the Global Operations of Multinational Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0137052

Award Number: 0137052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon Hanson gohanson@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew J. Slaughter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent research  on multinational firms leaves some important questions
              unanswered.  One is how to reconcile the view that most foreign direct
              investment is market seeking with the fact that world trade is increasingly
              composed of intermediate inputs as part of what seem to be global outsourcing
              networks.  Such networks appear to be based on finding the lowest cost
              destination to produce a specific good.  A second question is how multinational
              firms produce and deploy their intellectual property and other knowledge
              capital.  Knowledge capital is central to the existence of multinational
              enterprises, but has been the subject of little empirical research.
	
This
              research  will offer new empirical evidence on the activities of multinational
              firms.  Rather than use aggregate data on foreign direct investment, as most
              previous studies have done, the project will make use of data on individual
              U.S. parent firms and their foreign affiliates.  This will make it possible to
              examine the detailed mix of activities that multinational enterprises perform. 
              The project has access to data on U.S. multinational firms for the period 1977
              to 1999 from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. Using standard statistical
              techniques, the research will show how choices by foreign affiliates of U.S.
              multinational firms over specific inputs, including host-country labor and
              capital, imports from U.S. parent firms for further processing, and imports
              from U.S. parent firms of knowledge-capital service, are influenced by
              host-country factor prices, tax rates, trade policies, and other variables. 
              This will yield estimates of the sensitivity of input choices by foreign
              affiliates to host-country costs and policies.  These results will in turn
              reveal how factor prices and trade barriers influence both the relative
              intensity of market-seeking versus cost-seeking foreign direct investment and
              the foreign demand for services derived from the knowledge capital of U.S.
              parent firms.  

