Title       : Biochemical Mechanisms in Barnacle Adhesion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0137338

Award Number: 0137338
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336418             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kaplan david.kaplan@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Barnacles create major problems worldwide related to biofouling in marine
              environments due to their growth on ships, docks and related structures.  This
              biofouling results in the loss and destruction of structures in marine
              environments as well as loss of ship efficiency during transit due to increased
              drag resistance.  Current options to control this growth of barnacles are
              either unsatisfactory or environmentally unacceptable.  The mechanisms by which
              barnacles respond in the environment to adhere to different substrates are
              unknown.  The goal of this project is to identify the key components in the
              'glue' secreted by the barnacle, Balanus crenatus, in order to develop an
              understanding of the mechanisms involved in their adhesion to environmental
              surfaces in marine environments.  The rationale for this study is that once we
              understand the mechanisms of barnacle adhesion, we should be in a position to
              design better strategies to control or prevent this process.  In the long run,
              this insight into mechanisms of barnacle glue curing should also serve as a
              basis for the design and development of adhesives that cure in water, such as
              for biomedical applications.  Our preliminary data suggest that the mechanisms
              of adhesion by barnacles are distinct from the mechanisms reported for mussels
              such as Mytilus edulis, which has been well-studied.  The approach planned for
              the program is centered on isolating and characterizing the components of the
              glue used by the barnacle to stick to surfaces.  More specifically, we plan the
              following steps in the process: (1) isolation and characterization of the
              proteins present in the glue of the barnacle, B. crenatus, (2) cloning and
              expression of genes from the barnacle that encode the proteins found in the
              glue, and (3) characterization of the barnacle adhesion and cement curing
              process by studying the proteins that are produced and their interactions. 
              These studies will provide the most comprehensive picture of the mechanisms of
              barnacle adhesion and cement curing available to date and also provide insight
              into how this marine animal responds to environmental substrate cues.  Our
              preliminary data illustrate the feasibility of the proposed plans since we have
              gained important initial insight into: (a) some of the proteins present in the
              adhesive plaques, (b) some of the genes encoding the proteins present in the
              adhesive plaques, and (c) methods to assess changes in the proteins upon
              addition of chemicals that influence changes in the adhesion environment and
              the protein interactions involved (e.g., metals/chelation chemicals and changes
              in oxidation-reduction state).  This type of information and insight into
              adhesion and curing mechanisms will be critical to identifying mechanisms used
              by the barnacle to adhere to surfaces.  With the plans to elucidate the
              mechanisms of adhesion of barnacles to surfaces, control of these surface
              interactions will then be feasible.  This insight will be critical in order to
              identify long-term solutions to barnacle substrate colonization which leads to
              excessive pier and ship repairs and repainting, and the avoidance of the use of
              toxic compounds such as copper-based chemicals in material coatings to prevent
              barnacle adhesion in marine waters.


