Title       : RUI-Microbial Observatories: Diversity of Halophilic Bacteria and Geochemical
               Signatures in a Tropical Solar Saltern
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0137336

Award Number: 0137336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $556432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillian Casillas-Martinez l_casillas@cuhac.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pieter T. Visscher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carmen Hernandez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of PR at Humacao
	      100  Road 908
	      Humacao, PR  007914300    787/850-9473

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9104,9150,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Lilliam Casillas and Carmen Hernandez
              (University of Puerto Rico-Humacao) and Pieter Visscher (University of
              Connecticut) to establish a Microbial Observatory in the Cabo Rojo solar
              salterns of Puerto Rico. The salterns provide an excellent setting for the
              study of life under extreme conditions due to the intense solar radiation, high
              wind velocity and salinity at the site. Using molecular tools different
              halophilic (i.e. salt-loving) organisms present at the site during wet and dry
              periods will be identified. Once such halophiles have been identified, some of
              their metabolic activities such as photosynthesis, aerobic respiration, sulfate
              reduction and nitrogen fixation will be studied. Using microelectrodes, in situ
              activities of the halophiles in the cyanobacterial mats and their contributions
              to the productivity of the site will be studied. At the same time, the chemical
              and geological composition of the sediments of the mats and the water column of
              the salt ponds will be identified. The main goal of this research is to
              understand how the various biological, chemical and geological processes act in
              concert to define the hypersaline ecosystems of Cabo Rojo.

These studies
              will provide a scenario, as complete as possible, of the chemical and
              geological conditions in a Caribbean tropical saltern and establish the role of
              microorganisms in this ecosystem. Studies of this nature in the Caribbean are
              limited. While accessing the microbial diversity of the site it is anticipated
              that new organisms with novel adaptations and/or physiologies will be isolated.
              Special focus will be placed on the role of halophilic microorganisms in the
              geochemical transformations required for life to flourish. As hypersaline
              environments are known to have existed since Precambrian times, study of the
              Cabo Rojo salterns should shed light on how microorganisms and their by
              products could possibly have contributed in the past to establish present
              ecosystems.

