Title       : The Impact of Stepfamilies on the Well-being of Children and Adolescents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0137182

Award Number: 0137182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Megan M. Sweeney Msweeney@soc.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0137182
Megan Sweeney
University of California, Los Angeles

Although
              approximately one-fourth of all children born in the United States in the early
              1980s are expected to spend some time in a stepfamily, our understanding of the
              implications of parental remarriage for the well being of youth remains largely
              incomplete. In fact, a growing body of evidence suggests that remarriage may
              reduce children's well-being, which is surprising given the economic benefits
              of remarriage, the potential for increased supervision of children, and the
              emotional support remarriage offers to a potentially over-extended single
              parent. Most previous research on family structure, however, has focused on the
              well being of youth in single-parent families. The more limited body of
              research examining stepfamilies relies largely on cross-sectional comparisons
              of children in various family structures at a particular point in time, or on
              non-nationally representative longitudinal samples. The research addresses the
              following questions: (1) How do youth in stepfamilies fare, and do the effects
              of parental remarriage vary across child outcomes? (2) What underlying
              processes produce observed relationships between remarriage and child well
              being? Are these relationships causal or spuriously produced by the nature of
              selection into stepfamilies? (3) Do the effects of stepfamilies on children,
              and the processes producing these effects, vary across demographic groups
              defined by race, age, gender, or socioeconomic status? 

To investigate
              children's well being from middle childhood through late adolescence, data are
              obtained from The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth-Child Supplement and
              The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health. The analyses begin with a
              descriptive examination of the association between remarriage and various
              domains of children's well-being, followed by the testing of specific
              hypotheses about processes through which stepfamilies impact youth. Attention
              will be paid to theoretically-relevant operationalizations of family structure
              and to potential mediating mechanisms such as family income, parenting style,
              family conflict, and extrafamilial social networks. Finally, because children
              and parents in stepfamilies may be unlike individuals in other family forms in
              many ways, models will be estimated that control both observed and unobserved
              characteristics of parents and offspring. Analytical techniques used in the
              analyses include OLS regression, logistic regression, Cox proportional hazards
              and fixed-effects models. 

The project has important implications for
              parents, clinicians, and members of the research community. This research will
              provide useful information about targeting interventions to help stepfamilies
              and the children living within them. The emphasis on appropriate measurement
              and model specification in this research will also be important for members of
              the social scientific community interested in assessing the extent to which
              differences in children's well-being result from variation in family structure
              histories, as opposed to other potentially confounding factors. Finally, this
              research will improve our conceptual understanding of how remarriage affects
              children by testing relationships suggested broadly by the life course model
              and by dominant mid- level perspectives emphasizing economic deprivation,
              socialization, stress and instability, and community connections.

