Title       : Mechanisms of Nucleic Acid Oxidation and Cross-linking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0137716

Award Number: 0137716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $463000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia J. Burrows burrows@chem.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to understand the chemistry involved in the
              formation of DNA-protein cross links.  One electron oxidation of DNA fragments
              generates radical cations at a number of nucleosides which are then trapped by
              protein nucleophiles.  The protein-DNA adducts will then be characterized by a
              number of spectroscopic techniques including NMR and LC-ESI-MS/MS.  Lastly, a
              40 mer DNA sequence, and its complement, will be synthesized.  This sequence
              contains a triple G track, a double G and several AT tracks which compliment GC
              pairs.  This strand will then be prepared using G precursors which have been
              doped with 10% OG (oxidized G) leading to a random distribution of OG in all 10
              G positions in the strand and an average of 1 OG/strand.  Reactions of these
              strands with amine and protein nucleophiles and characterization of the
              subsequent adducts will be used to identify "hot spot" sequences which are most
              susceptible to adduct formation following oxidative damage.

 With this
              award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the
              research of Dr. Cynthia J. Burrows of the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Utah.  Dr. Burrows will explore the reactions of proteins with
              DNA fragments which have been damaged by oxidative chemical reactions. 
              Uncovering the chemical reactions involved in oxidative DNA damage is important
              to a fundamental molecular understanding of the chemical processes involved in
              aging, cancer and a number of neurological disorders.  Students trained as a
              result of working on this project will gain experience in mechanistic organic
              chemistry as well as biochemistry, hence they will have skills needed by both
              the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries.




