Title       : ADVANCE - Fellow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0137422

Award Number: 0137422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda G. Bushnell bushnell@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1517,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this prepared ADVANCE  Fellow award the PI plan to investigate the general
              area of "networks and control," which can be broken down into two subareas. The
              first subarea considers the control of communication networks, which falls into
              the broader field of information technology. The second subarea is networked
              control systems (NCS), where one or more control loops is closed via a serial
              communication channel. The focus of this proposal is in the latter subarea. The
              idea of NCS is to bring multiple-input, multiple-output control system
              technology to application areas where the prohibitive cost of point-to-point
              wiring had previously barred its use. The PI has worked for the past five years
              on research that covers stability, encoding, estimation, perturbation and
              application issues for NCS. Applications of this research include control and
              communications of active, intelligent, dynamic networks; distributed sensor
              systems; secure, reliable wireless communication; and control of multi-vehicle
              formations. 

The PI will work with two other robotics professors at UW on a
              project with the goal of enabling groups of robots to work effectively under
              unstructured conditions and with close coordination and control by humans.
              There are many activities where it is desirable to substitute robots for humans
              ("dull, dirty and/or dangerous" tasks). Teams of robots, operating in an
              unknown and perhaps hostile environment can potentially accomplish important
              missions
such as surveillance, situation awareness and understanding, damage
              assessment, search and rescue, and others. However, command and control of such
              a team requires effective coupling between the human supervisor and the robot
              teams. Furthermore, the sensory, motor and planning capabilities of the human
              exceed those of foreseeable autonomous robots. Therefore, an effective
              combination of the human and robot can potentially produce higher performance
              than a team composed entirely of humans or entirely of robots. Realizing this
              vision requires basic
advances in research in the fields of mobile robotic
              sensing planning and control, as well as human interfaces to multiple robots.
              The PI's work on this project will focus on multi-robot communication and
              control.

The PI is actively involved with community outreach at UW. During
              the past academic year, the PI has hosted three outreach events. The first was
              a 3-hour long workshop on mobile robotics for a group of Seattle YMCA
              teenagers. The second was three hour-long workshops on mobile robotics for
              teenage girls through the Shoreline Community College "Expanding Your Horizons
              Day" program. The PI also hosted a two-day open house in the Mobile
              Robotics
Laboratory for the annual EE Department Open House.

This past
              academic year, the PI developed three new senior-level capstone design courses
              on mobile robotics. The PI plans to improve the courses and teach them again in
              the upcoming academic year.

The PI plans to research the two areas listed
              above. This will involve working with other professors and students in the UW
              Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Engineering departments. 

To
              meet the ADVANCE goal the PI plans to support a woman graduate student each
              year. The PI is currently a graduate student mentor in the UW Women in Science
              and Engineering (WiSE) program. The PI will also be an advisor for independent
              study projects from women in the EE department. The UW EE Department has most
              of the required infrastructure to support the PI and graduate students to
              perform the research proposed.

