Title       : Force Propagation and Friction in Granular Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0137119

Award Number: 0137119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Behringer bob@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua E. S. Socolar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a combined experiment and theory/modeling condensed matter physics
              project.  The objective is to understand force propagation in granular
              materials.  Granular materials have been the focus of an intensive and growing
              body of research that also extends to a broader class of materials, such as
              glasses, colloids, foams and others that exhibit jamming (frozen structures). 
              New techniques are being invented to deal with these materials, which cannot be
              described in the context of conventional statistical mechanics.  Thus, concepts
              arising from this project have potential to impact a broad range of materials
              handling problems, which arise with food grains, coal and ores and
              pharmaceutical powders and other granular materials.  In these materials,
              forces are carried by an inhomogeneous network of so-called stress chains,
              which form and reform, leading to strong spatio-temporal stress fluctuations. 
              This project will address at least four different systems that exhibit force
              propagation and fluctuations.  Theory/modeling aspects of this work focus on
              micro/mesoscopic models of stress propagation, while Molecular Dynamics
              techniques are brought to bear on force fluctuations.  This project involves
              undergraduates, graduate students and post-docs in an integrated program of
              training and development.  More senior students and post-docs train undergrads
              through appropriate research projects.  Graduate students and post-docs receive
              training in advanced research techniques that prepare them for either academic
              or industrial careers.

This project will focus on the behavior of granular
              materials, which include a broad spectrum of technologically and industrially
              relevant products ranging from food grains to coal and ores to pharmaceutical
              powders.  The value added to the US economy in the handling of these materials
              is estimated to be as much as a trillion dollars a year.  However, our
              understanding of the basic physics of these materials is incomplete, and this
              translates into a corresponding loss of productivity in dealing with these
              materials.  This project focuses on such basic physics issues as how forces are
              carried in these materials and how the materials behave when they are subject
              to applied forces, such as those that might be encountered in handling devices.
               Important insights sought with this project should include better
              predictability of materials properties, as well as insight into the limits of
              this predictability.  This project involves undergraduates, graduate students
              and post-docs in an integrated program of training and development.  Grad
              students and post-docs will help undergrads through appropriate research
              projects.  Undergraduates learn key research techniques, and also training in
              instrumentation development.  Graduate students and post-docs receive training
              in advanced research techniques that will prepare them for either academic or
              industrial careers.

