Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award: Transcription System for Real-World Environments with
               Applications to Healthcare
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0137720

Award Number: 0137720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harriet G. Taylor                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manpreet Kaur mkaur@caip.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Grove  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1681      ADVANCE - FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1681,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EIA 0137720                            
Grove, Deborah
Rutgers University New
              Brunswick 

        Title: ADVANCE Fellows: Transcription System for Real
              World Environments with Applications to Healthcare

Amount Rec:     $
              300,000

Project Proposed

This proposal, developing a hands-free meeting
              transcription system along with a remote transcript browsing capability via
              telephone, will incorporate new microphone array technology for audio capture
              of speech for high-quality speech recognition. The capture will take place in a
              realistic office scenario, as required for a transcription application. The
              research is geared towards developing a patient-centered care system that would
              allow patients and family members to access office visit information. The
              system will have a speech interface to a computer for disease management
              feedback between patient and physician. The main goal consists of developing a
              meeting transcription system that incorporates microphone array algorithms for
              sound capture from multiple talkers and speaker identification. The microphone
              array builds on the past research by the PI for incorporating room response
              information into array algorithms. The array output will be adaptively
              determined such that it is robust in environmentally changing rooms and for
              talker positions not initially calibrated. The transcription research,
              concerned with parsing dialog to distinguish multiple talkers at a meeting
              (which may not be stored at the database), will be tested using the physician's
              office dialog. Speaker identification will involve incorporating phonetic
              knowledge along with keyword content information and talker location to improve
              the tagging of multiple talkers. Performance will be measured with respect to
              speech recognition results.


