Title       : Femtosecond Studies of Chemical Reaction Dynamics in Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0137340

Award Number: 0137340
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $734000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Harris harris@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Charles Harris of the University of California, Berkeley is supported by the
              Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for research on
              the kinetics (at the femto-second time scale) and the intimate mechanisms of
              rather complex organometallic reactions. Using femtosecond infrared
              spectroscopy coupled with high pressure techniques, the intimate mechanisms of
              a variety of complex chemical reactions will be elucidated. Special attention
              will be paid to the role of solvent molecules in these reactions. Initial
              interest will be centered on the activation by transition metal complexes of
              selective C-H and Si-H bond ruptures. A variety of more complex reactions,
              including alkyne polymerization, will also be examined.  Reaction dynamics will
              be interpreted with the aid of  stochastic dynamic simulations. Several
              theoretical methods, including ab initio calculations and density functional
              methods, will be applied to characterization of intermediates. 

This
              research is extending the time range accessible  in the study of the intimate
              mechanisms of solution-phase inorganic reactions by several orders of
              magnitude. The details of reactions that are instantaneous by other measures
              will be brought under examination. Such heretofore inaccessible chemical
              changes stand at critical points in networks of reactions that are of central
              importance in many scientific and technological areas. Specific examples of
              topics where this research may have great importance include studies of  the
              mechanisms of biological processes such as photosynthesis and respiration, and
              also improvement of metal-catalyzed polymerizations that are of central
              importance in the chemical industry.



