Title       : An Elite Mortuary Complex at Umm el-Marra: Ancestor Veneration and the Emergence
               of Syrian Complex Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2002    
File        : a0137513

Award Number: 0137513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89874              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn M. Schwartz schwartz@jhunix.hcf.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Support from the National Science Foundation will allow Dr. Glenn Schwartz to
              conduct two seasons of excavation at Umm el-Marra, Syria, in order to explore a
              "royal" mortuary complex dating to the period of Syria's first urban
              civilization.  Previous excavation and survey work based at Umm el-Marra,
              located east of Aleppo in northern Syria, has revealed that the site was the
              predominant urban center of the Jabbul plain throughout the Bronze Age, ca.
              2600-1200 BC.   In the 2000 excavation season, an intact elaborate tomb dating
              to the earliest urban era was discovered in the site center.  While an upper
              layer consisting of two young women, each with a baby, yielded numerous lavish
              ornaments of gold, lapis lazuli, and silver, the two layers of males underneath
              contained only modest amounts of burial goods.   Such gender differentiation in
              grave wealth might be interpreted as evidence of high-ranking women accompanied
              by sacrificed lower-ranking males.

Architectural evidence indicates that the
              Umm el-Marra tomb was a centrally-located, freestanding mausoleum, part of a
              larger complex on the site acropolis that may have been an elite funerary
              installation.  In summer 2002 and 2003, Schwartz plans to conduct two
              excavation seasons in order to investigate this complex.   An area of 640
              square meters will be excavated in the acropolis center in order to expose as
              much as possible of the hypothesized mortuary complex and to determine if
              earlier phases of the feature are to be found underneath it.  

This research
              promises to yield a number of important results.  The study of early urbanism
              in Syria and Mesopotamia has thus far concentrated on economic and
              environmental factors.  Excavation of an elite mortuary complex will allow for
              the consideration of the role of ritual, religion, and ideology. An hypothesis
              proposing that the Syrian elites legitimized their authority through veneration
              of elite ancestors will be tested.  Additional data on status and gender
              hierarchies will also be obtained and further scrutinized using artifact and
              skeletal analyses.

The complex can be expected to reveal important new
              information on the dominant elites in early urban Syria, the bases of their
              power, and the gender-related dimensions of such power. A large sample of elite
              data, complementing non-elite results from other parts of the site, would allow
              for a holistic view of an early Syrian urban center.






