Title       : Gender-Related Trends in Educational Expectations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0137050

Award Number: 0137050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47304              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Reynolds jreynold@coss.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0137050
John Reynolds
Florida State University

The past thirty years
              have witnessed considerable change in the gender norms surrounding men's and
              especially women's work and family roles. More women work full-time than ever
              before, and even in the most traditional families, two biological parents with
              young children, women are more likely than not to work for pay. On many
              work-related dimensions women still lag behind men, including lower median
              earnings, slimmer chances of being promoted, and a higher average share of
              household duties. In the area of education, however, women have surpassed men
              at many levels. Girls today are more likely than boys to plan to attend
              college, to graduate from high school, to attend college, and to complete a
              college degree. These trends suggest that the basic processes underlying
              educational attainment have shifted within recent decades. 
This research
              examines changes in girls' and boys' college expectations from 1972 to 1997 in
              an attempt to identify the most important forces behind women's advances in
              higher education. College expectations are students' subjective assessments of
              the odds of completing a college degree in the future, and they have been shown
              to be an important cognitive link between family background, school
              performance, and eventual educational achievements. In addition, college
              expectations among high school girls have risen faster than boys since the
              1970s, and girls today are significantly more likely to expect to complete a
              college degree or plan to attend graduate or professional school. The proposed
              research hypothesizes the faster rise in college expectations among girls is
              due to changes in, and gender-specific effects of, parents' achievements,
              family structure, and local job opportunities. 

The data come from four
              national longitudinal surveys of pre-college age youth: the 1972 National
              Longitudinal Survey, the 1980 High School and Beyond Survey, the 1988 National
              Education Longitudinal Study, and the 1997 National Longitudinal Survey of
              Youth. Probit models for each survey estimate the effects of parents'
              achievements, family structure, and local job opportunities on the probability
              that girls and boys expect to complete a college degree.  Characteristics of
              parents, families, and local job markets may help explain the gender-related
              trends in college expectations if the factors that have a more positive effect
              on girls' expectations become more positive over time (e.g., mothers'
              educational attainments), or if the effects of these characteristics become
              more positive for girls over time than for boys (e.g., job opportunities). The
              findings will suggest how changes in gender norms are impacting a major
              institution in society, higher education, and they will provide a much-needed
              update to our understanding of gender differences in the process of educational
              attainment. The study will also contribute to the current debate over whether
              girls or boys are more likely to underachieve relative to their talents, a
              debate that has relevance for educational policy at the secondary and
              post-secondary levels. 

