Title       : Collaborative Research for WOCE-AIMS: Global Velocity Estimation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0137077

Award Number: 0137077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $637000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. McWilliams jcm@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1326,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0137122/0137077 Owens/McWilliams

This collaborative project will try to
              estimate the large scale, three-dimensional velocity field for the North
              Atlantic using velocity data from sub-surface floats, current meters, and
              surface drifters, hydrographic profiles, and sea surface height measurements
              taken prior to and during the field operations phase of the World Ocean
              Circulation Experiment (WOCE). As new measurements, such as the gravimetry from
              the GRACE mission, altimetry from the JASON mission, and velocities and T and S
              profiles from the ARGO float program become available, they will be
              incorporated into the analysis. The estimates of the velocities and their
              expected errors will be made using generalized least-square error minimization
              based on a priori specification of expected measurement errors and space-time
              covariances and/or basis functions. A hierarchy of a priori statistics will be
              used. They will be determined from general spectral shapes for stretched basin
              basis functions and analyses of simulations from numerical general circulation
              models run for other purposes, as well as statistical analyses from the
              measurements. The model covariances and basis functions initially will exactly
              enforce geostrophic dynamics, with additional ageostrophic processes added
              where necessary, such as in the surface boundary layer and near the Equator.
              The use of slightly less constrained covariances calculated directly from the
              simulations will also be examined. The a posteriori statistics of the estimates
              will be compared with the a priori ones to evaluate the estimation procedure
              and the validity of the models. A sequence of estimations with expanding
              comprehensiveness will be made. Initially these estimates will be obtained for
              the mean circulation in highly sampled regions, i.e., the Atlantic Climate and
              Circulation Experiment and then expanded to first basin then global maps. As we
              gain confidence in the procedure, maps for temporally varying velocities will
              also be made. The ultimate goal is to  create a living estimation library and
              software system, capable of user-chosen variants and re-estimation with new
              data. This project is a contribution to WOCE


