Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: Causes of Sexual Size Dimorphism in Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0137344

Award Number: 0137344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10804              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Kappelman jkappelman@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this study is to investigate the causes of sexual size dimorphism
              (SSD) in primates.  SSD is the presence of differences in mean overall body
              size between males and females.  These differences are meaningful because they
              are often related to social structures and group compositions present in
              primates, and thus are useful in deducing the ways in which extinct primate
              species organized themselves.  It is important to understand the strength of
              the correlation between SSD and these other factors when drawing inferences
              about extinct populations.
The proposed study differs from earlier work in
              which analyses across species of SSD indices and categorical data (e.g., mating
              system, dietary type, substrate type) were compared to theoretical predictions.
               Instead, a quantitative model is used to generate predictions for populations
              of continuous data.  Predictions are based on initial conditions that
              correspond to mechanisms that can potentially produce SSD - mechanisms that
              predict high correlation between SSD and certain social structures, and other
              mechanisms that do not.  Data from primate populations will be compared to
              model predictions using analyses that take into account degree of relatedness
              between species to determine which mechanisms produce SSD in those
              primates.
This study has multiple areas of significance.  First, it tests the
              validity of an alternative technique for determining body size of skeletal
              specimens.  Second, it introduces a new technique for testing the influence of
              particular forces on SSD in primates.  Third, it will identify the forces that
              affect SSD within particular primate groups, as well as across the Order
              Primates.  Finally, reconstructed values of ancestral size and distribution
              parameters can be compared with values of known fossils, furthering
              understanding of the relationships between fossil primates, ancestral primates,
              and living primates.

