Title       : The Evolution of Diagonal-sequence Gaits in Primates: A New Approach to the
               Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0137930

Award Number: 0137930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matt Cartmill   (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Schmitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre Lemelin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    When walking, most quadrupeds typically put down each forefoot just after
              the hindfoot on the same side (that is, the right hind footfall is followed by
              the right fore footfall, and so on).  Quadrupedal primates (lemurs, monkeys,
              apes, etc.) are atypical in placing down the forefoot from the opposite side
              just after each hind footfall (that is, the right hind footfall is followed by
              the left fore footfall, and so on).  Although these so-called diagonal-sequence
              (DS) gaits of primates are well documented, their functional significance has
              eluded biologists for over a century.  Preliminary data show that DS gaits are
              also characteristic of arboreal marsupials, which resemble primates in being
              tree-dwelling animals with grasping hind feet.  DS gaits allow all these
              animals to support themselves with a protracted hind foot, placed on a proven
              support under the body's center of mass, before putting down a forefoot on a
              potentially precarious support.  Theoretical considerations imply that  the
              phase relationship ("diagonality") between the movement cycles of the fore and
              hind limbs should vary directly with the duty factor of the hindlimb relative
              to that of the forelimb, that diagonality should vary directly with support
              slope and inversely with support diameter, and that the correlation between
              duty factor and diagonality has undergone a historical transformation from
              negative (as in typical mammals) to positive (as in higher primates). 
              High-speed camcorders will be used to record footfall sequences on four support
              types for a suite of 15 species selected to control for the relevant variables.
               The data collected will be used to test the empirical predictions derived from
              the theory.  The results are expected to shed new light on controversies
              concerning primate origins and the early stages of the human lineage.
