Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: Advancing the Work of COMPASS: A
               Secondary Mathematics Implementation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0137772

Award Number: 0137772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John S. Bradley                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric E. Robinson robinson@ithaca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Maceli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The "Curricular Options Programs for All Secondary Students (COMPASS)" Center
              focuses on issues related to the implementation of five national comprehensive
              secondary school mathematics curriculum programs as a means of initiating
              systemic change within a school district.  The five programs are:  Contemporary
              Mathematics in Context; the Interactive Mathematics Program; MATH Connections;
              Mathematics:  Modeling Our World; and SIMMS Integrated Mathematics.  The
              structure of COMPASS includes a Central Site and five Satellite Sites, one for
              each curriculum program.  The primary functions of the Central Site are to
              inform various constituencies about these curricula, to assist school districts
              in developing the capacity for change by helping them formulate an
              implementation plan, and to coordinate requests for additional information and
              assistance from the Satellite Sites.  The primary goals of the Satellite Sites
              are to provide curriculum program-specific information and to assist school
              districts with program-specific implementation strategies, including
              professional development for teachers.  The work of all six sites involves
              working with policy makers at the school district, regional and state levels,
              as well as with parents, businesses and community leaders as they seek to
              institute or understand the kind of educational reform embodied in these
              curricula.
