Title       : SGER: Morphological CT Scan of Notropis megalepis for Phylogenetic and
               Evolutionary Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0137734

Award Number: 0137734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Mayden maydenrl@slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Historically, the stark contrast in diversity between North America's sunfish
              and minnow and shiner species served as a fertile research area for studying
              differential rates of evolution in two groups of equal age (based on fossil
              record).  Cladistic analyses of osteological characters revealed fundamental
              flaws with previous studies of this nature and classifications of these fishes,
              thus questioning the accuracy of prior evolutionary studies.  Today,
              phylogenetic relationships of species of Notropis (shiners) and relatives are
              relatively well known due to recent morphological and molecular analyses by the
              PI and collaborators as well as other researchers.  Relationships of species of
              Centrarchidae, also soon to be available using morphological and molecular
              data, will provide the necessary information to begin comparative studies
              between the sunfish and shiner groups as envisioned by earlier researchers -
              rate heterogeneity in evolution.  However, a notable problem remaining in
              advancing this research is the phylogenetic placement of the species Notropis
              megalepis, the species used to date the Notropis lineage, to a clade
              appropriate for comparison.  The PI proposes to conduct high-resolution CT
              scans of the fossil Notropis megalepis from the Middle Pliocene of western
              Kansas using the recent technology developed at The University of Texas NSF
              Multi-user facility maintained by Dr. Tim Rowe.  This fossil is fundamental in
              dating the age of the North American shiner and minnow group to which it
              belongs and evaluating rate heterogeneity in evolution for these two groups of
              fishes.  
	Producing accurate estimates of evolutionary relationships is
              necessary for the overall framework for information retrieval and biological
              prediction.  Uses of such information and predictability include tracking the
              origins of disease, identifying biological control agents for invasive species,
              and evaluating risk factors associated with biological conservation.  

