Title       : Macro Variables and Term Structure Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0137145

Award Number: 0137145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145155             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Ang aa610@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Two distinct areas of economics use linear tractable frameworks for modeling tem
              structure. The first area, financial asset pricing, uses no-arbitrage latent
              factor models for bond pricing, derivatives pricing and for risk management. 
              These affine models forecast poorly out of sample, do not incorporate
              non-linearities and the latent factors are given no economic interpretation.
              The second area of empirical macroeconomics uses Vector Auto Regression (VARs)
              to identify and compute the effects of monetary policy on inflation, economic
              growth and the behavior of the term structure. The VARs say little about how
              yields not included in the VAR may move, do not rule out arbitrage in the
              dynamics of the yield curve, and do not efficiently use forward-looking
              financial information. The goal of this proposal is to develop a framework that
              uses the best of the asset pricing and macroeconomic fields. The research has
              the following implications for macro and asset pricing term structure modeling.
              First, the framework identifies the effects of monetary policy and shocks from
              macro variables with priced time-varying factor risk. Second, incorporating
              inflation and real activity directly gives economic content to the asset
              pricing factor models. Third, imposing no-arbitrage provides greater
              efficiency, and preliminary results from the first project show that
              no-arbitrage models forecast better than unrestricted VARs, and incorporating
              macro variables further improves forecasting ability. Finally, incorporating
              regime switches has policy implications, as the impact of various shocks on the
              term structure may be very dissimilar across the regimes. 

More
              specifically, the new framework is no-arbitrage, incorporates latent and
              observable macro variables and introduces non-linearities. With time-varying
              risk premiums, the full specification is consistent with deviations from the
              Expectations Hypothesis, the Fisher Hypothesis, and in an international
              extension, Uncovered Interest Rate Parity and Purchasing Power Parity.  The
              project builds to the full model by incorporating additional features in each
              individual project. 

The first two projects, joint with Monika Piazzesi,
              build a Gaussian no-arbitrage model with observable macro variables and latent
              variables. The model is related to the Taylor (1993) rules of monetary policy,
              where the surprise shocks to the short rate are identified by no-arbitrage
              cross-equation restrictions. The first project assumes that macro and latent
              variables are orthogonal, to focus on the ability of inflation and real
              activity to forecast the dynamics of the yield curve, before resorting to
              latent variables. The second project introduces feedback between the macro and
              latent factors.  It identifies monetary policy shocks implied by no-arbitrage
              assumptions and investigates how shocks affect inflation, real activity, and
              yield curve dynamics.
 
The third project, joint with Geert Bekaert and Bob
              Hodrick, introduces non-linearities in interest rates by incorporating regime
              switches. The model allows means, covariances and risk premia to switch across
              the regimes. Impulse responses for yields from shocks to macro factors, and
              impulse responses for macro variables from monetary policy shocks, differ
              across the regimes. In an international extension, expected currency
              depreciations and forward rates are affine functions of state variables,
              conditional on the regime. 

