Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award: Forensic Seismic Damage Modeling Using Virtual Reality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0137700

Award Number: 0137700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408386             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Sardo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1681,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The recent collapse of a number of bridge structures has highlighted their
              vulnerability to earthquakes. The societal impacts of bridge failures on
              traffic, commerce, and public safety motivate the need to adequately evaluate
              their performance and rehabilitation.  Structural forensic techniques are
              commonly used to examine the damage patterns, develop possible failure
              scenarios, and select retrofit designs to be applied to similar bridges in an
              effort to avoid future failures.  This research will define appropriate seismic
              damage indices that quantify the level of damage experienced by the bridge
              structure during a seismic event.  Performance-based criteria will be developed
              that accounts for all deformation and damage accumulated during the earthquake
              in order to facilitate optimal retrofit designs and remediation policies.
              

Virtual reality provides a unique framework in which to understand complex
              problems.  It provides the ability to visualize and interact with computer
              images using natural human interfaces. Through the use of display technology,
              users can "enter" the computer world and move around complex three-dimensional
              computer models.  Thus, the solution of large-scale problems can be better
              understood and more effectively communicated to a wide audience.  This research
              will employ the use of virtual reality technology to visualize the dynamic
              performance of bridge structures during seismic events and perform structural
              forensic analyses. 

An integrated process of analysis and visualization that
              addresses the sequencing of damage, performance levels, and interdependence of
              failure mechanisms will be developed in this research.  Complex analytical
              models of bridges will be created while a virtual environment is used to
              display the results of the analysis and provide an effective communication
              tool.  This research will solve seismic infrastructure problems using a
              systemic perspective and innovative information systems.  Virtual reality
              technology will be used to enhance the capabilities of pre-event planning
              scenarios from an array of structural threats.  The ability to forensically
              recreate and understand structural failures, such as the 9/11 disaster, will be
              advanced through this unique merging of structural analysis and virtual reality
              technology. 


