Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Microbial and Plant Metabolism--Function through
               Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a0137409

Award Number: 0137409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Sherman lsherman@bilbo.bio.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0137409
Sherman

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan seminar on microbial and plant metabolism--function through
              genomics to be held in Honolulu, Hawaii from November 22-26, 2002.  The
              co-organizers are Professor Louis Sherman of Purdue University in Indiana and
              Professor Yuichiro Takahashi of Okayama University in Japan.  The meeting will
              cover the extraordinary progress that has been made in the last two years in
              sequencing of the genomes of photosynthetic microbes, especially cyanobacteria.
               Over one dozen strains will have been sequenced by the meeting and this will
              lead to a wide array of new findings in many different disciplines and also in
              our understanding of gene regulation.  Two of the newly sequenced organisms
              include Prochlorococcus strains that are of tremendous importance in the open
              ocean and may be the most abundant photosynthetic organisms on the planet.  Two
              others are N2-fixing strains that will provide a tremendous opportunity to
              analyze N2 fixation, heterocyst development and the way in which these
              processes are regulated.

The significance of the science to be discussed at
              this meeting is quite wide-ranging.  The cyanobacteria and the other
              photosynthetic phototrophs have become among the most important of all model
              organisms and that a multitude of important problems for the biosphere can be
              studied through these organisms.  This meeting will represent a timely
              opportunity for the major participants in this broad field of genomics to
              discuss their results, discuss the successes and the difficulties of recent
              work and focus on future directions.  Younger members of the community will be
              invited into the international collaboration and hopefully maintain research
              collaborations throughout their careers. Most importantly, cyanobacteria
              represent one of the best and most advanced model systems for understanding the
              functionality of each protein in a cell.  Results obtained from this
              photosynthetic microbe will be of great value for the Arabidopsis program aimed
              at the same goal.  The cyanobacterial results will be significant for an
              understanding of chloroplast function as well as providing critical information
              on how a cell lives, replicates, and responds to its environment.  Proceedings
              of the seminar will be published on the Web.  



