Title       : Business Cycles, Inflation and Welfare
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0137053

Award Number: 0137053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238430             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Gertler mark.gertler@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project continues the development of optimization based general
              equilibrium models that characterize the joint dynamics of output and
              inflation.  This work involves both a positive and normative analysis of
              monetary policy.  Under a previous NSF grant the investigator developed and
              estimated optimization based models of inflation.  This project measures the
              relative importance of price and wage rigidities for output and inflation
              dynamics. In addition to providing guidance for structural modeling, the
              approach leads naturally to a way to quantify the implied efficiency costs of
              output and inflation variability, in the spirit of recent literature.   The
              project provides new insights into the sources and the costs of business cycles
              and improves the design of monetary policy, as well as certain fiscal
              policies.

The approach taken begins with a monetary dynamic general
              equilibrium economy and then introduces certain frictions. Examples include
              imperfect competition, nominal price and wage rigidities, as well as various
              financial market frictions. In addition, preference and technological
              assumptions are introduced that improve the ability of the framework to account
              for cyclical output and price behavior. A sample includes: habit formation,
              various forms of adjustment costs on investment, and variable factor
              utilization. There are now a number of examples where these frameworks have
              been taken to the data with reasonable empirical success.   This project 
              explores the relative importance of the price and wage rigidities that underlie
              this approach for both output and inflation dynamics. In addition to providing
              guidance for subsequent structural modeling, the approach leads naturally to a
              way to quantify the implied efficiency costs of output and inflation
              variability.  If prices and/or wages are less than fully flexible, then the
              business cycle will produce fluctuations in the efficiency of resource
              allocation that are mirrored by fluctuations in the gap between the household's
              marginal rate of substitution between consumption and leisure and the marginal
              product of labor. This gap, which is called the "inefficiency gap," corresponds
              to the inverse of the markup of price over social marginal cost. Further, it is
              possible to decompose this markup into two components: a markup of price over
              firms' marginal cost and a markup of the wage over the household's marginal
              rate of substitution.  Countercyclical movements in either the price or wage
              markup, accordingly, produce procyclical movements in the inefficiency gap.  
              Given certain parametric assumptions, it is possible to construct time series
              measures of the inefficiency gap and to decompose this gap into its price and
              wage markup components. This is of  interest because the gap measure leads
              naturally to a simple quantitative indicator of the efficiency costs of
              fluctuations and the decomposition of the markup provides a way to measure the
              relative importance of price versus wage rigidity in cyclical fluctuations.
              


