Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award: Environmental Effects on Variations in Jellyfish
               Population Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0137419

Award Number: 0137419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $419730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer E. Purcell purcelj@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1681,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding for the PI to establish a long term research program
              on the environmental effects (temperature, salinity, prey density) on the
              population dynamics of jellyfish (including scyphomedusae, hydromedusae, and
              ctenophores) in the waters of the Puget Sound basin. Jellyfish populations
              exhibit dramatic interannual fluctuations, and the reasons for this are largely
              unknown. The PI will conduct laboratory experiments to test the combined
              effects of temperature, salinity and prey density in combination with in situ
              sampling with a video system. The initial target species is Aurelia labiata,
              whose congeners are among the most abundant large jelly fish worldwide. This
              research is significant because jellyfish populations may be increasing around
              the world due to the combined effects of human activities. Jellyfish are
              important consumers of zooplankton, and are generally deleterious to fish
              populations and commercial fisheries through direct predation on fish eggs and
              larvae, predator competition, and interference with fish harvesting. It is
              important to understand the factors that affect their population fluctuations
              in order to understand the possible effects of changing ocean
              conditions.

This ADVANCE award will promote the career of a female scientist
              at a critical point. This investment is likely to allow her to re-establish her
              career a new university, where she will be an excellent role model for
              students. In addition, the SPML has two strong programs focused on
              undergraduate research in which the PI will participate as a mentor and
              instructor. The programs, Minorities in Marine Science Undergraduate Program
              (MIMSUP) and an Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site program will
              allow the PI to mentor numerous undergraduate students.  




