Title       : ADVANCE Fellow: Microscopy of Nanomaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0137922

Award Number: 0137922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie J. Leppert vjleppert@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1681      ADVANCE - FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1681,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed research is to develop a new characterization
              technique for investigating the size-dependent magnetic, optical, and
              electronic behavior of nanomaterials.  An understanding of the origin of these
              new properties is essential for their exploitation in a variety of
              technologies, including high-density magnetic recording, high-speed optical
              computing, solar energy, environmental toxicology, biomaterials, and
              biosensors.  The technique that will be developed is electron energy-loss
              spectroscopy (EELS) in the transmission electron microscope (TEM).  New
              developments in the energy-resolution of EELS (<0.3 eV) will be used in concert
              with the high spatial-resolution of TEM to correlate the electronic and optical
              properties of individual nanoparticles to their size, shape, composition, and
              surface morphology.  Specific materials for initial investigation will be
              gallium nitride and silicon nanoparticles, synthesized by the PI and her
              collaborators.  The electronic and optical properties of individual
              nanoparticles will be extracted from the low energy-loss and fine structure
              portions of the EELS spectrum. Results will be compared to information
              collected from X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and optical spectroscopy, as
              well as modeling efforts.  This information will in turn be related to the
              physical morphology (size and shape) of the individual nanoparticles,
              particular surface reconstructions present (via phase-contrast microscopy), and
              elemental composition and distribution (e.g. doping, core/shell structures). 
              The potential impact of this work on understanding the origins of
              size-dependent properties is expected to be enormous, given that the capability
              of the proposed technique is unique in permitting the study of individual
              nanoparticles, rather than ensembles of nanoparticles.

Intense worldwide
              research over the last twenty years has been focused on understanding the
              effect on the magnetic, optical, and electronic properties of a bulk material
              when size is reduced to less than about 10 nanometers (less than one in a
              hundred millionths of a meter).  Investigation of the behavior and origin of
              these size-dependent properties is critical for their full exploitation in a
              broad range of technologies: high-density magnetic recording, high-speed
              optical computing, solar energy, environmental toxicology (including chemical
              and biological weapons detection), biomaterials (for example, artificial
              organs), and biosensors for advanced medical testing.  The small size scale of
              the materials under investigation demands that new techniques be developed for
              understanding their properties, since traditional characterization techniques
              typically study millions of particles at a time, rather than single particles
              alone.  The goal of this project is to use new developments in electron
              microscopy to correlate the magnetic, optical and electronic behavior of
              individual nanoparticles to their specific size, shape, composition and surface
              structure.  This will be achieved by taking full advantage of the ability of
              electron microscopy to image features less than 0.2 nm in size, as well as new
              developments in spectroscopic methods in the electron microscope that will
              allow optical and electronic data to be collected from individual
              nanoparticles.  An understanding of how the properties of nanomaterials are
              influenced by these various factors will extend knowledge of the basic
              properties of matter, as well as point to new synthesis strategies to optimize
              the performance of this important class of materials.

This award is
              supported through the NSF ADVANCE Fellows Program. The overall mission of the
              ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women in the scientific and
              engineering workforce through the increased representation and advancement of
              women in academic science and engineering careers.

