Title       : The Size-Distance Relation and the Moon Illusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0137567

Award Number: 0137567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272597             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lloyd Kaufman lkaufma@optonline.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Kaufman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Long Island Univ
	      University Center
	      Brookville, NY  11548    516/299-2527

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This goal of this research is to examine the relation between perceived distance
              and physical distance, and also to determine the way in which perceived size is
              related to perceived distance over distances ranging from about one meter to
              optical infinity.  Thus, the research will deal with size and distance of
              terrestrial objects, as well as celestial objects, such as the moon.  One
              particular objective is to determine if the moon illusion is a special case of
              ordinary size perception, or if it must be treated as a special process.  It is
              known that people can match the physical size of an object at one distance to
              that of another at a much greater distance, even though their images on the
              retina differ dramatically in size.  The ability to match physical sizes
              regardless of distance (size constancy) entails processing distance
              information.  In classic theories, the perceived size of an object does not
              depend upon its physical distance, but upon its perceived distance.  If
              distance is misperceived, as may occur under conditions of limited visibility,
              then size is also misperceived.  Some cues operate over large distances, while
              others play a dominant role at close distances.  How different cues interact
              with each other to influence size perception is not well understood.  For this
              reason, some have questioned whether perceived size really depends upon
              perceived distance, as in the classic view.  This alternative view arose in
              connection with theories of the moon illusion.  In this alternative view, the
              perceived distance to the moon depends upon its perceived size, which is
              opposite to the classic view and has important implications for size and
              distance perception in general.  This research will measure how well people can
              discriminate small differences in depth (or size) between objects over a wide
              range of distances out-of-doors and in a darkened laboratory containing an
              artificial "terrain."  A small depth between two nearby objects is more easily
              detected than the same depth between distant objects.  To be detected, the
              depth must be made larger with distance.  Thus, since ability to discriminate
              depth (and differences in size) is affected by available cues to distance,
              manipulation of these cues will allow for examination of their effects.  These
              studies will determine if size judgments are contingent upon capacity to
              discriminate differences in distance.  These results will enhance our
              understanding of a number of tasks that are important in society in which size
              and distance need to be judged simultaneously.  These include visual guidance
              of aircraft landings and similar vehicular control tasks.  They will be
              relevant to the design of apparatus such as flight simulators.
