Title       : Sources for a Biography of Dr. Francis Crick
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0137247

Award Number: 0137247
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16274              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Olby olbyr@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R,Olby
	      3820 Howley Street
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152011214    412/683-8091

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES 0137247
Sources for a Biography of Dr. Francis Crick
Dr.
              Robert Olby
University of Pittsburgh 

This project is the first phase of a
              biographical study of the career of Dr. Francis Crick. The study is not
              confined to the subject's contributions to the molecular biology of the fifties
              and sixties, but extends back to his applied research for the navy and forward
              to his neurobiological career in the eighties and nineties.  The project
              supports research at several locations in California (La Jolla, Irvine, Los
              Angeles),  Long Island (Cold Spring Harbor), and the U.K. (London, Cambridge,
              and Northampton) in order to examine archives; search for relevant
              correspondence, personal documents, and photographs; and conduct selected
              interviews.  These sources are the basis, in conjunction with published
              sources, of chapters for a forthcoming book-length biography and articles for
              professional journals.   

The publications resulting from this research will
              complement and enlarge the information already available in Dr. Crick's
              autobiography, "What Mad Pursuit."  Dr. Crick continues to be immersed in
              neuroscience, but has agreed to the PI's request to prepare this biography. 
              The aim is to inform the reader both about this central figure of the molecular
              revolution and about the birth, subsequent transformation, and impact of the
              molecular biology of the fifties with which Crick's name is so closely
              associated.  Taking the study back to the war years will seek to show how his
              involvement in military research - his 'first career' -- contributed to shaping
              his style of research. Extending forward to his 'third' career in neuroscience
              will illuminate the subject of post-Nobel career changes. The study seeks to
              show how the multifarious topics taken up by Dr. Crick are related, and what
              motivation lay behind their choice. This full-length portrait
will fill a gap
              in the biographies of twentieth century scientists, throw fresh light on
the
              molecular revolution, inform the general reader about the remarkable evolution
              and
transformation undergone by the molecular biology of the fifties and
              sixties, and
underline the great impact the subject has had upon so many
              provinces of biology.

