Title       : Collaborative Research: A Hybrid Systems Approach to Resource Allocation for
               Multimedia Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0137091

Award Number: 0137091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Urbashi Mitra ubli@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is the design of joint power control, rate control, and
              base station assignment for multimedia wireless networks. Two key aspects of
              the multimedia network will be considered that have been given short shrift in
              the past: the requirements of data and system dynamics.   The project will
              consider 4th generation Direct-Sequence Code-Division Multiple-Access (DS-CDMA)
              networks.  The goal is to implement dynamic assignment of downlink transmit
              power, data rate, and codes to each mobile in accordance with the ability of
              each application to use the resulting QoS.  The focus is on network-wide
              behavior, and therefore network-wide performance measures will be considered,
              jointly optimized between physical and networking layers.  Three main thrusts
              will be considered: 
(a) Use of multiple state automata hybrid systems models
              as a novel tool to control wireless network dynamics. 
(b) Design and analysis
              of resource allocation algorithms using novel pricing theory. 
(c) Design and
              analysis of parameter estimation algorithms to achieve robust network behavior.
              
The first thrust is intended to provide a powerful tool for generating
              control algorithms for systems with both discrete and continuous parameters and
              switching costs.  It will be used in this project for controlling power, data
              rate, and handoffs.  The research in this area will extend the dimensionality
              of a previously studied hybrid systems approach to handoff control.  The second
              research thrust is the construction of joint power control, data rate control,
              and base station assignment algorithms. This research will be based on economic
              theory for resource allocation, and implemented using hybrid systems.  The
              final thrust will address the reliance of many resource allocation schemes upon
              unknown communication parameters such as received SINR.  Three investigators
              will work together: an expert in hybrid systems, an expert in resource
              allocation, and an expert in multiuser spread spectrum wireless systems.

