Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: Show-Me Project (renewal)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0137305

Award Number: 0137305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John S. Bradley                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5092677            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Reys reysb@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ira J. Papick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Tarr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Reys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fran Arbaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project continues the work of the Show-Me Center.  The center consists of a
              Middle School Mathematics Center (University of Missouri) and four Curriculum
              Satellite Centers (University of Wisconsin, Michigan State University,
              University of Montana and the Education Development Center in Newton, MA.  The
              goals of the center are fourfold:  1) disseminate information supporting
              awareness, examination and implementation of comprehensive, standards-based
              middle school mathematics curricula; 2) develop a leadership infrastructure to
              support curriculum reform utilizing Show-Me Regional Associates, experienced
              teacher users of curricula (Show-Me Master Teachers) and district leadership
              teams to carry the message and work at local levels; 3) provide professional
              development and teacher renewal.  Center staff help school districts design and
              implement coherent and long-term professional development for teachers
              organized around standards-based curriculum adoption; and 4) monitor the impact
              of standards-based curricula on student learning.  The Center initiates data
              collection through the Show-Me Postdoctoral Fellow Program so that the extent
              and quality of implementation and its effects on student learning and teacher
              development are documented and disseminated. 


