Title       : Mesoscale Airflow over Mountains: Modeling and Observational Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0137335

Award Number: 0137335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $493664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale R. Durran durrand@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mountains exert a profound influence on the weather and climate.  This research
              is aimed at investigating two important ways in which mountain-induced
              circulations directly impact human activities: strong surface winds and violent
              low-level rotors.

Strong surface winds may be generated by the interaction
              of the larger-scale flow with the topography through two different mechanisms,
              gap winds and downslope winds.  Significant weather hazards and extensive
              property damage can occur during extreme gap-wind and downslope-wind events. 
              Gap winds are produced when air is forced through gaps in a mountain barrier. 
              The winds above mountain top level need not have a component perpendicular to
              the ridge line while the gap winds are blowing.  Downslope winds, on the other
              hand, only occur if there is a significant cross-mountain wind component at
              ridge-top level.  Downslope winds attain their high velocities as the flow
              descends from the mountain crest.  In some cases there may be synergistic
              interactions between the gap flow through a mountain pass and downslope winds
              on the slopes adjacent to the pass.  A goal of this research is to better
              understand the dynamics of gap winds, to determine those conditions under which
              a given large-scale flow is more suitable for the generation of gap winds or
              downslope winds, and to ultimately improve the forecasting of high wind events
              in mountainous regions.

Airflow over long ridges often produces low-level
              vortices with horizontal axes parallel to the ridge line.  These horizontal
              vortices, known as rotors, pose a serious hazard to commercial, military and
              civilian aviation.  The rotor flow is often very turbulent.  Some aircraft have
              reported undergoing extreme rolling motions (with roll angles approaching 90
              degrees), and some aircraft have been lost under conditions when strong rotors
              were believed to have been present.  Recent work by the Principal Investigator
              and collaborators has identified the basic source of rotation within a typical
              rotor.  Just as the tornadoes contain embedded regions of high vorticity
              (suction vortices), terrain induced rotors also appear to contain localized
              regions of very high vorticity.  At present, almost nothing is known about the
              maximum strength or the dynamics of these subrotors, yet they may pose the most
              danger to aircraft.  A goal of this proposal is to develop a better
              understanding of the probable strength, frequency of occurrence, and the
              dynamics of these subrotors.

Successful completion of this research can
              potentially lead to better forecasts of mountain-induced severe wind hazards.
