Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Multi-Systems Violence Prevention Program for
               Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0137096

Award Number: 0137096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4840               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Jordan ljordan@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Youth violence is a serious social health problem with physical, psychological,
              and legal implications. The most robust predictors of youth violence are
              frequent criminal acts and juvenile delinquency exhibited prior to or during
              adolescence. Types of delinquent behaviors most often seen during early
              adolescence include truancy, fighting, and minor, first-time offenses. The
              negative impact of early delinquency on the legal system can be seen in terms
              of high costs for court time, personnel, probation services, and residential
              facilities. However, delinquency also affects the educational and mental health
              fields as well. Since violent behavior is multi-determined, interventions that
              identify and prevent the multiple causes that lead to violence are necessary at
              this time.  The present study is an empirical investigation of the efficacy of
              a school-based violence prevention program for 6th grade girls at-risk for
              violence due to signs of early delinquency and academic failure. Girls from
              low-income, inner-city schools in Baltimore City will participate in an
              intensive 10-week program that focuses upon preventing violence through
              reducing behavior problems, enhancing academic performance, and improving
              psychological functioning. Evaluation of the violence prevention program will
              be based upon indicators of delinquent behavior and academic status following
              completion of the program. 
