Title       : Functional Significance of the Crocodilian Cardiopulmonary System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0137988

Award Number: 0137988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255648             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colleen G. Farmer Farmer@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1681      ADVANCE - FELLOWS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1681,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The unique cardiopulmonary system of crocodilian reptiles has interested
              biologists for hundreds of years.  Yet the functional significance of many
              features of this system remains a mystery.  The research proposed herein seeks
              to understand the functional significance of the dual aortas (left and right)
              and cardiovascular shunt of crocodilians.  Unlike mammals, that have only one
              aorta that originates in the left ventricle and carries oxygen-rich blood from
              the heart to the body, crocodilians have two aortas.  One aorta originates from
              the left cardiac ventricle and is analogous with the mammalian aorta.  However,
              crocodilians also have a second aorta that originates from the right cardiac
              ventricle and terminates at the stomach.  The crocodilian shunt refers to a
              blood flow pattern where oxygen-poor systemic venous blood is directed into
              this aorta to be sent to the stomach, rather than directed into the pulmonary
              artery to be sent to the lungs.  The research will test two hypotheses
              regarding this cardiovascular system: (1) that the dual aorta system of
              crocodilians facilitates digestion of food and (2) that this system functions
              to maintain appropriate blood pH after exercise.  It will consist of
              measurements of blood flow using ultrasonic technology and measurements of
              blood gases and pH.  A major aim of this research is to contribute to our
              understanding of the evolution of the vertebrate cardiovascular system.

A
              leading evolutionary biologist, Theodosius Dobzhansky, astutely said, "Nothing
              in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution."  Evolutionary theory
              is a profound contribution of biology to knowledge.  All aspects of biology
              have benefited from the use of this theory, including clinically oriented
              biology.  A full understanding of the human cardiovascular system in health and
              in disease is only possible if we understand the evolutionary history of the
              system.  Because the cardiovascular system is made up of soft tissues and does
              not preserve well in the fossil record, most insight into the evolution of the
              cardiovascular system comes from comparing cardiovascular features and
              functions of different living vertebrates.  The early ancestors of mammals
              almost certainly had a cardiovascular system that was similar to that of a
              typical reptile, such as is found in lizards and turtles.  The crocodilian
              cardiovascular system is unique because it shares numerous features with that
              of mammals (e.g., a completely divided cardiac ventricle supported by a
              coronary circulation) but has many other features that are typically reptilian
              (e.g., two aortas, the ability to shut down blood flow to the lung and redirect
              that blood to the body).  Thus, the paradoxical assemblage of 'mammalian' and
              'reptilian' features found within the crocodilians provides scientists with an
              exceptional opportunity to gain insight into how and why the mammalian system
              evolved from the reptilian pattern.  



