Title       : Fractionation of Cd and P by Marine Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0137592

Award Number: 0137592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298898             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Sherrell sherrell@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0137592


In this project, researchers at Rutgers University
              will continue their ongoing studies of the dependence of cadmium uptake by
              coastal marine phytoplankton on taxonomic affinity, growth rate, relative
              concentrations of other bioactive metals, and the ambient dissolved
              concentration of carbon dioxide in seawater. With this renewal funding, the
              focus will be on laboratory culture studies to complement field work carried
              out over the last four years.  Anticipating that the implications of the study
              will be of general applicability, the investigators have designed the study to
              quantify fundamental dependencies for several classes of phytoplankton. 
              Nevertheless, a strong impetus for the work is the desire to understand
              cadmium/phosphorous fractionation in Southern Ocean surface waters.  The team
              hopes to develop ground rules for the robust estimation of phosphorous
              utilization in past Southern Ocean surface waters from the Cd/Ca ratio of
              fossil planktonic foraminifera. 

The three-year project will address two
              major questions:  (1) Does uptake of Cd depend strongly on phytoplankton
              phylogeny, or are cell size, growth rate and availability of other metals more
              important?  (2) Is increased Cd uptake with decreased pCO2 found in all major
              phytoplankton groups, or just diatoms, and is it caused by a physiological
              response to pCO2 or by pH-dependent changes in water chemistry?  To answer
              these questions the research team will conduct two sets of experiments.  First,
              they will determine Cd uptake in phytoplankton species from four major
              taxonomic groups, and test the dependence of Cd uptake on availability of other
              bioactive metals and on growth rate.  Secondly, they will investigate the
              mechanism and ubiquity of Cd uptake control by ambient dissolved CO2 
              concentration by measuring the effect of varying CO2 on species across a wide
              phylogenetic spectrum of the phytoplankton.  As part of the latter studies,
              they will conduct experiments to distinguish a physiological role for Cd in
              carbon acquisition from pH effects on availability of competing metals. 


