Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award: The Development of a Tissue-Engineered Vascular Graft
               from Multipotent Adult Progenitor Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0137590

Award Number: 0137590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Suggs suggs001@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Odde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1681,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0137590  Suggs  Cardiovascular tissue engineering (CVTE) is an emerging field
              with the goal of creating vascular tissues that restore, maintain, or improve
              function based on the principles of engineering and the biologic sciences.  The
              primary goal of this project is to develop a tissue-engineered vascular graft. 
              Based on the current state of knowledge in the field of CVTE, several
              objectives can be outlined in the development of an ideal tissue-engineered
              vascular graft.  The graft should have sufficient strength to be easily sutured
              and withstand arterial pressures. The cells used in developing the
              tissue-engineered construct, particularly endothelial cells, should be
              autologous and should be derived from adult individuals with minimal donor site
              morbidity.

The PI plans to utilize techniques to drive multipotent cells
              towards smooth muscle cell and endothelial cell lineages.  Once these cells
              have been differentiated using various soluble chemical factors, they will be
              seeded sequentially onto porous collagen foams and cultured under both
              pulsatile and shear stresses.  The cell/collagen constructs will be evaluated
              relative to static controls with the hypothesis that the differentiated
              phenotype of the cells comprising the graft and the strength of the graft
              itself can be controlled and maintained by a combination of both chemical and
              mechanical stimulation.

Coronary artery disease can be treated with various
              interventional procedures; however, these procedures have a high failure rate
              due to restenosis and often must be followed by surgical reconstruction. 
              Conduits are typically removed from the same individual and used as a bypass
              around the affected artery.  Some individuals have unsuitable arteries or veins
              because of varicosities, branching, or inadequate lumen size.  If these
              autologous conduits are not available or not in satisfactory condition, there
              are no currently available grafts to replace the small diameter (<4mm) coronary
              arteries.  The development of an autologous conduit engineered from bone marrow
              cells would save the lives of patients who have no other options.

