Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award: Thermomechanical Models of Martensitic Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a0137634

Award Number: 0137634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna Vainchtein annav@math.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1681,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

DMS Award Abstract

Award #: 	0137634 
Principal Investigator:
              Vainchtein, Anna
Institution: University of Pittsburgh
NSF program:
              Infrastructure

Title: ADVANCE Fellows Award: Thermomechanical models of
              martensitic phase transitions

This proposal is concerned with
              physically-motivated thermomechanical models of materials, such as shape memory
              alloys, that undergo martensitic phase transitions. These materials are
              characterized by a strong coupling between temperature and deformation fields
              and exhibit markedly hysteretic behavior when subjected to cyclic mechanical
              loading. The origin of hysteresis, kinetics of phase boundaries and
              thermomechanical interactions are important open problems in modeling of
              martensitic phase transitions. The proposal includes several continuum models
              that account for both inertia and thermal effects. The important components of
              the models are nonconvex elastic energy, latent heat of transformation and
              time-dependent loading. The main goal is to develop a model capable of
              capturing the most significant experimental observations, such as size and
              features of hysteresis loops, volume fractions of material phases and details
              of interface dynamics. Important phenomena such as serrated hysteresis, inner
              loops, thermal trapping and evolution of twin microstructures will be
              investigated.

The results of the proposed work will be important for the
              emerging applications of shape memory materials, such as damage, vibration and
              acoustic transmission control in composite structures. By advancing the
              scientific understanding of the dissipative properties of shape memory alloys,
              this research will potentially contribute toward the development of innovative
              seismic damping devices for buildings and bridges. The educational component of
              the proposed work includes involving graduate and advanced undergraduate
              students in the research program, developing new courses, creating an outreach
              middle-school program and mentoring women graduate students. 




