Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Knowledge of Rivals' Types and Its
               Effect on Auctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0137162

Award Number: 0137162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4770               (Estimated)
Investigator: Yeon-Koo Che yche@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9218,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the doctoral dissertation project is to experimentally test the
              effect of bidders' information of their rivals' types in standard auctions.
              Auctions are used widely for trading goods and services, ranging from artwork
              and agricultural products to government assets such as PCS spectrum rights,
              timber and mineral harvesting rights. While the existing studies on auctions
              have made great strides, our understanding remains far from complete. In
              particular, how bidders' knowledge of their rivals affects their bidding
              behavior and the performance of various auctions is not well understood. The
              existing work assumes that bidders have either no information or full
              information about their rivals. In practice, however, bidders' knowledge about
              their rivals tends to be asymmetric. For instance, in a procurement auction
              contested by domestic firms and foreign firms, domestic firms are likely to be
              better informed about the technical capabilities of their domestic rivals than
              those of their foreign rivals. The current project will contribute to our
              understanding of the impact bidders' information has on their behavior and on
              the performance of standard auctions.

Bidders' asymmetric knowledge about
              their rivals matters and it may affect both the bidders' behavior and the
              performance of alternative auction forms. The first chapter of my dissertation,
              written jointly with Yeon-Koo Che, has also established a number of hypotheses
              regarding how the equilibrium bidding behavior and the revenue performance of a
              given auction will change as bidders learn more about their rivals' types. 
              Testing our hypotheses requires controlling the information flow of the
              bidders, which would be virtually impossible if one relied on the traditional
              empirical method employing secondary data. A lab experiment is ideal since the
              experiment designer can control the information flow precisely the way it is
              modelled in the theory. We plan to conduct 6 sessions of lab experiments, each
              of which will invite 32 subjects to participate in a series of auction games.
              The research will feature some innovative techniques to improve the empirical
              identification of the subjects' bidding behavior. While the main purpose of the
              experiment will be to test the specific hypotheses of the theory chapter, it
              will in the process contribute to the testing of the underlying Nash
              hypothesis, by subjecting it to more comparative static restrictions. Further,
              the test is expected to reveal the role bidders' risk aversion plays in auction
              experiments.


