Title       : Novel Real Time Optics for Thin Film Materials Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0137240

Award Number: 0137240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275021             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Collins RWC6@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research project seeks to advance the art and science of novel optical
              probes of thin solid films.  The project -emphasis is on spectroscopic probes
              with sub-monolayer resolution that can be performed in real time during film
              growth and modification.  Such real time probes will lend new physical insights
              into the mechanisms of film growth, the optical properties of solids and their
              interfaces, and the relationships between film growth processes and the
              resulting properties.  The scientific studies will focus on the following three
              themes:  (i) phase evolution in thin films; (ii) optical models of nanoscale,
              microscale, and macroscale structures; and (iii) the optical effects of
              interfaces and anisotropy in thin films.  Such efforts represent the
              continuation of a long-term research program, starting with the development of
              two-parameter multichannel ellipsometry over a decade ago and culminating with
              the recent development of sixteen-parameter multichannel Mueller matrix
              spectroscopy.  This research endows undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
              scholars with interdisciplinary skills in condensed matter, materials, and
              optical physics necessary for future positions in academia or industry.  The
              project has great potential for transfer of technology and skilled researchers
              to industries developing thin film photovoltaics, optical and wear-resistant
              coatings, and semiconductor metrological instruments. 

This research project
              is devoted to the development of thin films and their associated measurement
              tools for applications in science and technology.  Thin films are applied onto
              the surfaces of materials in order to provide functionality at low cost, and
              are used in numerous technologies from microelectronics to electrical energy
              production.  Research and development on thin films for such advanced
              applications are expedited by measurement tools that can determine the film
              thickness and other properties in real time, i.e., non-invasively during the
              fabrication process.  In this project, such tools will be developed and applied
              to optimize thin film growth processes used by a variety of industries.  These
              efforts represent the continuation of a long-term research program that began
              more than a decade ago and has provided new tools and optimum processes now
              being used extensively in academia and industry.  This research project will
              educate undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scholars from diverse
              backgrounds who will acquire skills spanning a number of disciplines in
              materials research.  The project will have great potential for transfer of
              technology and skilled researchers to industry, thereby enhancing the nation's
              science and technology infrastructure.  Industries developing optical,
              mechanical and wear-resistant coatings, thin film solar cells, and
              semiconductor analysis equipment will benefit.

