Title       : Along-Axis Variations in Magma Production and Delivery at Slow & Intermediate
               Spreading Ridges: Constraints from Theoretical Modeling & Field Observations in
               the Troodos Ophiolite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0137226

Award Number: 0137226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodey Batiza                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187105             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuri Fialko fialko@radar.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hubertus Staudigel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Science Summary. In this proposed study, Fialko has teamed with Staudigel and
              they propose a combined field and theoretical study of vertical and lateral
              diking at the Troodos ophiolite with expected applications to medium and slow
              spreading mid-ocean ridges. The study has three connected parts. First,
              theoretic models of diking will be improved and some initial simplifications
              will be relaxed to hopefully yield results more applicable to natural settings.
              New models will incorporate a wider range of magmatic overpressures and
              along-axis topographic slopes and tectonic stress. In addition, the PI will
              incorporate some thermal effects such as temperature dependent magma rheology.
              In the second part of the study, the PIs and a student will compile existing
              field data for dikes from the Troodos ophiolite, and acquire new field and lab
              data to constrain the amounts of magma that are intruded vertically versus
              laterally. They will also refine existing models of intrusive centers and
              distinctions between the behaviors of magmatically (and chemically) distinct
              systems. Finally, in the third part, the Troodos data will be combined  with
              the models developed in the first part to produce forward models for the diking
              behavior of  medium and slow-spreading ridges. A number of natural phenomena
              can be explored with these models to gain a deeper understanding of  how magma
              is focused toward ridges, the frequency and volume relations of diking, and
              magmatic and tectonic segmentation of ridges.


