Title       : Mechanistic Studies of Plasma Deposition and Etching for Integrated Circuit
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0137664

Award Number: 0137664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen R. Fisher erfisher@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,9179,9239,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials program in the Division of Chemistry and the Electronic
              Materials program in the Division of Materials Research make this joint renewal
              award to Colorado State University.  With this award, Professor Ellen Fisher
              will study detailed chemical and physical mechanisms of plasma-enhanced
              chemical vapor deposition and plasma etching, and will evaluate surface
              interactions of radicals produced during plasma processing using spatially
              resolved laser-induced fluorescence.  The PI will evaluate the interactions
              between plasma and surfaces during processing of integrated circuits using dual
              beam imaging; will quantify and characterize the radicals formed during this
              processing; and will develop detailed chemical mechanisms for plasma etching
              and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition on different substrates.  Use of
              dual beam imaging will be enable to identify and quantitate a number of
              different processes that are taking place during the plasma processing, and
              will be able to develop a knowledge base to be useful to the plasma processing
              and modeling community.  The research project will provide excellent
              opportunity to graduate and undergraduate students in chemistry and material
              sciences. 
 
This project will use dual beam spatially resolved laser-induced
              fluorescence imaging method to provide quantitative data on radicals produced
              at surfaces of different substrates during the plasma processing.  Information
              generated will be useful to plasma processing and modeling community for the
              development of improved and high performance integrated circuits.   In
              addition, the research activity in plasma processing will provide new
              opportunity to graduate and undergraduate students in chemistry and materials
              sciences.
