Title       : Collaborative Research: Trace Gas Deposition Processes in the Arctic Boundary
               Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a0137538

Award Number: 0137538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Detlev Helmig detlev@instaar.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is concerned with data analyses and modeling activities to gain
              further insights on the processes governing atmospheric trace gas dynamics, in
              particular ozone in the arctic boundary layer. The research activities will
              lead to improvements in the predictive understanding of tropospheric ozone and
              other trace gases, which can exert a critical influence in the arctic chemical
              and radiative balance. Our studies are motivated to derive further
              understanding of trace gas deposition rates and will achieve the following
              objectives:

1. to investigate the most appropriate methods for estimating
              trace gas transport in the surface layer of the arctic atmosphere,

2. to
              evaluate the suitability of electrochemical ozonesonde data for deriving ozone
              deposition rates,

3. to study and quantify ozone deposition rates at
              selected Arctic sites based on ozonesonde routinely obtained at selected arctic
              sites,

4. and to define the atmospheric conditions when maximum ozone
              surface deposition rates take place in the arctic boundary layer.

These
              objectives will be addressed through a combination of data analyses and
              modeling studies employing three data sets deemed to be of high quality. During
              spring 2000, we obtained high frequency data at Alert, Nunavut, Canada and
              Summit, Greenland, Denmark. These two data sets, involving vertical
              meteorological and chemical profiles from towers and tethered balloons, will be
              analyzed within the framework of investigating the most appropriate methods to
              derive trace gas fluxes between the surface and overlying atmosphere and/or
              vice versa. Additional scientific outputs of these activities relate to the
              turbulent length scales associated with trace gas fluxes in the arctic boundary
              layer. Knowledge of turbulent scales is critically essential to understand the
              atmospheric layer impacted by trace gas emissions from the Arctic snowpack. The
              third data set involves the archived data from ozonesondes released at selected
              sites throughout the Arctic. We will employ these extensive historical data to
              develop a one-dimensional model to derive ozone deposition rates to the
              snowpack surface. Estimated deposition rates will provide upper threshold
              values that can then be incorporated in regional and/or global models to
              constrain ozone budgets in the arctic troposphere. The research will lead to a
              simple modeling parameterization to routinely derive ozone deposition rates
              based on the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) ozone monitoring network,
              and thus provide critical information to decipher the processes governing ozone
              temporal changes in the Arctic boundary layer. Understanding of ozone dynamics
              is crucial to define the contribution of ozone in the chemical and radiative
              balance of the Arctic. Given the recent discovery that the arctic snowpack
              represents a substantial source of gases such as nitric oxide, nitrogen
              dioxide, nitrous acid and formaldehyde, this project will also yield
              methodologies to deduce fluxes of these important trace gases based on ambient
              (profile) concentrations.

