Title       : When Threats Succeed: A Formal Model of the Threat and Use of Economic Sanctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2001  
File        : a0137792

Award Number: 0137792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192898             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Clifton Morgan morgan@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The conventional wisdom that economic sanctions are not an effective
              instrument of foreign policy is based on the empirical analysis of numerous
              cases in which sanctions were applied. This work may suffer from selection bias
              in that instances in which sanctions would be effective may be characterized by
              the absence of their imposition. That is, the target may be able to
              
anticipate that it would alter its policies as a result of sanctions and may
              choose to acquiesce to the potential sanctioner's threat in order to avoid the
              cost of the economic dislocation. 
A game-theoretic model designed to explore
              this possibility is developed in this project. In equilibrium, any outcome of a
              sanctions episode is possible with some non-zero probability; but, sanctions
              that would be effective typically would bring about a change in the target's
              behavior at the threat stage and would never be applied. Derivations from this
              model also suggest that a rational, expected utility-maximizing sanctions
              strategy would produce more cases in which applied sanctions would fail than
              cases in which applied sanctions would succeed. The model produces expectations
              that are consistent with empirical observation and provides explanations for
              some of the puzzles regarding economic sanctions (such as why sanctions would
              continue to 
be imposed in spite of strong evidence that they are usually
              ineffective). The model also leads to a number of new hypotheses associating
              certain variables (such as the cost of the sanctions and the value of the issue
              at stake) with the probability that various outcomes would occur. 
The goals
              of this project are to continue the theoretical devlopment of this model and to
              develop a data set with which the hypotheses produced can be tested. Data on
              instances in which sanctions were threatened, but not imposed, do not currently
              exist. Such data are gathered as part of this project and are used to subject
              the theory to a rigorous, empirical test. 
The research promises to enhance
              substantially our understanding of the topic.
0137792 

