Title       : Eleventh International Symposium on Nondestructive Characterization of
               Materials; Berlin, Germany; June 24-28, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2002      
File        : a0137348

Award Number: 0137348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Green robert.green@JHU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the Eleventh International Symposium on Nondestructive
              Characterization of Materials to be held June 24-28, 2002, in Berlin, Germany.
              This will be the latest in a series of international symposia that was first
              held in 1983. The objective of these symposia is to provide a unique focus on
              the science and technology of nondestructive evaluation applied to materials
              characterization. The ultimate goal is to develop innovative, more sensitive
              and more precise methods to characterize the properties of materials much
              earlier than possible with current nondestructive testing techniques, so that
              any material alterations detrimental to the desired application can be detected
              and corrected well before macroscopic defects occur. Papers will include
              research and applications for aging infrastructure, nondestructive
              characterization of microstructures, on-line measurements for process control,
              precision and accuracy of nondestructive characterization measurements,
              advances in computed assisted tomography, non-contact ultrasonics, microwave
              advances and applications, and advanced high resolution probing techniques. Of
              considerable interest will be state-of-the-art developments and applications
              where the complex nature of materials has been recognized. The recipients of
              funds will be selected by the organizing committee with awareness of
              geographical distribution and the desire to include as many women and
              minorities as possible.

The nondestructive characterization of materials has
              been of immense interest to the materials community as well as practicing
              engineers concerned about the quality and sensitivity of nondestructive
              examination of real structures. This symposium functions to gather together
              both NDT technologists and NDE researchers. Research, needs, and applications
              in the nondestructive testing and evaluation of material characteristics such
              as yield strength, ductility, elastic modulus, grain size, microstructure,
              texture, fiber placement, and residual stress will be discussed. Several poster
              sessions will be held during the course of the symposium so that many
              participants can present the results of their research efforts, especially
              young scientists and graduate students. This grant supports the travel and
              registration of selected participants based on their need and expertise.

