Title       : Asian Foreign Investment in the United States: A Firm-Level Study of Technology
               Acquisition and Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a0137045

Award Number: 0137045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jessie P. Poon jesspoon@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan D. MacPherson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Existing theories of international technology transfer suggest that
              industrializing nations usually acquire new technology through inward
              investment, and from parent firms to subsidiaries.  In contrast, this research
              is concerned with a new model of technology transfer in which firms from
              industrializing nations move to the technology source.  By establishing
              subsidiaries inside the U.S., Asian companies are hypothesized to reverse the
              process of technology transfer through direct absorption of knowledge
              spillovers from U.S. firms and institutions.  Innovations that arise from these
              spillovers can then be transmitted back to parent companies in Asia.  This
              speeds up the process of technology transfer.  This research project will
              assess the extent to which Asian companies obtain new technology via this model
              of outward foreign direct investment to the United States.  Two approaches will
              be used.  First, a large-scale postal survey of Asian branch facilities in the
              U.S. will be conducted .  Approximately 600 establishments will be contacted. 
              The survey will be restricted to subsidiaries from South Korea, Taiwan,
              Singapore, and Hong Kong, which are four of the five largest sources of Asian
              investment in the U.S..  The survey will focus upon the types of spillovers
              that are absorbed as well as the transmission mechanisms that support
              technology transfer.  Second, personal interviews will be conducted with senior
              managers of the parent companies in Asia.  These interviews will supply
              qualitative insights regarding the types of benefits that are obtained from
              direct investment in the U.S.  Data from the postal survey will be analyzed
              using cross-tabulation, correlation, and conditional logit techniques.  Data
              from the interviews will be explored via content analysis.  

This project
              will shed light on an emerging model of international technology transfer in
              the global economy.  This model delivers technological benefits to Asian
              subsidiaries and their parent companies as well as employment and production
              benefits to U.S. host regions.  The role of local business conditions in
              attracting particular types of inward investment will be explored via
              statistical analysis.  In addition, the transmission mechanisms that support
              technology transfer will be assessed from both a local and international
              standpoint.  Overall, the project will contribute to social and regional
              science by identifying the main factors that have led to the emergence of this
              new model of local and international technology transfer.


