Title       : Legislative Fiscal Policy Making with Reconsideration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0137129

Award Number: 0137129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238676             (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Douglas Bernheim bernheim@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio Rangel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, economic scholars in a wide variety of specializations have
              become increasingly interested in questions of Political Economy.  A central
              objective of this movement has been to supplement our understanding of the
              relationships between the political environment (including institutions) and
              the economic policies that are adopted.  Though much progress has been made,
              virtually nothing is known about the strategic issues arising from the
              possibility that a legislature might choose to reconsider some provision of a
              law after its passage but prior to its implementation.  Legislative
              reconsideration is a common occurrence in practice.  Moreover, it gives rise to
              complex strategic issues.  The adoption of a policy provision for some future
              period changes the political landscape.  Further discussion of the issues prior
              to the law's implementation takes place against a different backdrop.  Though
              the provision can be changed, repealed, or replaced before it becomes
              effective, its adoption alters the terms of the ensuing debate.  The purpose of
              this project is to explore the effects of legislative reconsideration on
              economic policy selection.  The analysis identifies and explores a tendency for
              reconsideration to create high concentration of political power (irrespective
              of whether policies are actually changed after adoption and prior to
              implementation).  Using the tools of game theory, the project undertakes
              comparative institutional analysis, examining the role of reconsideration under
              a variety of alternative rules and procedures within the context of particular
              economic problems.  It seeks to understand the mechanisms by which particular
              institutions control (or fail to control) the tendency toward high
              concentration of power, and to elucidate the implications for economic
              policy.

The findings of this research are relevant to a wide range of
              practical issues.  Collective choice problems are pervasive not only in public
              policy making, but also in cooperative research, education, partnerships,
              networks, and many other forms of social activity.  These problems are resolved
              through a wide variety of formal and informal procedures.  By improving our
              understanding of the relationships between procedures and outcomes, the study
              of collective choice will provide constructive guidance concerning the choice
              of procedures and the design of institutions.  Insights concerning the effects
              of various rules on the influence of underrepresented groups may prove
              particularly useful.

