Title       : An Enhanced Optical Coherence Microscope for the Study of Dynamic Processes in
               the Early Development of Plants and Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0137973

Award Number: 0137973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Haskell Richard_Haskell@HMC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel C. Petersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Richard Haskell at Harvey Mudd College to
              construct an optical coherence microscope (OCM) to capture three-dimensional
              images of dynamic processes in the early development of plants and animals.  An
              interdisciplinary team of scientists and engineers at Harvey Mudd will record
              critical events that occur 300 to 500 mm below the surface of a developing
              organism, too deep to be accessible to other light-based methods because of the
              strong light-scattering property of embryonic tissue.  The ability of the OCM
              instrument to image non-invasively the development of an individual plant or
              animal will provide a key tool for gaining a full understanding of the
              relationship between gene expression and the structural changes that occur
              during tissue development.

The light source of the OCM instrument will be an
              ultrafast laser operating in the near infrared (1300 nm) to provide good depth
              penetration in biological tissue.  The laser output will have a broad spectrum
              that results in a depth resolution for the microscope of 5 mm.  The lateral
              resolution is provided by the focused spot diameter, also 5 mm.  The laser
              system developed for the OCM will be marketed by a commercial vendor so that it
              is available to other researchers.  In addition, the instrument will be capable
              of measuring scatter motion, for example Brownian motion, which in preliminary
              experiments has been shown to provide effective intrinsic contrast between
              different cell types.  Measurements of the local variation in refractive index
              will also serve as a source of intrinsic contrast.  

The new OCM instrument
              will be used to study the development of frog embryos and the differentiation
              of tissue at the apex of plant shoots.  OCM images will be assembled to form
              time-lapse images of dynamic processes, permitting the first direct tests of
              proposed models of cell motions and differentiation.  The research team will
              consist primarily of four faculty at Harvey Mudd College plus collaborators at
              four research universities.  Their backgrounds span the disciplines of physics,
              biology, and engineering.  An estimated 30 undergraduate researchers, drawn
              from all 6 major programs at Harvey Mudd, will make significant contributions
              to the program both during the summer and the academic year.  The
              multidisciplinary nature of the project provides an unusual opportunity to
              integrate research and education resulting in exceptional training for students
              and faculty alike.  Participants are motivated to develop careers in science
              and engineering, and to pursue significant research problems that stretch
              across traditional disciplinary lines.

