Title       : Visualization in Technology Education (VisTE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0137811

Award Number: 0137811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel L. Householder                   
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $923645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron C. Clark aaron_clark@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom Shown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Wiebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Visualization in Technology Education (VisTE) is a standards-based initiative
              designed to promote the use of graphic visualization tools among students in
              grades 9-12.  By using simple and complex visualization tools, students can
              conduct research, analyze phenomena, solve problem and communicate major topics
              identified in the Standards for Technology Literacy (STL) as well as topics
              aligned with national science and mathematics standards.  VisTE has forged a
              national coalition of institutions and individuals committed to the development
              of these materials, including North Carolina State University, the North
              Carolina Department of Public Instruction, Research Triangle Institute, the
              Southern Regional Education Board, and the International Technology Education
              Association, among others.  Over three years, partnership members will create
              12 modules reflecting the 20 STL standards and corresponding benchmarks. 
              Combined, the modules will form a discrete course in graphic visualization.
              However, each of the 12 modules could be used in existing technology education
              courses as a stand-alone activity.  Modules will be piloted in SREB "High
              Schools that Work" sites, selected to provide student diversity and to
              facilitate the collection of evaluation data.  VisTE's final products and
              outcomes will include 12 standards-based modules (in electronic and print
              formats) written for a diverse student audience; national dissemination of the
              materials through teacher training workshops, local and national presentations,
              and a web site; and a formal evaluation of the project's process and student
              outcomes.

