Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award: Studies in Financial Institutions and Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0137937

Award Number: 0137937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $502272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline M. Fohlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1681,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The primary focus of this ADVANCE Fellows award is on new research and
              educational activities related to the development and influence of venture
              capital (VC) institutions.  The VC research will look back over the past fifty
              years to pinpoint the functions of venture capitalists, explain the appearance
              of specialized VC firms, and identify institutional sources of risk capital
              before the advent of the VC industry.  Using international comparisons, the
              research will examine the influence of legal, political, and economic contests
              on institutional design.  The study will also explore further hypotheses about
              the link between capital markets and venture capital provision.  International
              comparison will undoubtedly uncover a range of institutional structures and
              will therefore raise the further question of the relative efficiency of
              different forms of VC provision.  The second component of the VC research
              project builds on the first, and explore the impact of venture capital on the
              economy.  The fundamental question is whether there is more innovation or
              high-tech growth now than there was before the advent of the VC industry, and
              if so, whether such rapid growth truly stems from the burgeoning of VC finance.
               Critical to this line of research is establishing rigorous ways to measure
              innovation and high-tech growth as well as the impact of VC financing thereon. 
              This project will take a longer-run view than past studies and will compare the
              US with a range of other countries, including some that have developed few or
              no specialized VC firms.  In addition to large-scale statistical analysis, the
              VC projects  will include case studies of specific countries, industries, and
              firms in order to elaborate on the general phenomena uncovered by the
              econometric work.

The PI will also work on completing two book manuscripts
              related to banking history.  The PI will be engaged in a range of educational
              activities, including teaching courses to graduates and undergraduates and
              advising students.  Students will also assist with the research projects.
              
	
This award is supported through the NSF ADVANCE Program. The overall
              mission of the ADVANCE Program is to increase the participation of women in the
              scientific and engineering workforce through the increased representation and
              advancement of women in academic science and engineering careers. 


