Title       : Electrolytes Near a Non-Planar Charged Interface. Effect of the Presence of
               Neutral Co-Solutes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0137273

Award Number: 0137273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lutful B. Bhuiyan lbhuiyan@rrpac.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5946,5999,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program of
              the Chemistry Division and the Western European and the Central and Eastern
              European Programs of the Office of International Science and Engineering,
              Bhuiyan will use numerical simulation and theoretical methods of statistical
              mechanics to characterize the equilibrium behavior of charged fluids in the
              neighborhood of non-planar, electrified interfaces in both open and confined
              geometries. Particular emphasis will be placed on the study of the
              thermodynamic non-ideality and structural changes in the solutions arising from
              the effects of added co-solutes and/or confinement of the fluid in a capillary.
               Modified Poisson-Boltzmann (MPB) theory, hypernetted-chain (HNC) theory, other
              integral equation theories, and Monte Carlo simulations will be used to study
              charged interfaces.  Electrolytes will be described in terms of the primitive
              model and primitive models with neutral co-solutes.

Electrolyte solutions
              are ubiquitous on earth in animate as well as inanimate materials.  This
              project involves applications of fundamental theories and simulations to
              investigate electrolytes at interfaces.  The theoretical formulations used in
              this research, which have been very accurate in many standard applications of
              electrolyte theory, are applied here to more complex geometries and electrolyte
              models.  The resulting applications are more realistic, such as chemical
              catalysis, electrolytes in micropores, and reverse micelles.  The results of
              this research effort thus affect the fields of materials science, biophysics,
              chemistry, and the environment.

In this research project Bhuiyan
              collaborates with Prof. Christopher W. Outhwaite of the University of Sheffield
              in the United Kingdom and with Prof. Vojko Vlachy of the University of
              Ljubljana in Slovenia.  The senior investigators will make reciprocal visits to
              each others' laboratories each year, and a student from Professor Bhuiyan's
              group will also visit both European laboratories.  Such a trip exposes the
              student early in his or her scientific career to international collaborations
              and helps broaden his/her educational experience.

