Title       : Risk Management and Juries: How Jurors React to Cost-Benefit Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a0137725

Award Number: 0137725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Penrod spenrod@jjay.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY John Jay College
	      444 West 56th Street
	      New York, NY  100193602    212/489-5183

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              When making a decision whether a company was negligent and therefore liable for
              harm to the plaintiff, juries are frequently asked to second-guess people's and
              companies' decisions. The goal of such a legal system is to compensate the
              plaintiff for harm caused by another's wrongdoing or negligent behavior. Many
              psychological and other researchers have investigated the workings of the civil
              jury system, and frequently claim that its purposes are not being fulfilled.
              However, this research has usually focused on a limited number of independent
              variables or attitudinal variables at one time. In contrast, the first goal of
              this proposal is to incorporate a variety of independent variables, moderating
              and mediating variables, and jurors' attitudes and perceptions into a
              comprehensive model of civil jury decision making. Also, the law of negligence
              (and to a lesser degree the law of product liability) has integrated
              cost-benefit analyses into the determination of whether a defendant should be
              held liable. Although the concept of a cost-benefit analysis is so incorporated
              into the law, how jurors perform cost-benefit analyses or how jurors respond to
              defendants who perform such analyses has not received much attention. The
              second goal of this proposal is to investigate variables associated with the
              claim that a defendant's performance of a cost-benefit analysis actually
              outrages jurors and leads to pro-plaintiff outcomes. This project uses products
              liability cases in which a cost-benefit analysis is or is not performed as a
              background for building a comprehensive model of civil jury decision making.
              Such cases include elements relevant to many variables that have been
              previously investigated as relevant to jury decision making, but which have
              been investigated usually in isolation. The elements of such cases include the
              risk involved with the product, the defendant's behavior in face of such a
              risk, jurors' attitudes and perceptions of the case, and jurors' outrage. This
              project will analyze the data from the proposed studies as a path model that
              includes the variables mentioned, and others. The independent variables in the
              studies will investigate what elements of the model are related to jurors'
              outrage toward cost-benefit analyses, and how that outrage might be mitigated.
