Title       : Middle School Science Curriculum Materials: Meeting Standards and Fostering
               Inquiry through Project-based Inquiry Science Units
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0137807

Award Number: 0137807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3139534            (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Kolodner jlk@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Camp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Reiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Krajcik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This comprehensive, project-based, inquiry-driven, middle school, science
              curriculum builds upon modules developed for Learning by Design at Georgia
              Institute of Technology and by LeTUS at the University of Michigan and
              Northwestern University.  The latter were specifically designed for urban
              settings.  The 15 units address national science content and process standards,
              focus on helping students acquire a qualitative understanding of the science
              principles and moves them toward a quantitative understanding.  The time per
              unit is long enough that students can change their ideas in light of the
              evidence.   The project develops a framework to assure complete coverage of
              fundamental topics.  The pedagogy, use of software and the development of a
              scientific and collaborative culture are consistent, persistent and pervasive
              across the entire curriculum.  The materials cover topics in physical,
              Earth/space and life sciences appropriate to the middle school and provide
              experience with diverse modes of scientific investigation -- experiment,
              observation, modeling, data mining, and history -- and standards of evidence
              are covered.   Instructional technology is infused throughout and science is
              connected to the students' world by the use of engineering design.  Assessments
              are embedded.  The student and teacher materials are pilot tested locally and
              field tested more broadly.  Materials for professional development of teachers
              are also developed.


