Title       : Building an Agenda for Integrated Developmental Ethnographic Research: Proposal
               for a Conference, winter 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0137381

Award Number: 0137381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9575               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara Harkness SaraHark@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Super  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1358,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Building an Agenda for Integrated Developmental Ethnographic
              Research:
A Proposal for a Conference

Sara Harkness & Charles M.
              Super

	In recent years there has been a growing awareness of the need for
              culturally grounded developmental research; yet, the integration of
              ethnographic perspectives and methods in research on children's development
              remains an unfulfilled agenda. The lack of integration of developmental and
              ethnographic approaches to the study of children is evident across a wide
              variety of academic contexts, including grant proposals, as well as published
              work.  Indeed, it appears that trends in graduate education in the social and
              behavioral sciences over the past few decades have exacerbated the separation
              of anthropological and developmental inquiry, to the detriment of both. 
              Despite these trends, however, there is currently high potential for a new
              level of integration of developmental and ethnographic approaches in research
              on children.  In order to realize this potential in research, a small working
              conference has been designed.

	The 2 -and one-half day workshop is intended
              to bring together leading researchers in anthropology and developmental
              science.  Participants will include approximately fifteen scholars from several
              disciplines, including social, demographic and psychological anthropology;
              developmental, social, and cross-cultural psychology; linguistics; sociology;
              and pediatrics to build an agenda for integrated developmental ethnographic
              research on children in cultural contexts.  Discussion will focus around three
              related topics:  1)  theoretical frameworks that are promising for the
              integration of developmental and ethnographic research; 2) integration of
              research methods so that both development and its context can be analyzed in
              systematic fashion; and 3) overcoming the dichotomy between "qualitative" and
              "quantitative" data.  

