Title       : Studies of Ionic Pericyclic Reactions in the Gas Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0137627

Award Number: 0137627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Wenthold pgw@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program in the Chemistry Division,
              Professor Paul Wenthold, of the Department of Chemistry at Purdue University,
              will investigate pericyclic reactions of ions using flowing
              afterglow/photoelectron spectroscopy. Among the reactions examined are radical
              cationic and radical anionic Cope and Diels-Alder reactions. The goal of the
              work will be to determine the products of the reaction, the mechanism by which
              they are formed, and the catalytic role of ionization. Solvated ions will be
              used to probe the role of solvent in determining reaction products. The
              proposal outlines an extensive program of experimentation to characterize the
              structure and reactivities of various ion radicals and related novel species,
              using the specialized capabilities of advanced flowing afterglow
              instrumentation and a negative ion photoelectron spectrometer now under
              construction at Purdue.  While theory-based calculations will play a role, the
              main emphasis is clearly on defining structures and patterns of reactivity
              experimentally.  The proposal rests on the curiosity of a mechanistically
              concerned physical organic chemist fully equipped with the more specialized
              technical repertoire of an experienced gas-phase ion chemist.  Much new
              information and non-trivial conceptual advances should be gained. 

Professor
              Paul Wenthold, of the Department of Chemistry at the Purdue University, with
              the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, will also continue to train
              students who will become an integral part of the research and publications
              resulting from the work. The research results will provide a fresh
              understanding of novel structures and chemical transformations while
              demonstrating new applications of emerging technical/instrumental
              capabilities.

