Title       : Partial Support of the NRC's Solid State Sciences Committee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0137236

Award Number: 0137236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Shapero dshapero@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for the National Research Council's Solid
              State Sciences Committee (SSSC).  The National Research Council is the working
              arm of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of
              Engineering.  The SSSC monitors field of materials research in the United
              States and provides guidance to federal agencies regarding their materials
              research programs. The Committee responds to requests for technical information
              and assistance; initiates conduct and publication of studies in the solid state
              sciences, acts as an educational resource for the community of the solid state
              opportunities; and provides a forum for discussion among solid state and
              materials scientists and Washington policymakers.  The SSSC will continue these
              activities in the next three years, with projects such as the Materials Forum
              2002 for Washington policy makers.  The interface between the materials
              research communities and the biology communities will receive attention: a
              brochure at the lay level describing the interface between biology and the
              materials sciences will be produced.  In addition a more technical study of
              "biomolecular materials" will be developed.  The central role that solid state
              and materials science play in the emerging field of nanotechnology will also
              receive timely attention.  The output of NRC SSSC an timely and useful
              materials and information that is widely disseminated to educational
              institutions, the Federal Government and technical industries.  The project is
              co-funded with the Department of Energy and National Institute of Standards and
              Technology

This award provides partial support for the National Research
              Council's Solid State Sciences Committee (SSSC).  The National Research Council
              is the working arm of the National Academy of Sciences and the National Academy
              of Engineering.  The SSSC will sponsor a Forum for discussion between solid
              state and materials scientists and Washington policy makers.  In addition the
              SSSC will monitor and report on several topics of great current interest, such
              as nanotechnology, biomolecular materials, and materials in microgravity
              environments.  The resulting materials will be widely disseminated to
              educational institutions, the Federal Government and technical industries.

