Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: IMP for the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0137805

Award Number: 0137805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark Saul                               
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2099935            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Fendel fendel@math.sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Klanica  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry Fraser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves revising the Interactive Mathematics Program (IMP), a
              four-year, integrated, problem-based, college-preparatory, high-school
              mathematics curriculum developed with funding from the State of California and
              the NSF.  Revisions will build on successful elements of the program in ways
              that respond to the changing context of mathematics education.  The revisions
              will focus on three objectives.  First, the curriculum will be strengthened by
              making changes that give the program greater flexibility.  This will be
              accomplished by adding a major technology component, and by making content
              changes that respond to recent state and national policy documents.  Second,
              the professional development program will be strengthened through leadership
              programs that produce more professional development leaders and by creating
              consistency and sustainability through a Professional Development Handbook that
              articulates IMP's vision of successful professional development.  Third,
              dissemination and implementation efforts will be strengthened by developing new
              materials about all aspects of IMP that will inform and address concerns of
              educational decision makers such as school boards, administrators, parents, and
              teachers.  These efforts will be carried out with the guidance of a broad-based
              steering committee.  There will be general evaluation of all project
              components, as well as analysis of the mathematical content of the revised
              curriculum materials.  Cost sharing includes substantial contributions from the
              publisher and from San Francisco State University.


