Title       : Spin Polarized Tunneling Studies in Transition Metals, Alloys and Heavy Fermions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0137632

Award Number: 0137632
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagadeesh S. Moodera moodera@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore electron spin properties, from both the fundamental
              physics point of view and from the viewpoint of the technologically important
              area of spintronics.  The emphasis will be on surfaces and interfaces that form
              the basis of spin transport phenomena.  The intention is also to extend the
              technique of spin-polarized tunneling into new areas: (1) Determination of its
              relation to crystalline direction, barrier interface, and bulk magnetic moment,
              (2) Analytical study of tunnel barriers.  Though having been addressed for
              nearly thirty years by many theoretical approaches, the origin and the
              magnitude of the polarization values measured by tunneling remain an open
              question.  This work will investigate the poorly understood relation between
              spin polarization of tunneling electrons on crystallographic orientation and
              surface band structure.  This includes spin-polarized tunneling from epitaxial
              ferromagnetic films, interfacial-bonding effects and tunnel barrier properties.
               Fabrication techniques will manipulate the interfaces and barriers in planar
              thin film magnetic tunnel junctions in efforts to maximize the spin
              polarization values.  Spin tunneling is influenced by delta dopants (with or
              without magnetic moment) in the tunnel barriers - mostly flipping the spins
              and, except for the case of Fe dopants, even enhancing the spin tunneling
              probability.  This area is yet to be understood and will be well investigated. 
              A state of the art MBE system makes it feasible to engineer thin films with new
              types of interface materials leading to unique electronic and magnetic
              properties.  The theoretical support comes from Prof. William H. Butler of Oak
              Ridge National Lab whose expertise is in band structure calculations, interface
              effects as well as ferromagnetic tunnel junction structures.  Spin tunneling
              studies will possibly be initiated, a first of its kind study in heavy Fermion
              systems, wherein temperature-induced changes and pressure-induced changes of
              the magnetic transitions occur.  Students of all levels and postdocs will be
              involved in this investigation thus creating a pool of technical experts
              particularly in the future field of information technology - spintronics, and
              in general magnetism as well as thin film science.

This condensed matter
              physics project broaden our fundamental understanding of electron spin
              properties (a topic in magnetism) by using the unique tool of spin polarized
              tunneling technique (a quantum phenomenon).  The results will contribute to the
              knowledge base needed for possible future spin-based information technologies. 
              The project will build on earlier successful work in spin tunneling plus
              transport, and at a later stage of the program will push toward the new
              frontiers by examining a new class of magnetic materials, so-called heavy
              Fermion metals.  A major goals is to expand a new and promising interaction
              between theorists who are now working to analyze the spin tunneling
              experiments.  In addition, the fabrication methods, using state of the art
              molecular beam epitaxy tools will manipulate the material interfaces and tunnel
              barriers to create novel materials and to maximize the spin polarization
              values.  Measurements will be made in ambient as well as liquid helium
              temperatures in the presence of a small or large magnetic field. Some of the
              earlier results of this project have generated worldwide interest, both
              experimentally and theoretically, with many major companies involved in
              developing nonvolatile memory elements as well as sensors for ultrahigh-density
              recording.  The project integrates research with the education and training of
              high-school students, undergraduate students, graduate students and
              post-doctoral fellows.  The training will be in spin transport and in
              specialized areas such as nanotechnology.  The highly educated and trained
              people will be well prepared for careers as educators and workers in the area
              of spin-based information storage technology.


