Title       : Four Projects about Macroeconomic Risk and Uncertainty: An Accomplishment Based
               Renewal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0137035

Award Number: 0137035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232129             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Sargent   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of four related lines of research. 1. Model drift and
              stochastic volatility: The project uses computationally intensive Bayesian
              methods to organize evidence about the sources of drift in vector
              autoregressions of post WWII U.S. aggregate time series.  It seeks to partition
              drift into parts due to the systematic or autoregressive part, on the one hand,
              and the conditional variances of innovations, on the other. There are some
              influential studies in the literature that purport to affirm drift in the
              systematic part of vector autoregressions, and other equally influential ones
              that deny it in favor of drifting volatilities. Insights about continuous time
              diffusions lead the investigator to suspect that it is much more difficult to
              detect drift in the systematic part than in the volatilities. Partitioning
              drift into these two parts is important for quantitatively evaluating monetary
              and fiscal policy rules and their effects.  The project interprets the evidence
              assembled in the light of recent theoretical formulations of drifting
              coefficient models that focus on the government's learning process. 2.
              Self-confirming equilibria and monetary policy: A self-confirming equilibrium
              is a form of rational expectations that permits agents' models to disagree on
              events that occur with zero probability in equilibrium. Recent theories of
              agents' learning deliver this form of rational expectations equilibrium as a
              limit point.  This project extends earlier work with self-confirming equilibria
              to an empirically more ambitious one based on a version of a 'new synthesis'
              macro model.   It also studies escape routes, a new form of dynamics, and the
              lessons that they carry for a possible threat to our current low-inflation
              regime. 3. Robust control and filtering in macroeconomics:  This project
              pursues applications of dynamic models of robust filtering and control. The aim
              of this work is to provide positive and normative models of decision making
              where the decision-maker regards his model as an approximation. Robust decision
              theory provides a model of caution.  Robust control theory is applied to asset
              pricing puzzles and the formulation of monetary and fiscal policies. 4.
              Macroeconomic history:  This project studies in depth two or three important
              stabilizations of inflation and focuses on the conditions that contributed to
              high or low output and unemployment costs of stabilization. 
