Title       : Topics in Macroeconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0137063

Award Number: 0137063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231629             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio T. Rebelo s-rebelo@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to improve our understanding of devaluation episodes. The
              first project studies the behavior of inflation in the aftermath of large
              contractionary devaluations. The second project investigates how the fiscal
              costs of banking crises that associated with currency crises are financed by
              the government. The third project characterizes the optimal time to abandon a
              fixed exchange rate regime in response to an increase in government spending
              that renders the peg unsustainable. 

The first project uses new data to
              understand how the prices of different goods behave in the aftermath of large
              devaluations. It examines a variety of episodes employing disaggregated
              Consumer Price Index (CPI) data together with new data obtained from a private
              provider that measures prices in different countries for a fixed set of brands.
              Some preliminary results suggest that there are two mechanisms important in
              shaping the behavior of prices in the aftermath of a devaluation. The first is
              the presence of distribution costs (transportation, wholesaling and retailing)
              that drive a wedge between the retail prices of tradable goods in different
              countries. The second mechanism is described as flight from quality in
              consumption. The large devaluations are associated with sizable recessions. The
              negative income effect associated with these recession induces agents to
              substitute away from imported good towards inferior local substitutes. This
              substitution can induce a significant downward bias in measured inflation
              rates. In principle the CPI measures the cost of purchasing a fixed bundle of
              goods. But in practice, in countries such as Korea and Thailand, the prices of
              imported goods are replaced in recessions by the prices of cheaper, inferior
              local alternatives in the CPl. This means that there is a sudden deterioration
              in the quality of the CPI consumption basket that is ignored in measuring the
              rate of inflation.  The project documents the role played by flight from
              quality in consumption in influencing the behavior of CPI inflation. 

The
              second project explores the implications of different strategies for financing
              the fiscal costs of twin crises for inflation and depreciation rates.   It uses
              a first-generation type model of speculative attacks which has four key
              features: (i) the crisis is triggered by prospective deficits; (ii) there
              exists outstanding non-indexed government debt issued prior to the crises;
              (iii) a portion of the government's liabilities are not indexed to inflation;
              and (iv) there are nontradable goods and costs of distributing tradable goods,
              so that purchasing power parity does not hold.  The project shows that the
              model can account for the high rates of devaluation and moderate rates of
              inflation often observed in the wake of currency crises.  The model and
              detailed fiscal and monetary data are used to interpret several twin
              banking/currency crises. Preliminary results have been obtained so far for the
              Korea 1997 and Mexico 1994 crises. 

The third project discusses the optimal
              time to abandon a fixed exchange rate regime in response to an increase in
              government spending that renders the peg unsustainable.   The preliminary work
              considers two variants of an optimization-based first-generation speculative
              attack model. In the first variant there are fiscal costs of abandoning fixed
              exchange rates. These costs may represent a bailout of the banking sector, loss
              of tax revenues, difficulties in refinancing public debt, etc. The second
              variant incorporates a fiscal reform that makes the peg sustainable and that
              arrives according to a Poisson process while the exchange rate is fixed. In
              both cases it is shown that for moderate government expenditure shocks it is
              optimal to abandon the peg when international reserves hit a pre-specified
              lower bound. When the government expenditure shock is large it is optimal to
              abandon the peg as soon as the shock materializes. 

