Title       : The Informational Content of Advertising
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0137001

Award Number: 0137001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147469             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon Anderson sa9w@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A substantial literature in marketing is devoted to measuring the informative
              content in advertising, and loosely confirms that messages contain limited
              information. However, the economics literature has not addressed the issue of
              what information firms wish to convey to potential customers. That is, the
              literature on informative advertising has not studied the fact that firms
              choose the content of advertising messages. The goal of this proposal is to
              develop such a theory and to explore the firms' incentives regarding the amount
              and the nature of the information they decide to provide in ads. Preliminary
              results suggest that the firm has a substantial incentive to hold back product
              information from the ad. When it does want to advertise, it wants to advertise
              the product characteristics that are most important to consumers. Moreover, it
              will advertise a greater range of features of the product the more costly it is
              for consumers to find out this information for themselves (for example, for
              goods that are infrequently purchased). 

The second part of the project will
              check whether these theoretical predictions are upheld in the data. Magazine
              and television ads will be analyzed for the amount and the type of information
              that they contain. It will then be determined whether the information in the
              ads conforms to the theoretical predictions. The project will further
              investigate the role of product quality on advertising content and the impact
              of competition on firms' advertising strategy.

