Title       : Cross-Site Comparisons, Syntheses and Internationalization: LTER-NTL Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9416810

Award Number: 9416810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214710             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Magnuson jmagnuson@macc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl J. Bowser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stith T. Gower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Adams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan A. Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9416810  Magnuson    This project encompasses three international efforts on the
              long-term temporal and spatial dynamics of temperate lakes at regional to
              global scales.  Three questions are addressed with data from widely scattered,
              multiple lake districts.  These questions are:    1. What patterns occur in
              ecological variability and organization of lake ecosystems when lake districts
              are considered at regional and global scales?    2. Can patterns of gains and
              losses of species from individual lakes be related to the overall patterns of
              species occurrence for lakes within a region?    3. Can analyses of lake ice
              freeze and breakup phenologies around the globe be used to describe and
              understand large scale dynamics and trends in climate?    The study of
              ecological variability and organization of lake districts will examine temporal
               variability patterns (conherence) of lakes within lake districts, explore the
              relationship  between landscape position and lake variability across lakes in
              different lake districts, and  examine relations between lake variability and
              factors such as lake morphometry and land   use.  Comparisons will provide
              opportunities to determine whether patterns observed at    the Northern
              Highland Lake District occur across lake districts worldwide.    The analyses
              of gains and losses of fish and zooplankton species will investigate regional  
              dynamics of species gains, losses, and turnover rates in different lake
              districts, relate these   dynamics to the extent and strength of
              interconnections among lakes within these regions,   and investigate how human
              activities may influence these processes.    The analyses of lake ice
              phenology, climate change, and variability  in the Northern   Hemisphere, will
              analyze interannual variability in thaw and freeze dates and where   possible
              the antecedent climatic variability.  Are observed patterns in Wisconsin
              general   for larger regions of the northern hemisphere?  Patterns are the
              recent warming based on   breakup dates, and variabili ty associated with ENSO
              events and inderdecadal or longer   time scales.  Expected patterns will be
              generated through global climate and ice freeze   modeling.
