Title       : NASA/NSF Collaborative Research: Integration of Plant Responses to Mechanical,
               Thermal, Electrical and Chemical Signals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2000   
File        : a9416041

Award Number: 9416041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $594250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara G. Pickard pickard@allenlab.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9416041  Pickard  An abundant mechanosensory calcium channel appears able
              not only to  detect mechanical stimuli such as those that initiate gravitropism
               but also to detect thermal, electrical, and various chemical  stimuli. 
              Because it responds to multimodal input with second-  messenger output, the
              channel system seems likely to be an  integrator that can engage in feedbacks
              with many other systems of  the cell - and feedback is the hallmark of
              regulation.  It is  hypothesized that the mechanical tension required for
              channel  activation is likely transmitted from the relatively rigid cell  wall
              to the plasma membrane system via linkage or adhesion sites  which have
              mechanical connections to the cytoskeleton.  Thus,  functionally, leverage
              exerted against any given adhesion site will  tend to control channels within a
              surrounding domain.    Reactions initiated by passage of calcium ions through
              the  mechanosensory channels could presumably be more effectively  regulated if
              channels within such a domain were somewhat clustered  and if appropriate
              receptors, kinases, porters, pumps, and some key  cytoskeletal anchoring sites
              were in turn clustered about them.   Such arrangements appear likely to play
              important roles in adapting  plant response to environmental signals and
              stresses and in  directing cellular growth and differentiation.    Newly
              emergent capabilities of electronic optical microscopy are  well suited for
              resolving the spatial distributions of many of  these cytoskeletal and
              regulatory molecules in living cells, and  for following temporospatial changes
              in calcium levels and  cytoskeletal geometry during challenge by mechanical,
              thermal,  electrical, and chemical stimuli.  Moreover, patch clamp technology 
              can be applied in special ways permitting electrical resolution of  the
              cascades and feedbacks these stimuli initiate.  Using  representative cells
              from onion (a monocot) and tobacco (a dicot),  it is proposed to employ these
              two complementary technologies to  examine how ar chitectural
              arrangements/rearrangements of  macromolecules and ionic fluxes help plant
              cells react  appropriately to the diverse stimuli recognized by mechanosensory 
              calcium channels.  ***
