Title       : Phosphorus Accumulation in Cenozoic Marine Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1996  
File        : a9416593

Award Number: 9416593
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret L. Delaney delaney@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9416593  DELANEY    The supply of dissolved phosphorus to the oceans from
              continental  weathering plays a key role in regulating oceanic productivity and
               sediment burial on long time scales. Despite this importance,  little is known
              about the Cenozoic history of P fluxes to and from  the ocean.  The three main
              objectives of this research are: (1) to  understand the controls on P
              accumulation rates in Cenozoic marine  sediments, and (3) to interpret these P
              accumulations rate  variations using mass balance models.  Measurements of P 
              geochemical distributions in marine sediments will use established  sequential
              extraction techniques which differentiate five  sedimentary P components; four
              of these are burial sinks for  dissolved, reactive P and the fifth is detrital
              P.  P accumulation  rates will be calculated from total reactive P
              concentration  measurements.  Total P concentration measurements will also be 
              applied, by shorter analytical methods, to the determination of P  accumulation
              rates where it has been demonstrated that  detrital P  is a negligible
              contribution to total P.  Sites to be studied  to  understand the controls on P
              accumulation rates include depth  transects of sites with similar surface water
              productivity ,  latitudinal transects of sites along a gradient of
              productivity,   and sediments of different  lithologies.  Sites for the 
              documentation of temporal variations in P accumulation rates in  Cenozoic
              marine sediments will be selected to ensure geographic  coverage of regions
              significant in terms of global productivity and  sediment accumulation
              (including the equatorial regions of the  Atlantic and Pacific, the high
              latitude North Pacific, and the  Southern Ocean).  Interpretation of the
              Cenozoic record of P  accumulation will be linked to other geochemical records
              of ocean   history, such as strontium and carbon isotopes.   This work will 
              yield substantial insights into the variations in P fluxes to and  from the
              oceanic reservoir over long time scales.
