Title       : An In Situ Flow Cytometer For The Optical Analysis Of Individual Particles In
               Seawater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1998       
File        : a9416551

Award Number: 9416551
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Olson rolson@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9416551   Olson     The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will undertake a
              project  to develop an instrument to analyze the optical properties (light 
              scattering and fluorescence) of individual microscopic particles in  situ and
              unattended, using established techniques of flow  cytometry.  The long-term
              goal is to develop an automated, moored  (eventually profiling) monitor for the
              optical characteristics of  phytoplankton and other microscopic particles in
              the euphotic zone  of the ocean.  The instrument will have resolution and
              sampling  rates comparable to a laboratory flow cytometer, but  will be  simple
              and small enough to be operated unattended for months at  sea, with on board
              processing/storage of data.  Developments  allowing this instrument to now be
              practicalinclude low-power-  consumption solid state lasers providing enough
              power to allow  fluorescence measurements of single phytoplankton cells, and 
              artificial neural network systems to cope with the large amounts of  data from
              multiparameter analyses of individual particles.  To  increase reliability, it
              is proposed to use a simple ducted flow to  replace the mechanically complex
              hydrodynamic sample stream  focusing of conventional flow cytometers. To use
              this simple flow  system will require the ability to recognize and reject
              signals  from particles passing through the edges of the excitation spot.  
              This can be achieved by use of excitation optics that produce a  unique signal
              shape for particles passing through the optimum  region.  Such an instrument
              will allow oceanographers to obtain  both the high resolution data necessary
              for understanding such  basic features of natural communities as diet patterns
              in phyto-  plankton cell growth and division and zooplankton grazing, and the 
              extended sampling necessary for resolving important but infrequent  events in
              the ocean.
