Title       : Retrospective Determination of Atlantic Croaker Migration through Laser-Beamed
               Elemental Analysis of Otoliths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9416579

Award Number: 9416579
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $640046             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia M. Jones cjones@odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9416579  Jones    Year to year variations in the number of fish which survive 
              the first year of life (termed recruitment or yearclass  strength) are often
              sufficient to control the success or  failure of the fishery a few years later.
               Despite the  scientific and economic benefits which would result if  yearclass
              strength could be estimated before fish reached a  marketable size, recruitment
              prediction has proved to be an  elusive goal.    Likely mechanisms contributing
              to year-to-year variations in  the yearclass strength of Atlantic croaker
              include  variations in the location and timing of spawning, the age  and date
              of subsequent advection to the estuarine nursery  area, the duration and
              relative growth  rate while in the  estuary, and the age and date of migration
              out of the  estuary as an adult.  In conjunction with age-structured  measures
              of growth and survival based on otolith daily  growth rings, these hypotheses
              can be testes using a new  laser-based elemental analysis technique (LA-ICPMS)
              to  retroactively determine the hatching site and estimate the  age and date of
              subsequent migrations in individual fish.  The technique is based on the a
              cellular nature of the fish  otolith (earstone), which forms through the
              concentric daily  additions of mineralized tissue around a central nucleus. 
              Given the fact that the elemental composition of a given  daily ring reflects
              the elemental composition of the otolith  at the appropriate daily increment. 
              By corollary, water  mass differences at the time and place of hatching will be
               reflected in elemental composition differences in the  otolith nucleus.   
              Previous work confirmed the analytic potential of LA-ICPMS  and provided the
              first demonstration that otolith elemental  composition does indeed reflect
              characteristics of the  ambient water.  The strength of the current project
              lies in  the refinement of this approach, and its application in a  field study
              using sample sizes well above that of any other  study of this type (1200
              otoliths). Su ccessful completion of  this project has implications not only
              for recruitment of  Atlantic croaker, but for studies of recruitment, stock 
              structure,  migration and fisheries management around the  world.  ***
