Title       : Time-Resolved Spectroscopic Studies of Hydrogen-Bonded Molecular Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9416913

Award Number: 9416913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Waldeck dave@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor David Waldeck, University of Pittsburgh, is supported by a   grant
              from the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to   continue his
              research involving time-resolved spectroscopic studies of   hydrogen-bonded
              molecular complexes.   Waldeck's prior work involved   measurements of
              rotational diffusion using optically heterodyned   polarization spectroscopy 
              and fluorescence depolarization.  The current   project extends this work to
              obtain a deeper understanding the dynamics   of hydrogen bonded complexes and
              intermolecular bonding.  He will use the   same experimental techniques, 
              polarization spectroscopy and fluorescence   depolarization, to study the
              mobility and flexibility of hydrogen bonded   guest molecules as a function of
              binding enthalpy and topology.    Experimental studies will be conducted on a
              variety of host/guest systems   in unassociated but dipolar organic solvents
              such as trichloro methane   and dimethyl sulphoxide, and comparisons made with
              theory.  The principal   goal of the research is to understand how the position
              and strength of   hydrogen bonds determine the flexibility of intermolecular
              hydrogen   bonded complexes, and to gain a deeper understanding of the dynamics
              of   such complexes.  These studies are important because they should elucidate
              aspects of   dynamics which are important in chemistry and biology.  In
              biology, the   flexibility of a guest molecule in a host is likely to be of
              critical   importance for the binding of biological molecules and for enzyme  
              activity.  In chemistry, the frictional coupling which occurs between a  
              molecular moiety and a solvent when the moiety is moving in a potential   is at
              the core of understanding the dynamical influence of a solvent on a   chemical
              reaction.  The studies being undertaken by Waldeck will have a   direct bearing
              on these larger and more complex issues.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
