Title       : Passive Energy Dissipation Devices for Upgrading of Steel Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1994 
File        : a9416516

Award Number: 9416516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mahendra P. Singh                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vitelmo V. Bertero   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1497,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416516  Betereo  The Northridge earthquake caused significant damage to a 
              large number of multistory steel framed buildings.  A number  of different
              explanations for the damage have been proposed,  including problems with
              welding, the material properties of  the steel, and the general design
              philosophy and lack of  redundancy and multiple lateral-resisting load paths in
              the  structural systems.  Coupled with these observations is the  fact that
              several recent experimental investigations have  highlighted the potential poor
              performance of large welded  steel connections under inelastic cyclic loading. 
              One  approach for improving the seismic performance of the types  of steel
              buildings is to increase the capability of the  structural system to dissipate
              energy by introducing special  devices for this purpose, and thus decreasing
              the energy  demands on critical regions of the primary structural  system.    A
              combined analytical and experimental study focusing on the  benefits of passive
              energy dissipation for steel frame  structures is undertaken in this project. 
              Four different  passive energy dissipation systems are investigated.  These 
              devices are representative of the main classes of passive  devices:  friction,
              metallic, pure viscous, and  viscoelastic.  Two devices are studied
              experimentally  (friction and pure viscous), and the results of the testing 
              are used to develop numerical models of the two types of  devices.  These
              numerical models are then utilized in  the  analytical study.  Two other types
              of passive dampers (shape  memory alloy and viscoelastic) are also included in
              the  study, but not investigated experimentally in the present  project. 
              Numerical models are developed for these dampers  based on the results of other
              pervious and current research.    An actual steel building, typical of those
              that suffered  damage in the Northridge earthquake is identified and used  as
              the basis of the analytical study.  A set of earthquake  ground motions are
              chosen, representing service-le vel,  moderate and severe earthquake shaking. 
              The selected  building is first analyzed in its existing (non-upgraded) 
              condition.  Upgrade schemes based on each of the four types  of damping devices
              are designed for the building and their  benefits investigated by a careful
              comparison of response  parameters.  The performance benefits are assessed by 
              considering ductility and energy demands on the primary  structural system, and
              also by evaluating damage to  nonstructural components and contents using
              appropriate  response parameters. The impact of the upgrade schemes on  the
              vulnerability of the building to economic loss due to  earthquake shaking is
              finally assessed.    Passive energy dissipation techniques represent a method
              for  seismic upgrading of existing structures that offers  performance and
              economic benefits over conventional  approaches.  This research project is
              designed to further  develop and refine the methodologies for upgrading using 
              these techniques.    This is a Northridge earthquake project.  ***
