Title       : Temporal and Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Chemical Reactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1994   
File        : a9416938

Award Number: 9416938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297201             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Hudson hudson@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9163,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Hudson - 9416938    Oscillations have been known in chemical systems
              for some time, phenomena such as bifurcations among states, chaos, and complex
              spatial patterns can arise in such systems.  In well-mixed open reacting
              systems (for example a continuous stirred tank reactor) the concentrations of
              reacting species can undergo periodic and chaotic oscillations.  Catalytic
              surface reactions such as the oxidation of carbon monoxide (one of the
              reactions taking place in the catalytic muffler of an automobile), can also
              oscillate and produce spatial patterns on the catalytic surface. 
              Electrochemical reactions, such as electrodissolution of metals, or corrosion,
              can exhibit temporal as well as spatial variations in reaction rate.    The
              PI's work is focused on quantifying the above experimentally observed behavior
              and on developing quantitative phenomenological models.  The reactions that
              will be studied are of both industrial and economic importance and should lead
              to an improved fundamental understanding of such reaction processes. 
              Electrochemical reactions have several features which make them ideal for
              fundamental studies of reaction dynamics.  They are relatively stationary,
              i.e., have less drift over the time scale of the dynamics and they exhibit many
              types of interesting dynamic behavior such as complex periodic oscillations,
              low order chaos, spatiotemporal patterns, etc.  Also, there are easily
              controlled parameters (the potential or current as well as the mass transfer
              coefficient near a rotating disk) so that transitions among states can be
              investigated.    The PI will study the temporal and spatiotemporal dynamics of
              chemically reacting systems.  In the temporal studies, time series emanating
              from the electrochemical dissolution of metals will be investigated.  The
              studies are to be both deterministic and stochastic.  In the former, chaotic
              behavior and transitions, or bifurcations, between states will be emphasized,
              applying methods from nonlinear dynamics to the experimental  data in order to
              identify and characterize the underlying dynamics of the system and to develop
              phenomenological mathematical models.  A new research program in
              electrochemical noise associated with localized corrosion will be initiated,
              consisting of both experimental and modeling studies.  Spatiotemporal dynamics
              will be studied by using a video camera to record spatial nonuniformities.  The
              work is aimed at developing models which should help answer questions such as
              how do films grow and recede on dissolving metals, how much interaction is
              there among pits on the surface of corroding metals, and under what conditions
              is synchronization among reacting sites local or global in nature.  ***
