Title       : NASA/NSF Collaborative Research: Molecular and Biochemical Analysis of CTR1, A
               Protein Involved in Ethylene Signal Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9416017

Award Number: 9416017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Kieber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9109,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9416017  Kieber         The proposal involves an analysis of ethylene signal 
              transduction in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana, with a  focus on one
              particular element of this pathway, the CTR1  kinase.  CTR1 was previously
              identified as a member of the  Raf family of serine/threonine protein kinases
              that acts as  a negative regulator of ethylene responses in Arabidopsis.  The
              goals of the studies proposed here are to characterize  the CTR1 biochemically,
              to define the function of the amino  terminal domain of CTR1, to understand how
              the CTR1 protein  and gene are regulated, and to identify additional elements 
              involved in ethylene signal transduction.  Specifically, it is hoped to
              demonstrate that CTR1 encodes a  functional protein kinase and to characterize
              the activity  in vitro by purifying this protein after expression in a 
              heterologous system.  The properties of the enzyme will be  compared to other
              protein kinases, with particular attention  given to other members of the Raf
              family.  It will be  determine whether the activity of the CTR1 kinase is 
              regulated by differential phosphorylation using in vivo  radiolabeling  with
              P32 orthophosphate followed by  immunoprecipitation with anti-CTR1 antibodies. 
              Different  domains of the CTR1 will be over-expressed in planta in an  attempt
              to determine the function of the amino terminal  domain and to examine the
              effect that inappropriate levels  and spatial expression of CTR1 has on plant
              development.  There is preliminary evidence that CTR1 translation is  enhanced
              by ethylene, and this will be confirmed and  investigated further.  Finally,
              novel elements involved in  ethylene signal transduction will be searched for
              using  additional; genetic screens and the yeast two-hybrid system.  The
              studies should lead to an increased understanding of  ethylene signal
              transduction, and may provide insights into  other environmental signal
              transduction pathways.    Plant development is a complex interplay of various 
              hormonal, environmental and endogeno us developmental  signals.  The
              elucidation of the molecular mechanism  underlying the perception and
              transduction of these signals,  and how these pathways are integrated with each
              other is  crucial for an understanding of the mechanisms that regulate  plant
              growth and development.  One such signal is the  gaseous plant hormone
              ethylene, which has been known to have  significant effects on plants since the
              turn of the century.  Ethylene affects seed germination, fruit ripening, and 
              abscission and senescence of leaves and flowers.  Ethylene  is also involved in
              the response of plants to various  environmental stresses such as wounding,
              pathogen attack,  drought and flooding..  This proposal involves the analysis
              of the ethylene signal  transduction pathway in the model plant Arabidopsis 
              thaliana, with a focus of a particulate element of this  pathway, the CTR1
              kinase.  The goals of the studies proposed  here are to characterize the CTR1
              kinase biochemically, to  define the function of the various parts of the CRT
              protein,  to understand how the CTR1 protein and gene are regulated,  and to
              identify additional elements involved in ethylene  signal transduction  The
              results of these studies will shed light on mechanisms  by which plants sense
              and respond to various environmental  stimuli.  They will also lay the basis
              for future  biotechnological applications to interfere with flower  senescence
              and fruit ripening.
