Title       : Comparison of Long-term Carbon Dynamics of Two Conifer Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1995     
File        : a9416821

Award Number: 9416821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Harmon harmonm@fsl.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur McKee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren B. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Olga N. Krankina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1314,9169,ENVI,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9416821  Harmon    Forests play a major role in the global carbon cycle, but
              their current role is not fully understood.  To some degree this uncertainty
              stems from the lack of attention to regional  scale analysis.  Heterogeneity
              between and within forested regions can significantly affect carbon cycling
              processes and the response to climate and landuse change.  This project will
              compare the carbon dynamics of two significant forest regions of the globe, the
               Pacific Northwest and northwestern Russia at three spatial levels: stand,
              landscape and region.  The main objective is to determine the major factors
              controlling the spatial and temporal patterns of carbon stores and fluxes
              within these two major coniferous ecosystems.  This analysis will be abased on
              the synthesis of long-term stand and weather records, forest inventory data,
              aerial photography, and remote sensing imagery for both regions.  Past
              NSF-LTER/NASA studies of the Pacific Northwest forests provide the template for
              the proposed Russian project and comparison.  The project also builds upon an
              ongoing collaborative study with the St. Petersburg Forest Academy.  For both
              regions the same complex of modeling tools will be used to analyze carbon
              dynamics at three spatial levels as well as the impact of harvesting and carbon
              stored in forest projects.  For northwestern Russia the models will be
              calibrated and tested with existing data including long-term observations on
              permanent plots, local growth tables and biomass equations, forest inventory
              data including forest types and soils, weather data, remotely sensed images and
              timber harvest and processing parameters.  This project will encourage further
              international partnerships in long-term ecological studies as well as make
              valuable new Russian data resources available to the US scientific community.
