Title       : Influence of Diaphragm Behavior on Performance of Precast Parking Garages During
               Northridge Earthquake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1996     
File        : a9416274

Award Number: 9416274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52137              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Sause rs0c@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Pessiki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1498,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416274  Sause  Many precast parking garages were heavily damaged in the 
              Northridge earthquake.  The gravity load system of many of  these structures
              consisted of double tee floor units  supported by inverted tee girders,
              spandrel girders, and  columns with corbels.  The lateral load system consisted
              of  a few shearwalls with diaphragms formed by the double tees  with reinforced
              topping slabs.  These two systems are  usually designed as separate systems. 
              If the diaphragm  develops cracks as a result of large in-plane forces and 
              bending moments, significant diaphragm deformation may  result and the rigid
              diaphragm assumption may be inadequate.  Yielding of diaphragm reinforcing
              steel would result in much  large diaphragm deformation.    The objectives of
              this project are to: (1) study the  influence of diaphragm behavior on the
              levels of drift  experienced by the gravity load systems of precast parking 
              structures during the Northridge earthquake, (2) evaluate  whether diaphragm
              failure contributed to the observed damage  in precast parking structures, and
              (3) propose capacity  design concepts for precast diaphragms, if appropriate.  
               A prototype parking structure based on the damaged parking  structures will be
              designed and detailed.  The seismic force-  deformation behavior of a typical
              diaphragm of the prototype  structure will be studied analytically, using a
              linear  model, and two nonlinear models of different levels of  detail and
              complexity.  Unidirectional and bidirectional  seismic loads will be
              considered.  The seismic force-  deformation behavior of a typical shearwall
              will also be  studied analytically.  The results of this analysis will be  used
              to assess the significance of the diaphragm  deformation.  If appropriate,
              capacity-based design concepts  for diaphragms will be developed using the
              results of  nonlinear dynamic analysis of the prototype structure.    The type
              of construction of precast parking structures  damaged in this earthquake is
              widely used across the  country, a nd thus a substantial hazard may exist.  The
               research undertaken in this project will evaluate the role  of diaphragm
              behavior and new capacity-based design concepts  will be proposed to avoid
              inadequate diaphragm behavior in  new precast parking structures.    This is a
              Northridge Earthquake project.  ***
