Title       : Trilateral Summer Institute on Innovation, Competitiveness and Sustainability in
               the North American Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9416308

Award Number: 9416308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Simon Fraser University
	      
	      Burnaby 2,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5984      OFFICE OF TRANS-REGIONAL AFFAI
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,9198,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  INT-9416308  ANDERSON    Although  "innovation,"  "competitiveness," and
              "sustainability"  have  all  emerged as essential themes in analyses of social
              and economic development,  until  recently little attention had been paid to
              the underlying  synergies  and  inherent  tensions  among them.  Harmonizing
              the  three  themes  in  a  multinational  context  is an even more daunting
              proposition,  in  view  of  differences in national political, economic and
              legal systems, for example.  Yet  the  coherent, mutually-beneficial
              development of the  North  American  region  envisioned by the NAFTA agreement
              will depend critically upon  such  harmonization.   This  project, which is
              being  supported  jointly  by  the  National  Science  Foundation, the Canadian
              Social Science  and  Humanities  Research  Council (SSHRC), and the Mexican
              National Science and  Technology  Council (CONACyT), will bring together for 10
              days in August 1994, scholars  and policy makers from the United States,
              Canada, and Mexico for a critical  examination  of  the issues that need to be
              addressed in understanding  and  harmonizing   the   relationships  among  the 
               problems   of   innovation,  competitiveness,  and sustainability in a North
              American regional  context.  The  principal  objective will be to develop a
              long-term agenda  that  will  provide  scholars  throughout North America with
              guidance  toward  further,  detailed   exploration   of   these  three 
              critical   themes   and   their  relationships.   An immediate outcome will be
              a network  of  scholars  with  interest  and expertise in various aspects of
              the problem, and  a  plan  to  expand  and sustain that network.  A published
              proceedings will also result  from  the institute.  Planning and follow-up for
              the project are under  the  direction  of   a  trinational  steering  group 
              chaired  by  the  Canadian  Principal  Investigator,  with  U.S.  and  Mexican 
              representatives   being  distinguished  social  scientists  nominated, 
              respectively,  by  NSF   and   CONACyT.    ***
