Title       : The Economics of Experimentation in the Design of New Products and Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9416177

Award Number: 9416177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Von Hippel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #9416177     In many fields, researchers have traditionally found it
              economical to do research by creating and testing a few, well though-out
              experiments in the expectation of a high successful rate.  Nature takes a
              different approach -creating many experiments and then  screening for the few
              successful ones (random mutation and survival of the fittest).  The
              cost-effectiveness of each experimental strategy depends on the relative cost
              of designing experiments versus "running" them and analyzing the results. 
              Today, the relative costs of experimental steps associated with the design of
              new products and processes is being radically affected in many fields due to
              the use of new or greatly improved experimental methods such as simulation,
              mass screening and genetic algorithm techniques.  Often, the effect of these
              techniques is to make "nature's" experimental approach increasingly
              cost-effective.  This, in turn, is changing the way experimentation is being
              (or should be) done in many fields.     This research examines the economics of
              the new forms of (often, computer assisted) experimentation in a number of
              fields, and to compare them with the economics of more traditional experimental
              methods.  The findings of this research will provide academics with new insight
              into the economics of experimentation in the design of new products and
              processes.  The findings will also enable developers of new products and
              processes and governmental decision makers to make better judgments with
              respect to the cost-effectiveness of  experimentation strategies they may use
              during the development of new products and processes.     For purposes of
              analysis, the execution of an experiment as involving a four-step cycle:  (1)
              one conceives of or designs an experiment; (2) one builds the (physical or
              virtual) apparatus needed to conduct that experiment; (3) one runs the
              experiment; (4) one analyzes the result. Each of these four steps has a cost. 
              The absolute and relative magnitude of these costs can affect exp erimental
              strategies.  Thus, experimenters might logically strive to replace expensive
              experimental methods with cheaper ones.  And, if step (1) - design of an
              experiment- is much cheaper than step (3) - running that experiment- one might
              logically expect an experimenter to invest more in step 4 -design- if by doing
              so he or she can reduce the cost or frequency of required experimental runs.   
               Recently-developed experimental techniques such as simulation, mass screening
              and genetic algorithm techniques can radically affect the absolute and relative
              cost of the four steps involved in experimentation.  15 pairs of experiments
              (30 cases total) are studied.  Each pair will contain one experiment performed
              in a manner that is traditional for the filed studied, and one experiment of a
              very similar type performed using a novel experimental technique such as those
              mentioned just above.  Analyses of cost and benefits of these experimental
              pairs are followed by the creation and testing of hypotheses as to which
              techniques will be most effective in experimental conditions characterized by
              known levels of key variables such as the cost of generating materials or
              designs to be used as experimental inputs.
