Title       : U.S.-Indo Collaborative Research: Logic Programming AnalysisTransformations and
               Principles, Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1999       
File        : a9416687

Award Number: 9416687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deepak Kapur   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9416687  KAPUR  Description:  This proposal will provide  linkage support for a 
               collaboration between Deepak Kapur, Department  of Computer  Science, State
              University of New York, Albany  and R.K.  Shyamasundar, Theoretical Computer
              Science  Group, Tata Institute  of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Bombay, India. 
               The focus of this  project is the study and analysis of logic  programs with
              emphasis  on termination of sequential and concurrent  programs.  The  initial
              theoretical investigations will  concentrate on proving  termination of a logic
              program for a query,  developing semantic-  preserving transformations to
              improve  efficiency of logic  programs, and identifying conditions under  which
              the occur-check  can be omitted in a logic programming language  interpreter.  
              Software tools will be developed to implement  theoretical results  and are
              expected to promote the design of  elegant and efficient  logic programs.  
              Scope:  The P.I.s are well-known senior  scientists with  complimentary
              research interests.  Kapur and  his group are  accomplished in the area of
              automated deduction  and term  rewriting systems and have developed an 
              extremely powerful  theorem prover, Rewrite Rule Laboratory.   Shyamasundar is
              well-  known for his research in theoretical computer  science,  particularly
              in the area of logic programming  and semantics of  real-time and concurrent
              programming.  Computer  science is an  area of exceptional strength in India
              and many  mutual benefits can be expected to result from  this collaboration.  
               ***
