Title       : The 1994 Northridge Earthquake and Prediction of Ground Motions on the Hanging
               Walls and Foot Wall of Thrust Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1994 
File        : a9416451

Award Number: 9416451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65366              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Somerville   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WCC
	      203 N. Golden Circle Drive
	      Santa Ana, CA  927054010    /   -

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1496,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416451  Somerville  The objective of this study is to develop an empirical
              model for  the prediction of ground motions around thrust faults, including 
              differences between ground motions on the hanging wall and the  foot wall,
              using strong motion data from the 1994 Northridge  earthquake and other thrust
              earthquakes.    Ground motions are known to be significantly larger on the 
              hanging wall than on the foot wall of dipping faults.  This was  observed in
              the ground motions of the 1994 Northridge earthquake,  where the peak
              accelerations in the northern San Fernando Valley,  which lies on the hanging
              wall of the Northridge rupture, were  larger than those recorded at equivalent
              distances on the foot  wall side, which lies in the San Gabriel Mountains to
              the north.  The peak accelerations from the Northridge earthquake were much 
              larger (e.g. 40-50% larger at distances less than 30 km)than  predicted by
              current empirical attenuation relations, even  accounting for the 20-30% larger
              motions expected for thrust  events.  Knowing whether or not the ground motions
              from the  Northridge earthquake are representative of ground motions from  the
              Northridge earthquake are representative of ground motions  expected in future
              thrust and/or blind thrust earthquakes has  important implications for the
              development of empirical ground  motion attenuation relations, and on the
              revision of seismic  building codes.    The project uses strong motion data
              from the 1994 Northridge  earthquake and other earthquakes to quantify the
              effect of  earthquake mechanism on horizontal and vertical response spectra 
              for periods of 0 to 4 seconds, distances of 0 to 50 km, and  magnitudes of 6 to
              7.5.  It uses an empirical analysis of  recorded motions from thrust and
              oblique earthquakes,  supplemented by numerical modeling.  These two approaches
               compliment each other and will lead to more robust results than  would result
              from using either approach by itself.  The empirical  model for the
              style-of-faulting factor considers the  distance and  magnitude dependence of
              the effect of earthquake mechanism as  well as differences between ground
              motions on the hanging wall  and foot wall.  Numerical ground motion modeling
              is used to help  understand the causes for the effect of earthquake mechanism
              on  the ground motions and to guide the selection of the functional  form used
              in the regression analysis to develop the empirical  model.  It permits the
              influences of various conditions, such as  location of the site on the hanging
              wall or on the foot wall, the  depth of rupture, stress drop, and rupture
              directivity to be  tested separately.  Numerical modeling is also used to
              evaluate  whether the ground motions from the Northridge earthquake, which  are
              larger than predicted by existing ground motion attenuation  relations for
              thrust earthquakes, are anomalous for thrust events  in general, and for blind
              thrust events in particular, or if they  are representative of ground motions
              expected in future thrust  and/or blind thrust earthquakes.  ***
