Title       : NASA/NSF Collaborative Research: Light-Regulation of Z. maysStomata: Single Cell
               Electrical and Molecular Assays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1998  
File        : a9416039

Award Number: 9416039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $531500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah M. Assmann sma3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9189,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9416039  Assmann         In the stomatal complex of maize (Zea mays), light 
              stimulates uptake of K+ and Cl- into guard cells but  simultaneously triggers
              loss of K+ and Cl- from subsidiary  cells.  How this exquisite level of
              cellular differentiation  is achieved, such that the same physical stimulus
              from the  environment elicits completely opposite ion transport  processes in
              the two cell types, is the focus of this  proposal.  Experiments will utilize
              refinement of microscale  (single cell) techniques of laser-assisted
              electrophysiology  and molecular biology to analyze cellular function and gene 
              expression.  In guard cells, light activates a H+ ATPase  which extrudes H+,
              thereby creating an electrical gradient  for passive uptake of K+ through K+
              selective ion channels.  Guard cell and subsidiary cell protoplasts of maize
              will be  patch-clamped, and their K+ and H+ ATPase currents will be  analyzed
              and tested for light regulation.  Techniques of  differential display, and of
              cDNA synthesis within an  individual living cell by reagents introduced via the
              patch-  clamp pipette in whole cell configuration will be used to  produce
              probes for genes that are differentially expressed  in the two cell types. 
              Probes will be used to screen  libraries to obtain full length sequences.  For
              all  experiments guard cell and subsidiary cell protoplasts will  be released
              using a recently developed microsurgery  technique, in which a laser is used to
              burn a hole in the  cell wall, and the protoplast is ten released through the 
              hole.  The laser microsurgery method obviates the use of  cell-wall digesting
              enzymes to release protoplasts, which  may induce gene expression and alter
              cell physiology and  viability.  Methods developed in this research should
              allow  the patch-clamp and molecular study of single cells that  have been
              inaccessible by previous approaches.  %%%  Plants take up CO2 from the
              atmosphere and use the sun's  energy to fix CO2 into carbohydrates.  CO2 enters
              plant  leaves through tiny pores  in the leaf surface called  stomata.  Water
              also exits the leaf through stomata.  It is  therefore important that stomatal
              apertures are tightly  controlled, so that plants neither starve because of 
              inadequate CO2 uptake, nor wilt because of excessive water  loss.  Stomatal
              apertures are regulated by pairs of guard  cells which define and border each
              stomatal pore.  Guard  cell regulation of pore aperture requires uptake and
              loss of  K+ from the guard cells.  In corn, when K+ is not needed by  the guard
              cells, it is stored in neighboring cells called  subsidiary cells.  The same
              environmental signals that cause  guard cells to take up K+ trigger subsidiary
              cells to lose  this ion, which the guard cells then have access to.  How  this
              exquisite level of cellular specialization is achieved  is the purpose of t his
              study.  An electrophysiological  technique called patch-clamping will be used
              to study how  light regulates the fluxes of K+ and other ions across the  cell
              membranes of guard cells and subsidiary cells.  Techniques of molecular biology
              will be applied o study how  these two cell types differ in which genes they
              express.  Understanding the mechanism of stomatal control is  important, in
              order to learn which responses to target , in  breeding or molecular genetic
              manipulations, to increase  plant productivity or decrease plant sensitivity to
              draught.  Such knowledge may also be important in deciding what the  best
              conditions are for growing crop plants in space to  support a manned space
              station.  ***
