Title       : Dissertation Research: The Trajectory of an Andean Chiefdom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1994   
File        : a9416610

Award Number: 9416610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1994   
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Drennan    Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Ms. Maria Cordero will 
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct  archaeological
              excavation at the site of Cayambe, located in the  Quito Basin in highland
              Ecuador. Prior work at Cayambe indicates  the presence of large hemispherical
              and quadrilateral mounds  which cover a range of time from ca. A.D. 500 to
              1,500. The  mounds - based on information obtained from other sites -  
              probably served as burial structures. The site almost certainly  represents a
              chiefdom level of social organization. The main goal  of Ms. Cordero's research
              is to reconstruct the sequence of  development of hierarchical society at
              Cayambe, to determine how  this chiefdom emerged and how far back it time its
              roots go. To  do this, she will determine the extent of the site during 
              different periods of time and attempt to detect differences in  the spatial
              patterning of activities in each. She is currently  conducting a systematic
              intensive surface of the site and  supplementing this with limited excavation.
              With NSF support she  will increase the number of test pits and the extent of 
              stratigraphic excavation. One of the hemispherical mounds and one  of the
              quadrilateral ones will be excavated to determine how they  were constructed
              and what role they served. Samples will be  collected for radiocarbon dating to
              obtain a more refined  chronology. Materials collected, especially pottery will
              be  subjected to detailed analysis.    Archaeologists wish to understand how
              complex societies emerged  and were maintained. The Cayambe area is
              particularly interesting  because excellent ethnohistoric data is available and
              this  provides a solid end point from which to work backwards in time.  What
              this information indicates is that Cayambe served as a trade  center and a
              point of entry into the highlands for "exotic" goods  from the Amazonian
              lowlands to the East. Utilizing archaeological  materials, especially one type
              of ceramics, Ms. Cordero will  study the d evelopment of this trade and relate
              it to the rise of  the Cayambe chiefdom. This research is important for several
               reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists.  It will
              increase understanding of the processes which led to the  development of
              complex society and it will assist in the training  of a promising young
              scientist.
