Title       : NASA/NSF Collaborative Research: Mechanosensing in Arabidopsis: A Genetic
               Analysis Based on Mechano-Inducible Luminescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1998      
File        : a9416025

Award Number: 9416025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $597000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Davis dbowe@sequence.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9416025  Davis       This proposal describes a genetic approach towards the 
              molecular analysis of mechanosensing in Arabidopsis.  The  importance of
              mechanical forces on plant responses to the  environment have historically been
              greatly under-appreciated  and relatively little attention is given to this 
              environmental stimulus in basic plant research.  However,  numerous
              observations point to the fundamental importance of  mechano-stimulation in
              plants both for pattern formation and  for adaptive responses to the
              environment.  Although  physiological studies of these effects have been
              carried out  in a number of species, molecular and genetic  characterization of
              the mechanosensory pathway(s) involved  have not been described.  Such an
              analysis would develop an  understanding of not only mechanosensory signaling,
              but also  of  how this pathway intersects with and integrates with 
              transduction pathways from other environmental stimuli.  This laboratory has
              previously discovered both a rapid  molecular response -- induction of the TCH
              ("touch") genes -  - and morphogenetic effects of mechano-stimulation in 
              Arabidopsis.  More recently, it has been shown with  transgenic
              aqueorin-containing seedlings that, like tabacco,  Arabidopsis also responds to
              mechano-stimulation with an  immediate and brief elevatimn of cytosolic  Ca2+ .
               That  Ca2+ may act as 2nd messenger in transducing mechanical  stimuli into
              nuclear gene activation events is supported by  the observations that
              exogenously added Ca2+ can induce TCH  gene expression in cultured cells and
              that three of the five  identified TCH genes encode proteins with predicted
              CA2+ -  binding domains, one being calmodulin.  It is also possible  that
              either or both of these molecular mechano-responses  (Ca2+ elevation and TCH
              gene activation) may regulate  subsequent developmental events, e.g. inhibition
              of  elongation and delay of flowering.  Two classes of  transgenic Arabidopsis
              plants have been created, each of  which translates one of these early m
              echano-responses into a  light emission response.  One class, containing a 
              TCH4:luciferase (Luc) gene fusion, monitors TCH4 gene  activation; the other,
              containing a constitutively expressed  CaMV 35S:aqueorin gene fusion, monitors
              cytosolic CA2+  elevation.  A low-light imaging system has been set up, and 
              experimental conditions determined, to permit identification  of mechanosensory
              mutants with aberrant luminescent  phenotypes.  Such mutants will allow the
              specific targeting  of the early signaling events in mechanoperception, whereas
               mutants identified on the basis of altered morphogenetic  responses to
              mechano-stimulation may often be defective in  executing basic developmental
              responses (e.g. cell  elongation) common to many signaling pathways. 
              Mechanosensory mutants identified in these screens will be  subjected to
              genetic and physiological analysis to begin  establishing maps of signaling
              circuitry within the cell,  while efforts to map and clone the genes are
              undertaken to  initiate a molecular characterization of the mechanosensory 
              pathway.  %%%       This research aims to expand our understanding of  how 
              organisms sense and respond to physical (also referred to as  "mechanical)
              stimulation in a process known as  "mechanosensing".  Although the property of
              mechanosensing  is usually associated with the specialized sensory cells 
              involved in hearing, balance, proprioception and touch, it  is in fact a
              general property exhibited by cells when they  are touched, rubbed, flexed,
              stretched, compressed or  vibrated.  Such stimulation can arise both
              externally, as in  the flexing of plants and trees by wind and rain, or 
              internally, as in the rhythmic pulsing of blood against the  walls of the
              vascular system, and can profoundly influence  the growth, development and
              functioning of plants and  animals alike.  In humans and other mammals,
              mechanosensing  is critically involved in the bone-building processes  elicited
              by the compressive force of gravity on the  skeleton; in the normal and 
              pathological (e.g.  atherosclerotic) responses of the vascular lining to the 
              sheer forces generated by flowing blood; in the production  of surfactant by
              stretching lung cells, which eases the work  of lung expansion; in modifying
              the structure and properties  of skeletal muscle in response to stretching, or
              the  enlargement of an over-worked heart (cardiac hypertrophy) in  response to
              elevated blood pressure; and in the relaxation  of smooth muscle lining a
              distending bladder.  As for  plants, horticulturalists and farmers have long
              appreciated  that wind-induced flexing decreases both the size and yield  of
              crop plants, and that mechanostimulation in general slows  the development of
              plants.  It has been shown further that  mechanical perturbation affects a
              plant's responses to many  other environmental stimuli, such as gravity, light,
              cold  and drought stress.  Even a plant's differentiation into its 
              characteristic form can be altered by imposing external  physical constraints
              on the developing plant.  This research  program utilizes the model genetic
              organism, Arabidopsis ( a  small mustard plant), to dissect the mechanosensory
              process.  It has been engineered so as to have a novel phenotype  whereby it
              emits light in response to mechanostimulatory  treatments.  This easily
              assayable response should enable  the rapid identification of plants which have
              mutations in  components of the mechanosensory pathway, and will permit  the
              molecular characterization of the cell machinery  responsible for this cellular
              property.  Apparent  similarities so far uncovered in the mechanosensory 
              processes of plant and animal cells suggest that the fuller  knowledge of
              mechanosensing gained from this investigation  may well have biomedical as well
              as agricultural benefits.  ***
