Title       : The Effect of Composite Floor Behavior on the Failure of Steel Moment-Resistant
               Connections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1994 
File        : a9416363

Award Number: 9416363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto T. Leon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome F. Hajjar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1498,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416363  Leon  Unique failures by fracture to welded moment-resisting 
              connections in steel frames were observed after the  Northridge, California
              earthquake of January 17, 1994.  These failures can be categorized either as
              Ostructural,O  which is associated primarily with larger ductilities and  local
              strains in the steel members and welds than is  envisioned in design, or
              Ometallurgical,O which is  associated primarily with weld defects, poor weld 
              workmanship, lack of toughness in thick sections of wide-  flange members, and
              the presence of stress risers such as  backing plates.  The resolution of the
              primary cause of the  failures will determine the provisions of the seismic
              design  specifications which must be modified.  It will also dictate  the
              nature of the repair and rehabilitation that will be  required in steel frames,
              since the retrofit strategies will  differ depending on the primary cause of
              failure.    This project addresses the problem of structural behavior by 
              examining both the load and resistance aspects of the  problem.  With respect
              to resistance, this research will  investigate whether the presence of a
              composite floor slab  and the occurrence of yielding in the panel zone region
              of  the connection significantly increased the local strains  near the critical
              welds.  A combined analytical-experimental  investigation will be conducted to
              focus on the local  behavior of the welded connections, and in particular on
              the  region near the bottom beam flange, where most of the  fractures occurred.
               The experimental program will include  tests of three beam-to-column
              subassemblages, including one  with no slab, one with a slab having partially
              composite  action, and one with a slab having fully composite action. 
              Three-dimensional nonlinear continuum finite element  analysis will be used to
              quantify the local strains near the  welds and the effect on force transfer of
              partial composite  action at the concrete/steel interface.  With respect to 
              loading, this research will address th e probable force  distribution in the
              structure during the earthquake through  the use of a three-dimensional,
              nonlinear, transient dynamic  frame analysis program capable of tracking both
              horizontal  and vertical accelerations.    This research will have a profound
              effect on the design of  steel structures if it can be demonstrated that
              current  seismic analysis and design methodologies for steel frame 
              lateral-resistance systems are inadequate, since they  usually exclude the
              effect of the composite floor slabs on  the structural behavior.    This is a
              Northridge Earthquake project.  ***
