Title       : "Cracking Repair, and Ductility Enhancement of Large-Size Steel Beam-to-Column
               Connections Subjected to Dynamic CyclicLoading"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1995 
File        : a9416266

Award Number: 9416266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100067             (Estimated)
Investigator: Le-Wu Lu lwl0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 0000,1498,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9416266  Lu  One of the significant issues that were brought forth, quite 
              unexpectedly, by the Northridge earthquake is the  vulnerability of some welded
              moment connections in steel  frames subjected to dynamic ground shaking.  It
              has been  reported that in more than 50 low- and high-rise buildings  cracks
              were found in the beam-to column connections.  Two  distinct types of cleavage
              cracks were observed to form at  the beam bottom flange groove welded
              connection to the  column flange face.  Both types of cracks had their origin 
              at the natural crack-like condition that results with a left-  in-place steel
              backing bar.    Preliminary investigations indicates that the deposited weld 
              metal has unusually low fracture toughness.  However, the  mechanical and
              chemical properties of the structural steel  generally meet the AISC and ASTM
              standard requirements.  Of  concern is whether a connection should be
              retrofitted if it  has not detectable change.  The issue of how to "protect" 
              critical connections has been raised as well as approaches  to lessen strength
              and deformation demand on these  connections, has been raised as well as
              approaches to lessen  strength and deformation demand on these connections.  It
              is  vitally important that reliable connection design and  fabrication
              methodologies be established as soon as possible  so that structures
              constructed in the future would not  experience similar failures.    The
              research under this project has the following  objectives: (1) to determine the
              probable causes of  cracking, (2) to evaluate the adequacy of the recommended 
              repair methods, (3) to find rational and cost-effective ways  to improve
              connection performance and/or to reduce demand on  connections, and (4) to
              develop reliable design and  fabrication procedures for welded connections. 
              The research  plan includes six tasks: (1) studies of welding procedure  and
              quality of weld metal (including performing procedure  qualification tests on
              electrodes to be used for repairs to  insure adequate  fracture toughness), (2)
              dynamic experiments  on large-size connections, (3) dynamic experiments on 
              repaired connections, (4) dynamic experiments on modified  connections with
              enhanced ductility, (5) analytical studies,  and (6) development of
              recommendations.    A total of 16 tests will be conducted on 8 large-size 
              connection specimens with cyclically applied dynamic load.  The experiments
              will be performed in the ATLSS Laboratory at  Lehigh University.  The
              experiments will be performed in the  ATLSS Laboratory at Lehigh University.   
              An interdisciplinary team including structural engineers and  welding
              metallurgist will carry out the study.  The results  will permit the
              development of definitive recommendations  related to:  weld metal and welding
              procedure, repair of  cracked connections, and performance enhancement of 
              connections.  The study will also establish probable causes  of connection
              cracking.  ***
