Title       : Human Modification of Landscape Function in New England and Ireland: Land Use
               Legacies and Atmospheric Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9416005

Award Number: 9416005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219300             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Aber john.aber@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1314,9169,ENVI,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              9416005  Aber    The forested and agricultural landscapes of New England and
              Europe share a common history of long-term human land use and more recent
              increases in anthropogenic atmospheric deposition.  The commonality of
              interests between New England and Ireland are especially apparent.  Both are
              regions adjacent to areas of high air pollution emissions which experience
              variable and episodic pollution deposition events.  Both are humid regions
              initially covered mainly with deciduous broad-leaved forests.  Both have
              experienced near-complete deforestation for conversion to both row-crop
              agriculture and grazing.  A Critical difference between the two is that much of
              New England has become reforested through farm abandonment over the last 150
              years, while the Irish landscape is still dominated by agricultural use. 
              However, recent experience demonstrating that Ireland's mild climate can
              support the most rapid rates of forest growth in Europe has lead to an
              aggressive program of reforestation, mainly with conifers native to the
              northwestern U.S.  Impacts of reforestation on landscape esthetics, land use
              patterns and water quality have all been questioned.    Specifically, this
              project is designed 1) to combine existing biogeochemical data sets from the
              European EXMAN (EXperimental MANipulation of forest ecosystems) network with
              similar data set for the northeastern U.S., 2) to develop a 1 km resolution GIS
              for Ireland containing information on monthly average maximum and minimum
              temperature, monthly precipitation, monthly solar radiation and on the
              distribution of major soils types in order to predict potential forest
              productivity for Ireland using the PnET model, and to compare these results
              with those from a similar analysis for New England, and 3) to examine the
              long-term effects of land use on soil properties and function by comparing
              adjacent field and forest systems, adjacent forest systems with different land
              use histories, and forest sites with different vegetation types.
