Title       : Effect of Vertical Accelerations on the Seismic Response of Highway Bridges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1994 
File        : a9416525

Award Number: 9416525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70746              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Breen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose M. Roesset  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6387      FEMA-POST EARTHQUAKE INVEST
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1498,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9416525  Breen  The main objective of this project is the evaluation of the 
              potential effects of vertical ground accelerations, when combined  with the
              horizontal components of motion, on the seismic response  of highway bridges. 
              The effects to be examined are the stresses  in the piers and girders or the
              maximum ductility requirements if  there is inelastic action, and the potential
              slippage and  permanent displacements at the seats of the girders. 
              Recommendations will be made to incorporate appropriate  provisions in bridge
              design codes to account for them in the  seismic design.    A series of
              parametric studies will be conducted on simplified  models of highway bridges,
              assuming first completely linear  behavior, incorporating next the nonlinearity
              associated with the  behavior of the bearing pads and the possibility of
              sliding or  uplift of the girders' ends, and including finally the  possibility
              of nonlinear material behavior in the girders and  piers.  Two-dimensional,
              in-plane, models and t a more limited  extent with three-dimensional models
              will be used.  The  parametric studies will be complemented with the analyses
              of some  selected bridges from the Northridge area to compare the  theoretical
              predictions with the observed patterns of behavior  and reported damage. 
              Design recommendations will be made in  consultation with bridge designers and
              engineers involved in the  code writing process.    This study is expected to
              contribute to a better understanding of  the potential effects of vertical
              ground acceleration and of the  conditions under which these effects may become
              important and  should be accounted for in the design.  If the results were to 
              indicate that revisions should be made in the present bridge  design codes to
              improve the safety and reliability of highway  bridges in the epicentral area,
              the outcome of the project would  have a significant impact on the seismic
              design.    This is a Northridge Earthquake project.  ***
