Title       : Experimental Analysis of Animal Cell Division
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1995     
File        : a9416654

Award Number: 9416654
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Rappaport   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Desert Island Biol Lab
	      
	      Salsbury Cove, ME  04672    /   -

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F               _        @         C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                      _      
              _                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                   *   +   ,   -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9416654
              Rappaport   The process by which one cell divides into two provides the basis
              for life of all unicellular and multicellular organisms.  This process of cell
              division is something which has fascinated scientists from the time that
              technological advancement permitted recognition of and viewing of, a cell.  For
              as long as cell division has been studied it has provide an intractable puzzle
              concerning the mechanism by which the cell precisely divides its cytoplasmic
              mass in two  Some experiments demonstrate that the cell cytoplasm acquires a
              memory as to where the site of cytoplasmic division will occur, where as other
              experiments demonstrate that by repositioning the machinery that divides the
              cell s genetic material (i.e., the DNA), the site of cytoplasmic division can
              be repositioned.  This study will reposition both the genetic components of the
              cell, as well as certain cytoplasmic components, employing tools of
              micromanipulation to make these minute adjustments.  In other cases, cells in
              the process of dividing will be subjected to centrifugal force to reposition
              the components within the ce ll.  These experiments will address whether the
              cell actually has a  memory  of the correct site for cytoplasmic division or
              whether that site can vary depending upon the position of other components
              within the cell. %%%  The proposal addresses the fundamental question as to how
              a cell divides.  One of the most central characteristic of life is that
              anything that is alive can reproduce.  This proposal examines the mechanisms of
              reproduction at the cellular level.  The proposed experiments will define the
              mechanisms that very precisely divide the mass of one cell into two daughter
              cells. ***                                                Oh     +'  0         
                                           $       H       l                                 
                           D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       9416654    
                                      Una Solomon                         Una Solomon        
                      @     i?                            @                                  
                S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (              
                                                  )                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              @     i?                                       
                                                                          @                  
                                      Microsoft Word 6.0                                     
                              1                                                              
                                      ;                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                 e 3       e 
                                                                                           j 
                   j   j       j       j       j       j                                     
                                               =   1                                         
                                                                                             
               n   T       1   =                       j                                     
                                                 =               j       j                   
                                                                 j               j           
                                         ~               j       j       j       j           
                             7                                                               
                                               9416654 Rappaport   The process by which one
              cell divides into two provides the basis for life of all unicellular and
              multicellular organisms.  This process of cell division is something which has
              fascinated scientists from the time that technological advancement permitted
              recognition of and viewing of, a cell.  For as long as cell division has been
              studied it has provide an intractable puzzle concerning the mechanism by which
              the cell precisely divides its cytoplasmic mass in two  Some experiments
              demonstrate that the cell cytoplasm acquires a memory as to where the site of
              cytoplasmic division will occur, where as other experiments demonstrate that by
              repositioning the machinery that divides the cell s genetic material (i.e., the
              DNA), the site of cytoplasmic division can be repositioned.  This study will
              reposition both the genetic components of the cell, as well as certain
              cytoplasmic components, employing tools of micromanipulation to make these
              minute adjustments.  In other cases, cells in the process of dividing will be
              subjected to centrifugal force to repositi
