Title       : Simulation Studies of Entropically-Stabilized Quasicrystals and of Nanophase
               Materials (Materials Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9003018

Award Number: 9003018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110486             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine J. Strandburg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                Quasicrystalline materials are intriguing because of their fivefold          
              symmetry which is incompatible with periodic translational order.  Two         
              models of quasicrystal structure were originally proposed: the                 
              quasiperiodic crystal or "Penrose tiling" model and the icosahedral            
              glass model.  Dr. Strandburg's research, along with that of a number           
              of others, suggested a third possibility - the entropically stabilized         
              or "random tiling" model.  In this project she will use computer               
              simulation techniques to study:  (1) properties of the random tiling           
              model in three dimensions.  Results will allow comparisons with                
              experiment, to distinguish between the suggested structural models;            
              and (2) crystal growth and interface roughness of the random tiling            
              model.  Nanocrystals are compactions of nanometer-sized crystallites.          
              They have novel properties due to their large density of grain                 
              boundaries.  The anomalous stability of these materials against grain          
              growth will be investigated using a simple topological model.                  
                Interactive activities include a mentorship program pairing female           
              students with women scientists at Argonne and Fermilab; regular                
              gatherings of female physics students for discussion of issues of              
              interest to women in science; Ph.D. thesis research supervision; and           
              teaching introductory undergraduate physics and graduate solid state           
              physics.                                                                       
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
