Title       : Subcellular Localization of Signal Molecules and Their Effect on Plants
               (Biological Sciences)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1990      
File        : a9003555

Award Number: 9003555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina S. Allen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                This project will take a two-pronged approach to give greater                
              insight into how signals are perceived and transduced into responses           
              in plant cells.  (1) Rhizobium bacteria induce the formation of                
              nitrogen fixing nodules in plants and together they provide the major          
              input of biologically fixed nitrogen in agriculture.  Cellular and             
              molecular biological methods will be brought to bear on the analysis           
              of early events of nodulation (nod gene mechanisms) of root hairs in           
              the Rhizobium meliloti-alfalfa system (with Sharon Long).  A newly             
              developed method will allow bacterial cells and purified "nod factors"         
              to be applied to or injected into single root hair cells.  Video-              
              enhanced (including confocal laser scanning) light microscopic images          
              will permit the in vivo observations of induced responses in                   
              nodulating root hair cells, and these images will be correlated with           
              in vitro electron microscopic images.  Transient and longer response           
              changes in internal calcium ion levels, cytoskeletal elements,                 
              calmodulin and the endoplasmic reticulum will be examined.  A clearer          
              understanding of the cellular, genetic and molecular aspects of                
              nodulation should result.  (2) The photoreceptor phytochrome mediates          
              a host of light-activated developmental processes in plants.                   
              Monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies against phytochrome will be used          
              to detect and localize (video microscopically) the distribution of the         
              membrane-associated fractions of phytochrome in pea stem vesicles, and         
              if that is successful, in cells (with Winslow Briggs).                         
                Interactive activities will consist of a course entitled Gender and          
              Science, taught to undergraduate and graduate students from different          
              disciplines in the sciences and humanities; lectures in a "Microscopy          
              for Biologists" course on video-enhanced, computer-based microscopic           
              methods; several seminars; and organization of informal panel                  
              discussions on several topics pertinent to women (and men) in science.         
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
