Title       : Kidney Function in Lizards (Biological Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1992   
File        : a9003021

Award Number: 9003021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Beuchat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1141,9225,
Abstract    :
                Current knowledge of the patterns of water and solute regulation in          
              terrestrial vertebrates is based largely on studies of mammals, birds,         
              and amphibians.  Studies of reptiles are for the most part limited to          
              turtles and snakes, for which information has only just begun to               
              accumulate, and lizards remain largely unstudied.                              
                This research will exploit the ontogenetic variability in                    
              osmoregulatory patterns of lizards as the mesonephric kidney ceases to         
              function after birth and the metanephric kidney assumes its adult role         
              in water and ion balance.  These investigations are being conducted at         
              several levels:                                                                
                1) Physiological properties of the whole kidney, as well as of               
              individual nephrons, will be studied with respect to the regulation of         
              filtration and of ion and water balance.                                       
                2) The morphological changes that occur in the mesonephric and               
              metanephric kidneys with postnatal development will be documented in           
              terms of both the structural organizations of the tissue and the               
              ultrastructural changes at the cellular level.                                 
                3) Information from the physiological and morphological studies will         
              be integrated to yield a picture of the interrelationships between             
              structure and function.                                                        
                This study is the first to examine the osmoregulatory physiology and         
              morphology of a neonatal reptile and in fact represents one of only a          
              very few to study osmoregulation in any newborn vertebrate.  The               
              information gained from this study will not only significantly advance         
              our understanding of the patterns of osmoregulation in lizards and             
              other reptiles, but will also provide a basis for understanding the            
              ontogenetic changes in the osmoregulatory roles of the mesonephric and         
              metanephric kidneys both before and after birth in other vertebrates.          
                The interactive activities will involve team-teaching two courses in         
              Physiology as well as presenting research seminars in two departments          
              on campus; and participation in an ongoing seminar on "Women in the            
              Biological Sciences," which centers on gender issues.  Dr. Beuchat             
              will also teach a graduate seminar entitled "On Being a Scientist."            
              This seminar will focus on acquisition of information and skills               
              necessary for success in academic science that are not traditionally           
              part of the graduate curriculum.  The seminar will include discussions         
              of CV preparation, applying for research grants, giving a talk at a            
              meeting, getting a job in academia, and the ethics of science.                 
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
