Title       : Postdoctoral Fellowship in Studies in Science, Technology and Society.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1990       
File        : a9003430

Award Number: 9003430
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Stump   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1353,
Abstract    :
              Working with Dr. Peter Galison, Dr. Stump is undertaking a                     
              postdoctoral fellowship to study and conduct research at                       
              Stanford University.  His research is centering on                             
              methodological issues surrounding new approaches to the                        
              philosophy of science which have arisen since the overthrow                    
              of logical positivism in the 1960's and 70's.  Philosophers                    
              of science are now paying close attention to the history of                    
              science and to current scientific practice.  The use of                        
              evidence from case studies can now be taken for granted as                     
              central to studies of scientific methodology.  There are,                      
              however, competing views on what to do with historical                         
              evidence even among philosophers of science who agree that                     
              such evidence is important and who reject the                                  
              incommensurability thesis (i.e. that advocates of a                            
              "revolutionary" scientific paradigm cannot meaningfully speak                  
              to advocates of the old paradigm because the theoretical terms                 
              they use have radically different, "incommensurable" meanings)                 
              associated with some anti-positivists.  Dr. Stump is examining                 
              three methodological positions:  Thomas Nickles view, "local                   
              historicism,"  Larry Laudan's reworking of epistemology,                       
              "normative naturalism," and Ronald Giere's "cognitive science                  
              of science."  Dr. Stump first is clearly formulating these                     
              positions, paying special attention to the issue of defining                   
              what is meant by "local" or context specific methodological                    
              rules.  The second issue he is exploring is how to test                        
              general and prescriptive rules from the historical record and                  
              current scientific practice.  The deep issue to be tested is                   
              whether any substantial methodological rules are legitimately                  
              universal or if all must remain context specific as the local                  
              historicists claim.  He is attempting to settle this question                  
              using case studies from the history of science and current                     
              scientific practice.
