Title       : U.S.-Venezuela Cooperative Research: Long-Term AstronomicalSurveys Using
               Electronic Detectors on a Wide-Field Telescope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1994     
File        : a9003157

Award Number: 9003157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17298              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Chih-yuen Koo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lloyd B. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5945      VENEZUELA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1217,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support Drs. David Chih-yuen Koo, Joseph S.                    
              Miller, and Lloyd B. Robinson of the University of California                  
              Lick Observatory in a research collaboration with Dr. Gustavo                  
              Bruzual of the Centro de Investigaciones de Astronomia (CIDA)                  
              in Merida, Venezuela.  The purpose of the collaboration is to                  
              establish a long-term joint program involving two parts: the                   
              first involves travel and data-transfer support for a pilot                    
              instrumentation project to develop a large-format electronic                   
              (CCD) camera for use on the new CIDA 1-meter Schmidt telescope.                
              Lick and CIDA astronomers will then use this powerful                          
              combination to undertake various extensive new photometric                     
              and synoptic surveys of joint scientific interest.  One of                     
              these will be a major new long-term observational survey of                    
              20 areas in the sky.  Among many potential programs using                      
              these data will be a multicolor photometric survey to study                    
              the luminosity function of galaxies and a synoptic program to                  
              search for very distant supernovae.  The second part of the                    
              collaboration will attempt to develop new quantitative                         
              methods of analyzing extensive multidimensional data, aimed                    
              mainly at exploring the evolution of galaxies and cosmology.                   
                                                                                             
              Major observational surveys are some of the most productive                    
              astronomical tools to understand the universe.  Such surveys                   
              allow astronomers to measure distributions of properties of                    
              known objects and also to discover new, rare, or unusual                       
              classes of objects.  Despite their importance, photometric                     
              surveys that cover large areas, synoptic programs, or any                      
              long-term projects are all particularly difficult to undertake                 
              in today's climate of scarce telescope time.  The CIDA                         
              observatory in Venezuela has recently finished the construction                
              of a 1-meter Schmidt telescope that has overall optical                        
              properties similar to the one at Palomar and is the among the                  
              three largest in the northern hemisphere.  The collaborators'                  
              plan to develop imaging cameras for the telescope at CIDA using                
              charge coupled detectors (CCDs) of very large format developed                 
              at the Detector Laboratory at Lick, plus the ability of CIDA                   
              to provide dedicated observers time for long-term surveys                      
              should allow astronomers to undertake a variety of new                         
              surveys of unprecedented depth, time and areal coverage.
