Title       : The Rise of Molecular Biology: Roots in Protein Research and the Problematic
               Relationship to Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1991     
File        : a9003042

Award Number: 9003042
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela N. Creager   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1353,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Creager, a trained biochemist, is entering a postdoctoral                  
              training and research program at the History of Science Department             
              of Harvard University.  Working with Professor Everett Mendelsohn,             
              she is investigating two questions relating to the emergence of                
              molecular biology in this century.  First, how did the preexisting             
              program of research on proteins contribute to the ascension of                 
              molecular biology and how was that program changed by it?                      
              Physiologists and biochemists appropriated experimental methodology            
              from the physical sciences before molecular biologists exploited               
              this approach to answer fundamental questions in genetics.  Dr.                
              Creager is examining the development of this physico-chemical                  
              approach at the Physical Chemistry Laboratory at Harvard Medical               
              School in the first decades of this century.  Second, she is asking            
              is the concept of the molecular biological revolution of the life              
              sciences a suitable or accurate expression of the nature of                    
              scientific change in biology in this century.  She is studying the             
              relationship of molecular biology to the older field of                        
              biochemistry in order to assess whether molecular biology                      
              introduced a novel methodology or approach.  Her investigations of             
              whether developments in the life sciences in this century have been            
              continuous or discontinuous with previous traditions should provide            
              a basis for assessing the nature of scientific change in modern                
              biology.
