Title       : International Workshop on the Runup of Long Ocean Waves Onto a Coastline
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1991      
File        : a9003982

Award Number: 9003982
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : April 30,  1992      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39408              (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas E. Synolakis costas@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objectives of this workshop are: (1) to                                    
              review the state of the art of long wave                                       
              (tsunami) runup onto a coastline; (2) help                                     
              identify areas where knowledge is fragmented                                   
              and incomplete; (3) assist in the transfer of                                  
              information between theory and practice; (4)                                   
              address the issues of the maintenance of                                       
              numerical codes for runup predictions, and                                     
              the development of certain bench mark                                          
              problems for calibration and comparison                                        
              purposes; and (5) suggest future directions                                    
              in tsunami runup hazard mitigation research.                                   
                                                                                             
              The attendance of tsunami researchers from                                     
              Japan and the Soviet Union is an important                                     
              component in the planning of the workshop.                                     
              Tsunami research is very active in these                                       
              countries, but due to communication                                            
              difficulties, this research is not well known                                  
              in the United States.  Another goal of this                                    
              meeting is to bring together researchers who                                   
              do not normally interact.  This workshop                                       
              brings together coastal engineers,                                             
              oceanographers, geologists and mathematicians                                  
              engaged in the study of wave runup, thereby                                    
              improving the communication between                                            
              specialists from different scientific                                          
              disciplines who work on different aspects of                                   
              the runup problem.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The workshop addresses the related problem of                                  
              computer code maintenance: given the expense                                   
              of developing new codes or of resurrecting                                     
              existing ones, guidelines are needed for the                                   
              maintenance of existing codes.  The                                            
              dissemination of these codes is also of                                        
              concern.  Given the current capabilities of                                    
              electronic mail, it appears that this offers                                   
              a convenient method of dissemination, but                                      
              there is a need to agree upon protocols for                                    
              governing the transfer of research codes.                                      
                                                                                             
              It is expected that this workshop will have a                                  
              very positive effect on directing research                                     
              toward tsunami hazard mitigation, including a                                  
              more conspicuous effort to contribute to the                                   
              state of the art of tsunami warning systems                                    
              (which are the responsibility of the National                                  
              Weather Service within the National Oceanic                                    
              and Atmospheric Administration).
