Title       : An Investigation of the Isomporphism Conjecture, Self- Reducibility, and Reverse
               Mathematics (Pure Mathematics Logic)) and Theoretical Computer Science
               (Computer Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1991   
File        : a9003056

Award Number: 9003056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97095              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Goldsmith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                Complexity can be considered the primary foundation of theoretical           
              computer science.  It is the study of computability with limited               
              resources.  A problem that has stimulated a large body of work in              
              structural complexity is whether all sets equivalent under various             
              reductions are polynomially isomorhic.  In 1977, J. Hartmanis and              
              L.Berman conjectured that all NP-complete sets are polynomially                
              isomorphic.  This is still open.  In most instances of difficult               
              problems, it has been straightforward to construct oracles to decide           
              the problems either way.  In the case of the isomorphism conjecture,           
              this has not been true.  There is no known oracle for which the                
              isomorphism conjecture holds.                                                  
                Dr. Goldsmith will continue to investigate the isomorphism                   
              conjecture.  She will continue working on self-reducibility and                
              oracle accessibility.  She will investigate the difficulty of                  
              constructions in complexity theory by analyzing the complexity of the          
              statements of the theorems and the standard techniques for proving             
              them, using reverse mathematics.                                               
                Interactive activities include teaching an undergraduate course at           
              the introductory level where it is crucial that role models be                 
              provided.  Dr. Goldsmith will also participate in complexity theory            
              and logic seminars and will continue her participation in the                  
              Northeastern Set Theory Seminar.                                               
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers             
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a                     
              valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
