Title       : Characterization of Drosophila Genes Similar to Mammalian Transcription Factor
               Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1994   
File        : a9003908

Award Number: 9003908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Poole poole@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long term objectives of this project are to understand how                 
              genes interact to specify the body plan during development.                    
              Several tissue specific mammalian positive transcriptional                     
              activators share an approximately 150 amino acid region, the POU               
              domain. This proposal focuses on three newly isolated POU domain               
              genes from Drosophila: what are their structures, what are the                 
              natures of their protein products, when and where in development               
              are they expressed, and what are the effects of perturbing their               
              normal expression. The DNA sequences of cDNA clones originating                
              from each of the genes will show the expected structure of the                 
              protein products and will allow their comparison with the                      
              mammalian POU domain genes. Determination of the expression                    
              patterns of each gene by in situ hybridization and by                          
              immunohistochemical staining with antibodies will help indicate                
              what their roles in regulating development may be. Fly strains                 
              containing each of the three genes under heat inducible control                
              will be made. The effects of disrupting the normal expression of               
              the genes will also show the roles each may play in development.               
              %%%                                                                            
              A central question in developmental biology is how genes act to                
              produce a complex structure. This project is to investigate that               
              question by examining the regulation of genes involved in early                
              patterning events in the Drosophila embryo.
