Title       : Research Initiation: Solution Refinement by the Adaptive Mesh Superposition
               Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9003093

Award Number: 9003093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George Lea                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Fish fishj@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              One of the major challenges in computational mechanics is the                  
              development of numerical methods for resolving the structure                   
              of functions with high gradients in complicated geometries.  In                
              problems such as material failure due to localization and crack                
              propagation, or shocks in fluid dynamics, the regions of high                  
              gradients are of several orders of magnitude smaller than the                  
              size of the domain of interest.  Therefore, if a uniform finite                
              element mesh is used, a tremendous amount of elements                          
              would be needed to accurately resolve the structure of high                    
              gradients.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this research is to improve the quality of finite               
              element calculations in the regions of high gradients.  This is                
              accomplished by superimposing a patch of higher order                          
              hierarchical elements on the portion of the original finite                    
              element mesh where resolution is required.  Continuity of the                  
              displacement field is maintained by imposing homogenous                        
              boundaries between the original and superimposed fields.  The                  
              superimposed and the original mesh topology.  The research                     
              to be carried out as part of this project will consider the                    
              following aspects:                                                             
                                                                                             
               1.    The development and implementation of the                               
                     finite element mesh superposition method.                               
                                                                                             
               2.    Automation of the superposition method.                                 
                                                                                             
              High resolution of the fields will be obtained by controlling the              
              location of the superimposed field, its subdivision and the                    
              polynomial order of the superimposed elements.  The process                    
              of selection of these variables will be steered by a posteriori                
              information.  Pointwise error and the superimposed mesh will                   
              be designed to make a nearly optimal use of posterior                          
              information.
