Title       : Probability and Statistics for Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences (Atmospheric
               Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9003132

Award Number: 9003132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125528             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Jean Thiebaux   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                This project will involve the preparation of a graduate level text           
              that will introduce concepts and techniques of stochastic modeling and         
              statistical analysis in the contexts of ocean and atmospheric                  
              sciences.  The text, which will be based in part on lecture notes              
              prepared by the late R. Preisendorfer during his tenure at the Naval           
              Postgraduate School in the G. Haltnier Research Chair, will fill an            
              important gap in current scientific literature.  The concepts and              
              techniques that will be presented in the language and research                 
              settings of two allied geophysical sciences, provide basic tools for           
              diagnosis, analysis and prediction of dynamical systems.  Their                
              presentation in this form will make them, and their relationships with         
              the evaluation of hypotheses, more accessible in scientific terms.             
                Interactive activities include seminars on subjects of                       
              Dr. Thiebaux's previous research, teaching two graduate level courses,         
              organization of a workshop on professional careers in physical and             
              mathematical sciences, and interactions with faculty and students in           
              their customary university meetings.  The courses and the discussions          
              following seminars will complement the research component of the               
              academic visit, while they provide open opportunities for interactions         
              with students at a critical stage in the formation of their personal           
              professional expectations.  Finally, the workshop will provide a               
              concrete look at career opportunities, with the inspiration of women           
              who achieved major goals.                                                      
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
