Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Development Caenorhabditis Elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1993       
File        : a9003912

Award Number: 9003912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleanor M. Maine emmaine@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Regulatory information is passed from one cell or tissue type to               
              another during the development of multicellular organisms.                     
              Development of the nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans, has been                  
              described in detail at the cellular level and includes several                 
              instances where regulatory cell-cell interactions decide cell                  
              fate. This proposal investigates the mechanisms underlying two                 
              such regulatory interactions: induction of mitosis in the germ                 
              line and induction of pharyngeal muscle cells in the early                     
              embryo. These two events occur at different times and in                       
              different tissues but share a common component: the glp-1 gene.                
              Extensive genetic and molecular studies suggest that glp-1 acts                
              as a signal receptor in each of the induced tissues. Dr. Maine                 
              has generated extragenic suppressors of glp-1 mutations as a way               
              of identifying genes responsible for signal production in the                  
              inducing tissue and signal transduction in the induced tissue.                 
              This proposal outlines genetic and molecular studies and cell                  
              ablation experiments that are designed to analyze the role(s) of               
              these newly identified genes in the germ line and embryonic cell-              
              cell interactions. In particular, the proposal focuses on one                  
              gene identified as a recessive suppressors, sog-1, and on a set                
              of dominant suppressors that are linked to glp-1.                              
              %%%                                                                            
              The proposed studies are designed to investigate how cell fate                 
              is specified during the development of multicellular organisms.                
              In particular, the experiments will focus on the cell-cell                     
              interactions that  are reguired to specify the fates of                        
              individual cells as they differentiate into one or another adult               
              cell type.
