Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Ranking Models with Covariates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1990       
File        : a9003383

Award Number: 9003383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan Izenman                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57795              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Fligner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Verducci  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Critchlow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research in statistical methods involves probability                 
              models for the rankings that result when a group of subjects each              
              independently ranks a set of items from first place to last                    
              place. These include Thurstone order statistics models, ranking                
              models induced by paired comparisons and models based on                       
              distances between rankings. In many practical problems the                     
              probability of observing any particular ranking is affected by                 
              the values of one or more independent variables, or subject                    
              covariates, associated with the subjects performing the ranking.               
              In a different but related situation, covariates associated with               
              the items can be used to describe the probability distribution of              
              the ranking.  A principal goal of the proposed research is to                  
              investigate the consequences of different methods of                           
              incorporating the information contained in both item and subject               
              covariates. The performance of the methods, which allow for the                
              development of formal inferential and graphical techniques for                 
              studying the effects of the covariates, will be evaluated. A                   
              semi-parametric approach will be described to detect systematic                
              differences between rankings which arise in pairs, such as pre-                
              and post-treatment rankings produced by the same subject.                      
              Residual spectral analytic techniques will be applied to ranking               
              models in general and covariate models in particular. Diagnostics              
              based on the distributional properties of the residuals will be                
              developed.
