Title       : Molecular Movements in Bioenergy Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9003692

Award Number: 9003692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49779              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel F. Morales   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julian Borejdo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Burghardt  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This application proposes an international cooperation among                   
              three American and three Soviet laboratories.  The scientific                  
              objective is to define the relative movements between myosin                   
              subfragment 1 (S-1) and actin (in complex) under the influence                 
              of ATP hydrolysis going on in S-1.  These movements, underlying                
              muscle contraction and some cell motility, are thought to                      
              accomplish energy transduction (free energy of ATP hydrolysis                  
              to mechanical (force x distance) work).  Optically-detected                    
              molecular probes are to be used in pairs, either to detect                     
              correlated re-orientation or to detect change in scalar                        
              distances, the purpose being to decide whether the movements                   
              in transduction are a global rotation of S-1 caused by very                    
              small internal displacements (present "standard model") or                     
              whether internal movements encompass most of S-1 (as in                        
              interdomain movement).  Efforts will be made---using                           
              differential scanning calorimetry circular dichroism---to                      
              obtain indications of domain structure, and also to examine the                
              effect of crosslinks on the putative movements of these                        
              domains.  Attempts also will be made to develop both physical                  
              (S-1 on oriented pure F-actin) and molecular graphic models in                 
              order to simplify the foregoing studies.  Besides the six                      
              senior investigators, several students and young associates                    
              would participate in this work.  The principal significance of                 
              this proposal is basic.  Since no biological energy transducer                 
              has yet been explained, the possibility of discovering design                  
              features also may be of practical interest.
