Title       : Destructive Field Testing of a R C Bridge as a Benchmark to Validate FE Modeling
               and Analysis of RC Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1990 
File        : a9003953

Award Number: 9003953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R H. Iding   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmet E. Aktan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              F D. Heidbrink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald F. Meinheit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wiss Janney Elstner&Assoc
	      
	      Northbrook, IL  60062    /   -

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              It is proposed to exploit a destructive bridge test for the                    
              advancement of analytical modeling and nonlinear analysis of                   
              reinforced concrete structures.  Collaborating researchers from the            
              University of Cincinnati and Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc.            
              will design, conduct and document the test as a benchmark                      
              experiment for validating and calibrating RC bridge analytical                 
              finite-element modeling and analysis.  Instrumentation will be                 
              designed and installed to measure local and global responses to                
              serve this purpose.  Information will be documented, archived and              
              disseminated to permit analytical model generation and response                
              simulation by analytical researchers.  The test will provide a                 
              unique opportunity to identify unknown and/or unmeasured phenomena             
              influencing advanced limit-state responses of aged and deteriorated            
              constructed facilities so that these may be analytically simulated.            
                                                                                             
              The principal investigators from WJE and UC are respectively the               
              vice-chairman and a member of the standing joint ASCE-ACI Committee            
              on Finite Element Analysis of Reinforced Concrete Structures.
