Title       : Red Blood Cell Lysis by Schistosoma Mansoni
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1990      
File        : a9003052

Award Number: 9003052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret R. Kasschau   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                The overall objective of this project is to complete                         
              characterization of the hemolytic agent(s) from the human blood                
              parasite Schistosoma mansoni.  First it is planned to determine the            
              chemical identity of the lytic agent(s) as well as its metabolic               
              precursors using HPLC techniques and radioactive precursors.  Previous         
              studies suggest that the lytic agent can influence the organization            
              and dynamics of the red blood cell (RBC) membrane, therefore, it is            
              proposed to use fluorescence photobleaching recovery techniques to             
              determine changes which occur in the RBC membrane during the lytic             
              process.  Finally, the localization of the lytic activity within live          
              schistosomes will be determined.  Through this study it is hoped to            
              increase our knowledge on factors influencing red cell membrane                
              dynamics as well our knowledge on direct interactions between a human          
              parasite and the cells of its host.                                            
                The interactive component will involve lecturing in the regular              
              parasitology course offered to Harvard graduate students, presenting a         
              seminar series for graduate and undergraduate students on "Careers for         
              Women in Science," and participating in the Women in Academic Medicine         
              Network."  In addition, Dr. Kasschau will discuss careers in Biology           
              and medicine with interested high school students.                             
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
