Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Structural, Electronic and Magnetic
               Properties of Bulk Solids, Surfaces and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1992 
File        : a9003240

Award Number: 9003240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14510              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Freeman art@freeman.phys.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5942      KOREA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1747,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds to permit Dr. Arthur J. Freeman,                     
              Department of Physics, Northwestern University, to pursue with                 
              Dr. Jae Il Lee, Department of Physics, Inha University, Dr. Soon               
              Cheol Hong, Department of Physics, University of Ulsan, and Dr.                
              Byung Il Min, Department of Physics, Pohang Institute of Science               
              and Technology (POSTECH), for 24 months, a program of cooperative              
              research on structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of                 
              bulk solids, surfaces, and interfaces.  In this project, these                 
              scientists will use newly developed computational                              
              methods/algorithms which are the product of their past                         
              collaboration.  A wide range of phenomena will be investigated                 
              jointly using these computational methods, including the                       
              structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of metals,                     
              semiconductors, insulators, and their compounds, overlays, and                 
              superlattices.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is based on the assumption that the properties of                
              macroscopic samples of solid material are related to and can be                
              derived from the electronic structure of individual molecules and              
              atomic building blocks of that material.  A high degree of                     
              reliability  concerning predictions of physical and chemical                   
              properties and phenomena has been achieved using highly                        
              sophisticated, fully self-consistent local density computer codes              
              for the calculation of electronic structures of these materials.               
              A wide range of phenomena will be investigated.  Applications                  
              include understanding the properties and design of new                         
              intermetallic compounds and artificial materials.  The                         
              collaborators are highly respected scientists in the field of                  
              this research.  Their past collaboration has resulted in                       
              significant contributions to the literature of this field.  This               
              project will provide valuable support for the PI's work with the               
              (U.S.) multi-institutional Materials Research Group on the                     
              Magnetic Properties of Materials.  This project is relevant to                 
              the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program                   
              which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and              
              Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of                        
              scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through              
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  Korean                           
              participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science                 
              and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
