Title       : Measurement and Analysis of Kodaikanal Solar Images, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1993 
File        : a9003848

Award Number: 9003848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1990  
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49600              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. R. Sivaraman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst of Astrophys
	      
	      Bangalore, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 5951,
Abstract    :
              Description:  Under this project, scientists from the U.S.                     
              and from India will work to enlarge the data base on the                       
              motion of sunspots.  The source of the new data is the Indian                  
              white-light solar plates began in 1905 in the Kodaikanal                       
              Observatory, which is of excellent quality.  The combination                   
              of the Kodaikanal and Mount Wilson data could make the finest                  
              sunspot data set in existence.  It will provide many times                     
              the number of sunspots now available for statistical studies                   
              of rotation and latitude drift and spot areas.  This will                      
              increase the precision of the averaged results for the                         
              cycle-related rotation rate changes found in the data set.                     
              It will also increase the confidence in small-amplitude                        
              effects which is low given the the limits of the U.S. data                     
              set, as well as increase the potential for detecting                           
              low-amplitude effects.  These measured drifts have an                          
              important bearing on the large-scale dynamics of the solar                     
              convection zone and is believed to be responsible for the                      
              11-year activity cycle.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Scope:  The U.S. P.I. Dr. Robert Howard, of the National                       
              Solar Observatory (NSO) in Tucson, AZ, and the Indian P.I.                     
              Dr. K.R. Sivaraman, of the Indian Institute of Astrophysics,                   
              (IIA) in Bangalore, India have collaborated in earlier                         
              studies under the Mount Wilson Program funded by NSF/AST.                      
              This action extends and formalizes the international                           
              collaboration by providing funds to the NSO for the per diem                   
              of the Indian scientists, ans providing IIA with funds in                      
              Indian currency for travel to the U.S. and for computer                        
              operation for digitization of data.                                            
                                                                                             
              Funding:  This project is being funded under two grants:                       
                                                                                             
                     1.  To The Association of Universities for Research in                  
                         Astronomy $10,500 plus $36,355 in Indian Currency                   
                                                                                             
                     2.  To the Indian Insitute of Astrophysics $49,600 in                   
                         Indian Currency.
