Title       : Proteins Associated with the Carbon Dioxide Concentrating Mechanism of
               Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9003917

Award Number: 9003917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Moroney btmoro@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Unicellular algae, including Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, have the               
              capacity to concentrate CO2 internally, allowing these organisms               
              to grow photoautotrophically at CO2 concentrations lower than                  
              most higher plants can tolerate.  This CO2 concentrating                       
              mechanism is inducible; it is present only in cells that have                  
              been grown with limiting CO2 conditions.  An important aspect of               
              this Ci (Ci = CO2 + HCO3- + CO3-2) accumulation system is located              
              in the chloroplast.  Intact chloroplasts isolated from low CO2-                
              grown C. reinhardtii cells retain the ability to accumulate Ci to              
              much higher levels than intact chloroplasts isolated from high                 
              Co2-grown cells.  Five polypeptides that are specifically induced              
              by growth on low CO2 and are missing in the high CO2-requiring                 
              strain CIA-5 have been identified.  One of these proteins is a                 
              carbonic anhydrase located in the periplasmic space and another                
              is a 36 kDa membrane associated polypeptide located in intact                  
              chloroplasts.  The other three proteins are soluble and their                  
              function is unknown.  The role of the chloroplast in Ci                        
              accumulation is being characterized by determining Ci uptake in                
              intact chloroplasts from wild-type and high CO2-requiring C.                   
              reinhardtii strains.  The role of the 36 kDa polypeptide in this               
              uptake process is also being investigated.  This protein is                    
              located on the chloroplast, possibly in the chloroplast envelope,              
              and may be responsible, in part, for the increase in Ci uptake                 
              observed in chloroplasts from low CO2-grown cultures.  The                     
              chloroplast carbonic anhydrase a low abundance, constitutively                 
              made protein that is required for efficient CO2 fixation is also               
              being studied.  The role of the three other low CO2-induced                    
              polypeptides is unknown.  A cDNA library is being made to mRNA                 
              isolated from low CO2-grown cells and differentially screened                  
              with cDNA made from mRNA from low and high CO2-grown cells.  This              
              will identify many of the low CO2-inducible genes required for                 
              growth on low CO2.  The eventual characterization of the proteins              
              of this transport system will increase our understanding of the                
              low CO2 adjustment in algae and the role of the chloroplast in                 
              this photosynthetic adaptation.                                                
                                                                                             
              Photosynthesis involves the photoassimilation of carbon dioxide                
              (CO2) and the photoevolution of oxygen (O2).  Partly due to this               
              gas exchange activity of plants, earth's atmosphere changed in                 
              composition from one that was high in CO2 and low in O2 to one                 
              that is high in O2 and low in CO2.  Under current conditions, the              
              rate of CO2 fixation and thus plant growth, can be limited by                  
              CO2.  Many unicellular algae can adapt to low CO2 conditions so                
              that they become very efficient in their utiliation of CO2 for                 
              photosynthesis.  This adaptation results from an enhancement of                
              the cells' ability to transport and accumulate inorganic carbon.               
              These studies characterize the protein components required for                 
              the efficient use of CO2 in the green alga Chlamydomonas                       
              reinhardtii.  Emphasis is placed on the role of the chloroplast                
              in inorganic carbon acquisition.
