Title       : Regulation of Ina in Escherichia Coli (Biology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9003129

Award Number: 9003129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 29,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77137              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan L. Slonczewski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                A novel pH-dependent locus ina, mapping at 48.5 min, has been                
              isolated through lacZ operon fusions in Escherichia coli.  This locus          
              exhibits pH-dependent induction by membrane-permeable weak acids and           
              by protonophores, but not by external acidification alone.  These data         
              could be explained by the detection of internal acidification by ina.          
              The ina fusions will be cloned and sequenced, and the sequence                 
              analyzed for promoters and regulatory sites.  Acid-sensitivity of the          
              regulatory DNA will be tested by in vitro transcription of the cloned          
              fusions.  The possible regulatory role of H-palindromes, which produce         
              H-form DNA at low pH, will be investigated.  Regulator genes for ina           
              will be isolated, by screening Tn10 insertions and                             
              ethylmethanesulfonate mutants for isolates which are either                    
              constitutive or uninducible.                                                   
                Interactive activities include teaching a course in molecular                
              biology, presenting a public lecture on the topic of women and                 
              science, and forming a support group for young scientists attempting           
              to balance competitive research careers with family life.                      
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
