Title       : Number Theory, Combinatorics and Representation Theory (Mathematics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  1991    
File        : a9003126

Award Number: 9003126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106732             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wen-Ching W. Li   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                This project consists of two independent parts.  The first part              
              arises from Dr. Li's recent constructions of Ramanujan graphs and              
              graphs with small eigenvalues using Deligne's estimate of generalized          
              Kloosterman sums and using the Riemann hypothesis for curves over              
              finite fields.  Such graphs have wide applications and all the known           
              constructions are number-theoretic.  Continuing the theme of her work,         
              she proposes to obtain estimates of interesting exponential sums from          
              the Riemann hypothesis and Weil conjectures, to study which Ramanujan          
              graphs she constructed come from the quotient of the tree attached to          
              PGL2 by arithmetic discrete subgroups, and to construct other                  
              Ramanujan graphs using number theory.  The second part is in                   
              representation theory.  It concerns proving Tunnell's multiplicity             
              formula for representations of a local quaternion group using the              
              formula for the reduced traces expressed in terms of the associated y-         
              factors and understanding the role of the y-factors attached to degree         
              two irreducible representations of local Weil groups.  The information         
              will enhance the understanding of how the y-factors determine the              
              classes of representations.                                                    
                In addition, Dr. Li will teach an advanced graduate course entitled          
              "General Reciprocity Laws," and she will present several seminar talks         
              in number theory, representation theory and combinatorics.                     
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering by         
              providing greater visibility for women scientists and engineers                
              employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.  By               
              encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a valuable            
              investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
