Title       : Women and Aggression in Aboriginal Australia: A Cross- Cultural Exploration
               (Anthropology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9003815

Award Number: 9003815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84852              (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria K. Burbank   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                The principle objectives of this research are to learn new computer          
              skills, conduct analyses of 765 cases of men's and women's aggressive          
              behavior in an Australian Aboriginal community, and to integrate the           
              results of these quantitative analyses with material on the                    
              sociocultural context in which these cases occur in a book titled:             
              "Fighting Sticks and Spears:  Women and Aggression -- An                       
              Exploration." The publication will contribute to an understanding of           
              how and why women everywhere or anywhere, act aggressively.  Detailed          
              illustrations will be presented of acts of female aggression and               
              victimization and their sociocultural context.  It will also                   
              integrate the Aboriginal data with those of other studies in order to          
              address a number of current issues about female aggression including           
              gender/sex differences in aggression, female competition, and women's          
              roles in family violence.  Finally, it will analyze the impact of              
              Western theories and stereotyped on the study of female aggression             
              and victimization and suggest appropriate modifications of current             
              theory.                                                                        
                Interactive activities will include teaching a graduate seminar on           
              women and aggression as well as a team.taught undergraduate course on          
              Australian Aboriginal Ethnography.                                             
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and                       
              engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.         
              By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a                  
              valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
