Title       : Induction of PR1 Protein Synthesis in Nicotiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1992      
File        : a9003711

Award Number: 9003711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $413102             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel F. Klessig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              As a model to study how plants react to pathogenic attack the                  
              response of tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum) to tobacco mosaic virus                
              (TMV) is being investigated.  In response to a variety of                      
              pathogenic and chemcial agents tobacco plants produce large                    
              amounts of pathogenesis-related (PR) proteins whose synthesis has              
              been associated with resistance to TMV.  This laboratory has                   
              focused on the synthesis, location, and function of the PR1                    
              family of these proteins.  Salicylic acid (SA) has been used                   
              extensively as an inducer of PR proteins and local acquired                    
              resistance to TMV.  These observations together with the recent                
              finding that endogenous SA levels rose at least 20-fold in leaves              
              of TMV-resistant, but not susceptible, tobacco after TMV                       
              inoculation suggest that SA may be part of the natural induction               
              pathway following TMV infection.  A major objective is to                      
              determine the role of SA in induction of PR1 genes.  This may                  
              provide an important avenue to define intermediate steps in the                
              signal transduction pathway that leads to the defense response                 
              following pathogenic assault.  As part of this analysis the cis                
              acting element(s) and trans acting factor(s) necessary for SA                  
              induction will be defined.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Many plants respond to viral infection by the production of                    
              certain proteins which have been termed "pathogenesis-related                  
              proteins".  The goal of this research is to understand the                     
              molecular signals by which the genes for pathogenesis-related                  
              protein are activated.  The results of this research will                      
              contribute to basic knowledge of the mechanisms of plant defense               
              against viruses.
