Title       : The Stable Isotope and Minor Element Geochemistry of Iron- Rich Chemical
               Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9003108

Award Number: 9003108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110013             (Estimated)
Investigator: Crayton J. Yapp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Chemical sediments dominated by iron(III) oxides are a                         
              manifestation of the unique combination of abundant free oxygen                
              and liquid water found in the surface and many near-surface                    
              environments of Earth.  Research performed in this laboratory has              
              shown that the stable isotope ratios of oxygen, hydrogen and carbon            
              in certain iron(III) oxides contain information on ancient                     
              temperatures, sources of water and organic contributions to aqueous            
              carbonate systems associated with iron(III) oxide precipitation.               
              In addition trapped CO2 abundance data from geothites may be related           
              to ambient CO2 partial pressures at the time of mineral formation.             
              The oxygen isotope systematics of ubiquitous phosphate-iron(III)               
              oxide pairs will be studied to determine if they contain                       
              information on paleotemperatures.  Knowledge obtained from this and            
              our previous studies of iron(III) oxides will be applied to                    
              isotopic, chemical and attendant petrographic investigations of                
              Phanerozoic oolitic ironstones, recent bacterially mediated                    
              iron(III) oxide precipitate and Late Precambrian banded iron                   
              formation(BIF).  Fe(III) carbonate abundance and carbon-13                     
              variations in a Late Ordovician weathering surface could provide               
              knowledge of ambient CO2 partial pressures and the role of organic             
              matter in this ancient environment.  Oxygen, hydrogen and carbon               
              abundance and isotopic data from tropical oolitic ironstones that              
              date from global "greenhouse" and "icehouse" intervals in the                  
              Phanerozoic will be obtained.  The ancient tropical temperatures               
              and sources of water will be compared for the deposits that                    
              represent these putative global climatic extremes.  Oxygen isotopic            
              measurements of a Late Precambrian quartz-hematite BIF should                  
              provide insight into the depositional environment of this deposit.             
              Paleoclimatic data of the type to be obtained in this research are             
              essential to an ultimate understanding of the possible link between            
              global tectonics and the types of climatic regimes that could                  
              produce apparent tropical continental ice sheets in the Late                   
              Precambrian or polar ice sheets in the Late Ordovician.
