Title       : PHRASING
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9003087

Award Number: 9003087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218741             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Swartout swartout@ict.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Bateman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cecile Paris  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              When humans use language, they show an essential responsiveness                
              to their hearers.  When language is automatically generated, it                
              is similarly necessary to ensure that language is appropriate for              
              its intended audience.  Much previous research in computational                
              linguistics has focused on building user models and selecting                  
              information from a knowledge base to present to the user.  It is               
              important, however, that the phrasing of a text be also tailored               
              to the hearer - otherwise it may be just as ineffective as texts               
              which rely on knowledge the hearer does not have.  The                         
              realization that situations systematically affect language can                 
              greatly help the tailoring process:  given appropriate                         
              classifications of situation-types, the consequences of these                  
              situations on language can be specified, and suitable language                 
              can be produced.  In a pilot study that involved generating                    
              explanations for an expert system tailored to three user types,                
              previous work has shown that is is possible to specify the type                
              of language required in a given situation and to build a text                  
              planning system that uses that specification to control phrasing               
              of its text.  This research will extend that work.  The goal is                
              to create a framework within which it is possible to gain                      
              systematic control over phrasing by designing methodologies and                
              mechanisms by which the systematic relationship between                        
              situations and language can be found, represented, and used to                 
              tailor generated texts.
