Title       : Mechanisms of Phytotoxin-Host Membrane Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9003398

Award Number: 9003398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon Y. Takemoto jon@biology.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Syringomycin is a peptide phytotoxin produced by the bacterium,                
              Pseudomonas syringae pv. syringae.  The toxin is a major                       
              virulence factor in many plant and crop diseases.  Previous work               
              supported by NSF showed that syringomycin's primary site of                    
              action is the host plasma membrane.  Several plasma membrane-                  
              associated events caused by syringomycin were demonstrated                     
              including changes in K+ efflux, Ca2+ influx, H+-pump ATPase                    
              activity, membrane charge potential, and protein phosphorylation.              
              Also, the structure of syringomycin was determined.  Further                   
              studies on the mechanism of action of the syringomycin are being               
              pursued.  The studies exploit the action of the toxin on the                   
              yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Preliminary studies revealed                  
              that syringomycin affects S. cerevisiae in ways which resemble                 
              its effects on plant plasma membranes.  Syringomycin-resistant,                
              temperature-sensitive mutants are being isolated and                           
              characterized.  The normal versions of the defective genes are                 
              being isolated by gene complementation techniques and                          
              characterized.  These genes encode proteins that function in the               
              syringomycin response pathway.  Revertants with second-site                    
              suppressor mutations are being studied to determine how the                    
              identified gene products interact in the syringomycin response                 
              pathway.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This project is significant because it determines how an                       
              important, ubiquitous bacterial phytotoxin causes plant disease                
              and provides basic information about the function, structure and               
              regulation of the plant cell plasma membrane.
