Title       : Plan-Based Models of Discourse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1992        
File        : a9003841

Award Number: 9003841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125181             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Allen james@cs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory N. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project aims to develop a formal and implementable theory of              
              the communicative interactions that can occur within a man-                    
              machine dialog.  It will develop a plan-based model of the                     
              interaction - explicity representing the differing beliefs of the              
              system and the user, as well as their mutually shared beliefs                  
              arising from the dialog, and representing the sentences in the                 
              dialog explicitly as actions - both as speech acts reflecting                  
              immediate intentions, and as discourse acts, signalling the                    
              structure of the dialog.  The goal is to develop a domain-                     
              independent model of dialog interaction, focusing on those                     
              aspects that allow the system and user to monitor how well the                 
              dialog is understood.  In particular, the intent is to account                 
              for the prevalent acknowledgement behavior in dialog, and to                   
              provide a general account of clarifications and correction                     
              subdialogs.  The work also will examine how the planning model                 
              affects the actual interpretation of the sentences in the dialog,              
              concentrating on the effects the model has on speech act                       
              interpretation, and the interpretation of tense and aspect, and                
              the generic/specific distinction.  As a result, the plan-based                 
              approach to language will be brought into much closer                          
              correspondence to the actual linguistic behavior apparent in                   
              natural dialogs.
