Title       : Support for the Association of Biomolecular Resource Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1993   
File        : a9003100

Award Number: 9003100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155120             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Crabb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : W. Alton Jones Cell Sci.
	      
	      Lake Placid, NY  12946    /   -

NSF Program : 1102      BIOLOGICAL FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This award will provide funds to a group of scientists who                
              direct microchemical facilities that serve large numbers of                    
              investigators at their own and other institutions.  The funds will             
              be used to obtain and distribute synthetic peptides useful for                 
              measuring the sensitivity and accuracy of protein sequencing                   
              procedures at these and many similar facilities, and to increase               
              cooperation and contact between such facilities.  The overall aim              
              of the project is to increase the quality of service provided by               
              the facilities.                                                                
                   The use of microchemical techniques for the sequencing and                
              synthesis of protein and DNA now occupies an important role in                 
              modern biology.  Because of the substantial investment in equipment            
              and personnel required, such work is most often performed in                   
              central facilities that serve a large group of investigators.                  
              There are now over a hundred such facilities in the U.S.  This                 
              award will help insure that the service provided by each is of a               
              uniform high quality and is consistent with the state of the art               
              in protein sequencing.
