Title       : Mechanism(s) of Plant Response to Suboptimal and Adverse Irradiance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1990     
File        : a9003928

Award Number: 9003928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce L. Umminger                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anastasios Melis melis@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Irradiance stress directly affects the structure of the photosystems in        
              plant chloroplasts.  These adjustments apparently help optimize                
              photosynthesis and allow the plant to retain efficient growth under            
              suboptimal and/or adverse irradiance conditions.  The overall goal of          
              this research is to understand the fundamental mechanism of plant              
              response to suboptimal and adverse irradiance.  Components of thylakoid        
              membranes which are found in chloroplasts will be studied.  Specific           
              goals of this proposal are to identify the primary receptor of the             
              signal (irradiance stress) and elucidate the first step in the signal          
              transduction and transformation process leading to a plant response.           
              Experimental methodologies and approaches to be employed include               
              absorbance difference spectrophotometry, gel electrophoresis and               
              immunoblot (western) analysis, radioactive labelling and                       
              autoradiography, and DNA-RNA hybridization (northern analysis).                
                                                                                             
              This research addresses a novel idea, namely that photosynthetic               
              pigments act in the primary step of adverse irradiance recognition and         
              that signal transduction is mediated by electron transport reactions in        
              the thylakoid membrane.  There is preliminary evidence to suggest that         
              such a molecular feedback control mechanism guides plant response to           
              irradiance stress and this proposal will examine this mechanism.               
              Results from this research will improve our understanding of the               
              mechanisms by which photosynthetic plants perceive and adapt to                
              irradiance stress including ultraviolet radiation (UV-B).  This will           
              have implications for predicting plant response to potential increases         
              in UV-B that may result from depletion of stratospheric ozone in the           
              atmosphere.
