Title       : Simulation of High Speed Pseudomorphic Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1993   
File        : a9003518

Award Number: 9003518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1990   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ting-wei Tang ttang@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A specific objective is to extend the                                          
              state-of-the-art of the numerical modeling                                     
              of lattice-matched heterojunction                                              
              semiconductor devices to strained-layer                                        
              (pseudomorphic) heterojunction                                                 
              semiconductor devices for high speed                                           
              and/or high frequency applications.  Over                                      
              the last three years, we have modeled                                          
              A1GaAs/GaAs and InGaAs/InA1AsHBTs.  Using                                      
              a finite difference drift-diffusion                                            
              equations (DDE) solver and numerical                                           
              small-signal a.c. analysis, terminal                                           
              characteristics as well as fT and fmax of                                      
              these devices have been simulated.  In                                         
              view of recent interest in strained-layer                                      
              semiconductors, it is natural to extend                                        
              our current research to the modeling of                                        
              HBTs involving strained layers.  Focus                                         
              will be placed on Si1-x Gex/Si and InxGa1-x                                    
              As/GaAs systems.  The basic heterojunction                                     
              structures to be modeled are vertical                                          
              devices having strained double                                                 
              heterojunctions with either emitter-top or                                     
              collector-top configurations.  The Monte                                       
              Carlo method will be used to determine                                         
              fundamental material properties, e.g.                                          
              mobility, different coupling constants                                         
              needed for proper modeling of non-                                             
              stationary effects such as overshoot, and                                      
              to perform full regional analysis of                                           
              selected regions where these effects are                                       
              suspected to be taking place, e.g. in the                                      
              base-collector region of an HBT.  In the                                       
              next step, calculations will be performed                                      
              using hydrodynamic equations obtained from                                     
              the first three moments of the Boltzmann                                       
              transport equation with the transport                                          
              coefficients derived form the MC data.                                         
              The results of these calculations will                                         
              enable us to calculate both steady state                                       
              d.c. and small-signal a.c. parameters,                                         
              ranging from current gain to fT and fmax.                                      
              Simulation results will be compared with                                       
              either published data or with actual                                           
              device measurements to be carried out in                                       
              collaboration with researchers of the IBM                                      
              Corporation.  It is hoped that this                                            
              research will bring heterojunctions                                            
              advantages to today's well developed                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              silicon technology and also take GaAs                                          
              technology one step further in the race                                        
              for the fastest semiconductor device.
