Title       : Public Sector Accountability and Control (Decision, Risk, and Management
               Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 2,  1991    
File        : a9003242

Award Number: 9003242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 31,  1990  
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133359             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivian L. Carpenter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 9225,
Abstract    :
                This research will apply interdisciplinary research methods to               
              public sector accountability issues.  Use of interdisciplinary                 
              methods will be enhanced through a joint association with the College          
              of Engineering and the Institute for Public Policy Studies.                    
              Public sector accountability and performance evaluation will be                
              addressed by investigating the choice of accounting practices and the          
              nature and amount of auditing performed by state and local                     
              governments.  This will expand on the research in public sector                
              decision.making by:  (1) conducting field studies to gain a greater            
              understanding of the organizational factors and conditions which               
              influence government accounting practices, budgetary allocations, and          
              auditing choice; (2) using the organizational theory literature and            
              insights from the field studies to contribute to the theory of                 
              accounting and auditing choice under conditions of uncertainty; and            
              (3) empirically testing the implications drawn from the organizational         
              theory literature.  Analogies will be drawn between this decision              
              setting and similar group decision scenarios that involve diverse              
              parties with conflicting goals.                                                
                Dr. Carpenter will teach a research seminar in public                        
              sector accountability issues and a section of an engineering economy           
              course which considers theories of capital allocation in private and           
              public sector organizations during the second year.  Additionally, she         
              will work with the university's Minority Program Office to develop             
              strategies and programs to increase the number of minority                     
              females pursuing careers in the sciences.                                      
                This project furthers VPW program objectives which are (1) to                
              provide opportunities for women to advance their careers in                    
              engineering and in the disciplines of science supported by NSF and             
              (2) to encourage women to pursue careers in science and engineering            
              by providing greater visibility for women scientists and                       
              engineers employed in industry, government, and academic institutions.         
              By encouraging the participation of women in science, it is a                  
              valuable investment in the Nation's future scientific vitality.
