Title       : Gas-Surface Interactions: Spectroscopy and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1992      
File        : a9003553

Award Number: 9003553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry N. Blount, III                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Henry Weinberg whw@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant is in the general field of analytical and surface                   
              chemistry and in the subfield of reaction dynamics at gas metal                
              interfaces.  Professor W. Henry Weinberg of the University of                  
              California at Santa Barbara will continue his studies of the                   
              reactions of gases at well defined metal surfaces.  The focus                  
              of the current work will be the understanding of the details of                
              the promotion and poisoning of the dissociative adsorption                     
              reactions of nitrogen, oxygen and carbon dioxide at ruthenium                  
              surfaces.  Further studies with more complex polyatomic                        
              molecules will also be done.  Simulations of the reaction                      
              dynamics will be accomplished to determine the effects of                      
              specific reaction channels in the adsorption process.  The                     
              results of this work will lead to an understanding of the                      
              factors governing catalytic reactions and the thermodynamics of                
              reactions at the interface.                                                    
                                                                                             
              Several related issues in reaction dynamics will be explored.                  
              Molecular beam chemistry with the Ru(001) interface will be                    
              explored with vibrational spectroscopy of the adsorbates,                      
              following the products of complex surface reactions.  Local                    
              surface coverage effects will be explored by studying oxygen                   
              chemisorption on the Ru surface as a function of order in the                  
              monolayer.  Surface temperature modulation will be used to                     
              follow the reaction coordinates and quantify the reaction rate                 
              coefficients of a branching unimolecular dissociation reaction.                
              Monte Carlo simulations of second order surface reactions will                 
              explore compensation effects in kinetic parameters.
