Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Discrete Groups, Quasiconformal Mappings, and Function
               Theoretic Inequalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1992       
File        : a9003438

Award Number: 9003438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260261             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick W. Gehring   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Work to be done on this project focuses on questions arising              
              at the interface of geometry and mathematical analysis in                      
              Euclidean spaces.  The basis for the research lies within the                  
              geometric development of complex function theory, in that it                   
              emphasizes the group structure underlying analytic function                    
              theory and the infinitesimal behavior of such functions.  It was               
              their infinitesimal regularity that led to the notion of                       
              quasiconformal mappings in the 1930's.  Decades passed before an               
              intrinsic definition of these mappings was found which could be                
              applied to mappings in higher dimensions.  This work is about                  
              those mappings and their underlying domains.                                   
                    A quasiconformal mapping is a univalent mapping between two              
              domains which maps infinitesimal circles into infinitesimal                    
              ellipses whose major and minor axes have bounded (the                          
              dilatation) ratios.  An important question in the understanding                
              of their structure concerns the decomposition of maps into                     
              iterates of maps with the same dilatation.  Those with no such                 
              decomposition would form a basis of irreducible maps.  From the                
              geometric side, one would like to know how to determine when two               
              domains are equivalent under quasiconformal mappings.  Even when               
              one of the two domains is a ball, this question is very                        
              difficult.  The sufficient conditions given by Schoenflies type                
              theorems and the necessary ones arising from local connectivity                
              are very far apart.  Some progress has been made in three                      
              dimensions when one of the domains is a slit domain and the other              
              is a ball.                                                                     
                   Other work, concentrating on planar problems, will be                     
              concerned with Kleinian groups.  This includes continuing work on              
              measuring the distance of elements from the identity in several                
              natural metrics. When applied to generators of groups,                         
              information about the singular set can be obtained.  As this work              
              develops further, higher dimensional analogues will be studied.                
              Work will also continue on discrete convergence groups, a class                
              of transformation groups introduced several years ago which                    
              reflect many properties of Mobius groups (they are conjugate to                
              such groups by quasiconformal maps).  Investigations into the                  
              fine structure of convergence groups will be conducted.
