Title       : Biotic and Chemical Defense Systems of Myrmecophytic Cecropia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1992  
File        : a9003079

Award Number: 9003079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1990   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274603             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane W. Davidson davidson@bioscience.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Interspecific, environmental and development differences in               
              biotic and chemical defense systems of myrmecophytic Cecropia                  
              trees will be studied in relation to plant associations with                   
              herbivores and symbotic ants in Amazonian rain forest.  Seedlings              
              of six Cecropia species will be grown from seed under high and                 
              low light regimes in temperate greenhouse and transplant gardens               
              in southeastern Peru'.  Ant attracting traits, leaf tannin                     
              concentrations, and toughness will be monitored in relation to                 
              plant performance, especially growth rates and leaf lifetimes                  
              (thought to determine the pattern of investment in chemical and                
              ant-defense).  Performance data on transplanted seedlings with                 
              and without herbivores will test specific hypotheses for habitat               
              specificity in these trees.                                                    
              Short-term experiments with cultivated seedlings will test for 1)              
              habitat and host specificity in four specialized symbiotic ants;               
              2) rates of host resource supply to ants as a determinant of the               
              species composition of symbiotic relationships: 3) habitat and                 
              species specificity in effects of different ants on herbivory                  
              rates, host performances, and colony growth and reproduction.                  
              Natural seedling populations are used to investigate species                   
              specificity in host choice by queens and host mechanisms for                   
              excluding certain ants.  Results of studies will be synthesized                
              to test hypotheses that: plant resource environments determine                 
              predictable patterns of investment in alternative defense                      
              systems and patterns of defense investment determine the species               
              composition of ant-plant associations.  Findings will contribute               
              to basic ecological science and will also add to the knowledge                 
              base on the biodiversity of tropical forests. //
