Title       : Third Annual "Mouse Molecular Genetics" Meeting, Cold SpringHarbor, NY, August
               29-Sept. 2, 1990.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1990     
File        : a9003270

Award Number: 9003270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The third annual "Mouse Molecular Genetics" meeting is scheduled               
              to be held in Cold Spring Harbor, August 29 to September 2 and is              
              expected to attract about 350 scientists working on various aspects            
              of the molecular biology and molecular genetics of the mouse.  The             
              emphasis of the meeting will be on the mouse as an organism (as                
              opposed to in vitro studies) and will cover such areas as:                     
              regulation of gene expression, cell proliferation and oncogenesis,             
              models of disease processes embryonic stem cells, and molecular                
              analysis of mutations.  In the past, sessions on germ cells and the            
              development of hemopoietic system were arranged based upon the                 
              number of interesting abstracts submitted in these areas.  We hope             
              to have enough interest in neurobiology to have a separate session             
              this year.  The use of homologous recombination to disrupt specific            
              genes has been featured in previous meetings and this year should              
              reveal the fruits of this powerful technique as applied to various             
              interesting genes in the mouse.  The meeting is intended for                   
              students and post docs as well as established investigators.  All              
              applicants will be expected to submit an abstract- about a third               
              will be selected for 10 minute talks along with the invited                    
              speakers and the rest will present posters. The abstracts will be              
              collated into a booklet that will be available to all attendees but            
              proceedings will not be published.  This has been a very successful            
              meeting the last two years and feel that it still fills an                     
              important niche by allowing cross communication between various                
              disciplines.
