Title       : Forced Oscillations for Lagrangian and Hamiltonian Systems and the
               Nonhomogeneous Dirichlet Problem for Semilinear Elliptic Equations Involving
               Critical Exponents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1990       
File        : a9003149

Award Number: 9003149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabriella Tarantello   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9220,
Abstract    :
                   Several problems in the field of differential equations will              
              be under investigation during the term of this project.  They                  
              concern systems of differential equations from the physical                    
              sciences, namely Lagrangian equations representing forced motion               
              of a mechanical system and the more general Hamiltonian systems.               
              A system of forced pendulums would give rise to the first class                
              of equations, whereas the motion of bodies under gravitational                 
              forces often uses the Hamiltonian structure.                                   
                   The Lagrangian equations involved in this study have                      
              periodic coefficients and forcing functions.  It is natural to                 
              inquire whether of not there will exist periodic solutions                     
              under such assumptions.  As with many equations modeling                       
              phenomena from the physical world, the Lagrangians result from a               
              principle of energy or action minimization.  One seeks to find                 
              critical points of a certain integral with admissible functions                
              taken from a Hilbert space.  Depending on the growth of the                    
              potential, there may be many distinct periodic solutions, whereas              
              evidence suggests that for periodic potentials, only finitely                  
              many periodic solutions may exist.  A measure of the number of                 
              such solutions in terms the structure of the potential will be                 
              sought.                                                                        
                   Work on Hamiltonian systems will follow a similar vein                    
              concentrating on the case of periodic Hamiltonians.  Solutions of              
              these systems are known as subharmonics.  There are known to be                
              periodic subharmonics under very general conditions.  The most                 
              important subharmonics are those with minimal periods.  This                   
              research will look for a description of solutions with minimal                 
              periods in cases where additional symmetry assumptions are made                
              on the Hamiltonian.  Solutions of Hamiltonian systems must lie on              
              surfaces of constant energy.  A related goal of this work will                 
              be to determine which surfaces of the Hamiltonian carry a                      
              periodic orbit.
