Title       : Trace Elemental Source Characterization of La Mixtequilla Obsidian Artifacts,
               Veracruz, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1990       
File        : a9003606

Award Number: 9003606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4649               (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Stark BLSTARK@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Barbara Stark will               
              conduct sourcing analysis of ca. 174 obsidian artifacts recovered              
              from archaeological contexts in the Veracruz region of Mexico.                 
              In the course of previous NSF funded research, Dr. Stark has                   
              examined the prehistory of this small region located on the Gulf               
              coast of Mexico.  In contrast to the central highlands region,                 
              Veracruz never developed into a large and powerful state but                   
              rather was characterized by smaller polities.  Dr. Stark,                      
              therefore, looked at Veracruz as a marginal area and wished to                 
              discover how it interacted with and was affected by these more                 
              powerful states.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Because obsidian (volcanic glass) makes excellent stone tools                  
              which hold a sharp edge, it was highly prized in antiquity and                 
              was widely traded.  It is also of interest to archaeologists                   
              because its distribution in Middle America is highly localized                 
              and the number of sources small.  Individual sources are                       
              chemically distinct, and through trace element analysis it is                  
              possible to match obsidian artifact with its geological source.                
              On this basis it is possible to trace the movement of obsidian,                
              to reconstruct economic patterns, and in turn to gain insight                  
              into the changing political landscape.  In this project, the                   
              University of Missouri will conduct neutron activation analysis                
              on a series of obsidian artifacts from a number of Veracruz                    
              sites.  Through these, interactions with larger central Mexican                
              states can be reconstructed.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will increase our                        
              understanding of how the complex societies characteristic of many              
              portions of the world develop and are maintained.  It will also                
              allow the maximum amount of information to be obtained from an                 
              already successful project.
