Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Weighted Norm Inequalities and Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1990     
File        : a9003095

Award Number: 9003095
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1990        
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38654              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cristian E. Gutierrez gutier@math.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is concerned with problems in two subareas of                
              mathematical analysis: partial differential equations and                      
              harmonic analysis related to the Gaussian measure.  The project                
              has two objectives.                                                            
                   The first is to analyze the behavior of solutions of a class              
              of degenerate parabolic equations in divergence form with                      
              non-smooth coefficients.  Such coefficients may be zero, infinite              
              or both.  The equations are known to model cases of diffusion of               
              temperature in a non-homogeneous and non-isotropic material.                   
              Basic questions to be considered in this work include finding                  
              conditions which imply regularity of solutions, determining                    
              whether a Harnack principle is valid for non-negative solutions                
              and understanding the behavior of the fundamental solutions of                 
              the equations.  Weighted norm inequalities of the Poincare and                 
              Sobolev type will be used in this study.                                       
                   The second objective concerns the behavior, in the space of               
              functions integrable with respect to Gaussian measure, of a class              
              of transforms generated by the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck semigroup.                   
              These transforms play the role, in the Gaussian context, of the                
              classical singular integrals of M. Riesz.  Of particular interest              
              will be the establishment of weak-type estimates with constants                
              bounded independently of dimension.  This investigation will                   
              center on the use of a maximal function as in the Calderon-                    
              Zygmund theory, but this function does not inherit all the                     
              properties of the classical maximal functions.  However, there is              
              evidence to suggest that it is still of weak type with respect to              
              Gaussian measure.  This is the first problem to be resolved.
