Title       : Analysis of Floral Determination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1993  
File        : a9003739

Award Number: 9003739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl N. McDaniel mcdanc@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Determination is a developmental event which programs the future               
              fate of a cell or a group of cells. It is often a stable state                 
              but not necessarily an irreversible condition. In general terms,               
              a cell or group of cells is determined when it exhibits the same               
              developmental fate whether grown in situ, in isolation, or at a                
              new place in or on the organism. Determination has been                        
              extensively documented and studied, primarily in animals. In                   
              plant development, determination is often an obscure component                 
              because many plant cells are totipotent. Nevertheless, Dr.                     
              McDaniel has identified a situation in plant development,                      
              flowering in both day neutral and photoperiodic plants, in which               
              determination is stable enough to permit investigation. The                    
              proposed study will continue his characterization of floral                    
              determination in the genus Nicotiana and extend his approach to                
              the single cycle, long day plant, Lolium temulentum. Four topics               
              will be addressed: 1) Employing clonal analysis, establish the                 
              developmental fate of cells in the meristem of florally                        
              determined terminal and axillary buds of day neutral tobacco, 2)               
              Via tissue culture, establish the stability of the capacity of                 
              pedicle tissues to produce floral shoots, 3) Using reciprocal                  
              grafts, establish if the number of nodes produced by a N.                      
              tabacum cv. Wisconsin 38 shoot (scion) can be influenced by the                
              roots (stock) of other cultivars of N. tabacum, 4) Using                       
              meristem/apex culture, establish the time for floral evocation,                
              the time of floral determination, and characterize the influence               
              of various gibberellic acids on the flowering process in Lolium                
              temulentum.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Understanding determination is critical for any in depth,                      
              comprehensive understanding of development in multicellular                    
              organisms. This has proved a very difficult problem to attack in               
              plant systems. The determination of a plant to flower has been                 
              developed into an approachable system for this study.
