Title       : The Impact of Gene Typing on the Criminal Justice System: A Professional
               Development Award in Studies in Science, Technology and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1990   
File        : a9003154

Award Number: 9003154
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Wasserman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This two year, half-time award enables a legal scholar and ethicist            
              at the Institute for Philosophy and Public Policy at the University            
              of Maryland College Park to develop his understanding of theory and            
              research underlying the forensic applications of DNA typing.  He               
              will undertake a two-year course of study with the Division of                 
              Human Genetics at the University of Maryland at Baltimore,                     
              sponsored by Dr. Maimon Cohen, Director of the Division, and Dr.               
              Joann Boughman, Director of Graduate Studies.  Under their                     
              supervision, he will receive intensive training in molecular and               
              population genetics and DNA typing through classroom instruction               
              and laboratory rotations.  He will use this training in a program              
              of collaborative research with colleagues at the Institute for                 
              Philosophy and Public Policy and specialists in the forensic                   
              applications of genetic typing.  He expects to complete several                
              articles during the grant period, to be submitted to journals in               
              law, public policy and criminology, and to begin work on a book.               
                                                                                             
              This project addresses a central issue in ethics and values                    
              studies:  the social values and mutual obligations and                         
              responsibilities that arise in the interactions between new                    
              developments in science and technology, and society.  The                      
              investigator and his host specialists and host institution are                 
              uniquely well-qualified to undertake and support this project;                 
              research and related activities are likely to continue after the               
              period of the award.  Results are likely to be appropriately                   
              disseminated and useful.  An award in the amount of $40,000 is                 
              therefore recommended.
