Title       : Practical Methods for Total Synthesis of Complex Natural Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1992       
File        : a9003608

Award Number: 9003608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406120             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clayton H. Heathcock   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research is being funded by the Organic Synthesis                         
              Chemistry Program.  The synthesis of the complex new substances                
              required by our society in a cost effective manner is the goal                 
              of this research.  This is a daunting challenge that requires                  
              considerable insight and ingenuity to accomplish.                              
                                                                                             
              Nature is replete with organic compounds of intricate molecular                
              structure.  Often these materials may be isolated from their                   
              natural sources in quantity; more often they cannot.  The                      
              alternative to isolation is synthesis--laboratory manufacture                  
              from commonly available materials.  Although chemists have over                
              the last half-century become rather adept at constructing small                
              amounts of very complicated molecules, they generally cannot                   
              prepare most desired organic compounds in an efficient,                        
              practical, and cost-effective manner.  This general inability                  
              to conceive and execute practical laboratory syntheses                         
              constitutes a frailty of our science.  It is the long-term goal                
              of this research to address this deficiency by inventing new                   
              strategies for the laboratory synthesis of complex organic                     
              structures.  The compounds to be synthesized are molecules of                  
              nature--alkaloids and polyisoprenoids. The intent is not just                  
              to make a compound, but to do it in a way that will lead to                    
              something new about the architectural aspect of                                
              molecule-building.  The constant goals are:  (a) to minimize                   
              the required number of tranformations by eschewing protective                  
              groups whenever possible, (b) to minimize the required number                  
              of transformations by finding ways in which "cascades" of                      
              reactions can occur under the same reaction conditions, (c) to                 
              simplify the total synthesis process by using, to the extent                   
              possible, "low-tech", rather than exotic, expensive reagents.                  
              The specific systems to be studied are: petrosin, sarain-A,                    
              nominine, aristone, dictyoxetane, velutinal, crinipellin A and                 
              members of the daphniphyllum alkaloid family.
