Title       : EPSCoR: Ionic Currents in Vestibular Hair Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2000      
File        : a0077880

Award Number: 0077880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antoinette Steinacker asteinac@mbl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Med Sci
	      G P O Box 5067
	      San Juan, PR  00901    809/753-5353

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                            The sense of balance and equilibrium in vertebrates is provided by
              the vestibular system, which functions to maintain the position of the body in
              space and to stabilize the visual image on the retina. The semicircular canal
              system, the subject of the research proposed here, is the vestibular end organ
              responsible for sensing angular acceleration of the head and transmitting this
              information to the central nervous system. Unlike many other sensory systems,
              for example, the visual system, our knowledge of even basic properties of the
              vestibular system is still very rudimentary, primarily because in higher
              animals, this system is encased in the hard temporal bone of the head. Recent
              technical advances have made it possible to isolate neurons individually from
              this system and record their responses to sensory stimulation. These
              experiments address the need for advancement in this field of research using
              some of this new technology. Central to this study is the choice of an
              experimental animal in which the vestibular system can be easily accessed. In
              higher vertebrates, in addition to the cost of the research animals and
              concerns over the use of more evolved vertebrates, the vestibular system is
              encased in the very dense temporal bone. On the other hand, this end organ in
              fish is a highly evolved system without the dense temporal bone and thus offers
              a unique opportunity for study of basic properties of the coding of movement.
              The fish has therefore been used as a model system to study vestibular
              processing for over 20 years.
The experiments described in this research
              proposal will be carried out using the toadfish, Opsanus tau, as the
              experimental animal. In the toadfish in particular, there is easy access to the
              canals due to the flat head of the fish and hence, this animal has been used
              extensively to study the process of sensory coding of head and body movement by
              the semicircular canals. In the past, this research has centered primarily on
              recording from the most easily accessible nerve fibers. The neural response
              recorded from these nerve fibers that transmit sensory information from the
              primary sensory receptor, the hair cell, to the midbrain is complex. This
              complexity may be due to differences in the properties of several levels of the
              peripheral vestibular system. The research proposed here is the investigation
              of the ionic currents of the primary sensory cell responsible for sensing body
              and head movement. Progress in understanding these currents, as opposed to work
              from other levels of the vestibular system, has only come about in recent years
              with the development of a particular technique known as patch clamp recording
              technology and the use of isolated sensory cells. In the experiments proposed
              here, the semicircular canals will be removed from the animal and the sensory
              cells mechanically removed as isolated cells. Patch clamp technology will then
              be used to record ionic currents from the sensory cells. These currents will be
              separated and classified using known voltage paradigms and pharmacology to
              provide a quantitative description of the behavior of the currents as they code
              the information on body and head motion. 
The data obtained will be
              incorporated with that from other levels of the system, either currently
              available or in the process of experimental investigation in other
              laboratories, to obtain a more comprehensive knowledge of sensory processing in
              the vestibular system. Incorporation of these data into a computer generated
              mathematical model of the semicircular canal system is planned for the future.
              Not only do the proposed experiments enlarge our basic understanding of
              vestibular system function but also they provide knowledge vital to science and
              medicine in arriving at the mechanisms underlying pathology of the vestibular
              system, such as vertigo, motion sickness and the problems of balance and
              equilibrium so common in the aging human population.

