Title       : Structural Determinants of Leghemoglobin Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0077890

Award Number: 0077890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Hargrove msh@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob W. Petrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hargrove
MCB 0077890

The long-range goal of this research is to develop a
              more comprehensive understanding of the structural and biophysical mechanisms,
              which regulate ligand binding to hemoglobins.  The immediate goals are to use
              leghemoglobin as a complementary model system to test hypotheses for hemoglobin
              function, which are based heavily on the understanding of myoglobin.  This work
              involves the use of site-directed mutagenesis, 
X-ray crystallography, and
              modern methods for the analysis of heme vibrational modes in combination with
              traditional kinetic and spectroscopic techniques to analyze the relationship of
              structure and function in soybean leghemoglobin.  It has been demonstrated that
              this protein exploits different mechanisms for regulating ligand binding than
              those used by myoglobin.  Therefore, a comprehensive study of leghemoglobin
              will undoubtedly provide new insight into hemoglobin structure and function.  
              


Heme proteins carry out a variety of important physiological functions. 
              A basic understanding of monomeric heme proteins provides a starting point for
              investigating the structure and function of these different systems and allows
              for rational design to incorporate desired characteristics into better
              understood hemoglobins.  It is not clear to what degree the current
              hypothesized mechanisms for hemoglobin regulation can be transferred to an
              understanding of other heme proteins.  The research carried out through this
              project will test the current hypotheses for hemoglobin function using a
              comprehensive analysis of a monomeric hemoglobin, soybean leghemoglobin.   A
              better understanding of ligand binding generated from a detailed study of this
              protein will complement our understanding of these processes gained from
              traditional model systems.  The goals are to provide a more diverse and
              complete basis for exploring the same questions about more complex, multimeric
              hemoglobins, oxygen sensors, peroxidases, and related enzymes.

