Title       : Leucine Aminopeptidases: Role in Wounding and Defense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0077862

Award Number: 0077862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda L. Walling linda.walling@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	Little is known about the degradation of proteins during plant development
              and in response to stress. In particular, there is a gap in the understanding
              of the class of proteases called aminopeptidases. Two classes of leucine
              aminopeptidase genes (LapA and LapN) from tomato have been characterized. LapA
              genes are expressed in response to wounding, caterpillar feeding, and some
              bacterial and fungal pathogens. In contrast, LapN genes are expressed at all
              times and in all tissues. The analysis of genetically engineered tomato plants
              that express a LapA antisense gene (35S:asLap) showed that down-regulation of
              Lap genes impairs the ability of tomatoes to mount a wound response. This
              proposal builds on a strong foundation of knowledge about the tomato LAPs built
              during the previous granting period. This proposed integrated research effort
              is focused on understanding the location of LAPs and their role in responses
              wounding, pathogens, water deficit, and salinity. 
	Cell fractionation studies
              show that LAPs reside in two cellular compartments: the cytoplasm and the
              chloroplast. Obviously, the substrates available for LAP action are determined
              by the location of LAPs within the tomato cell. Therefore, LAP-A- and
              LAP-N-specific antibodies will be used to determine the location of these two
              classes of aminopeptidases within the cell. The mechanisms that control the
              accumulation of LAP-A and LAP-N in two cellular locations will be tested.
	The
              LapA antisense plants (35S:asLap) do not effectively induce wound-response
              genes. These data suggest that LAP-A may be one of the first peptidases to
              regulate a plant-signaling pathway. Since this conclusion is novel for the
              plant community, these data should be confirmed using additional strategies.
              Three sets of transgenic tomato plants that have altered patterns of Lap gene
              expression will be evaluated. First, plants expressing two Lap antisense genes
              will be made. These plants express the LapA antisense RNA from both the
              wound-induced LapA promoter (LapA:asLap) and the constitutive 35S promoter
              (35S:asLap). These plants should afford the tightest regulation of the wound
              response. Second, co-suppressed plants will be characterized. Unlike the
              antisense plants that down regulate both LapA and LapN, the co-suppressed
              plants only down regulate LapA. Third, transgenic tomatoes that express high
              levels of LAP-A constitutively will be characterized. A tight correlation of
              LapA and/or LapN down regulation with the suppression of the wound response
              will implicate LAPs as protease that regulates plant stress responses. If LAPs
              are shown to modulate the wound response, the site of LAP action will be
              determined by feeding Lap down-regulated plants systemin, abscisic acid,
              jasmonic acid and intermediates of the octadecanoid pathway. If systemin
              activation is implicated, the activity of LAP-A and LAP-N on putative systemin
              precursors will be characterized. 
	Transgenic tomatoes that are up- and
              down-regulated for Lap gene expression will be used to determine if LAPs are
              important for controlling bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, as well as
              insect infestations and tolerance to water-deficit and salinity. 
	The
              understanding of the expression and impact of LAPs in plant development and in
              responses to stress has increased greatly. However, continued efforts are
              essential to elucidate the exact roles of LAPs in stress responses. These
              studies will enhance our understanding of the mechanisms that favor optimal
              growth and development. These factors will directly impact on increased crop
              productivity and may yield significant insights for the development of cogent
              strategies to enhance a plant's endogenous protection mechanisms to an array of
              stresses. 


