Title       : Genetics of Postzygotic Isolation: The Extent of Genomic Coadaptation in
               Populations of a Microcrustacean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0077940

Award Number: 0077940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne Edmands sedmands@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0077940
Edmands

Hybridization between populations results in increased
              fitness (hybrid vigor) in some cases, and decreased fitness (outbreeding
              depression) in others.  Outbreeding depression is a subject of concern for
              conservation and is also important to the study of speciation, because it marks
              the earliest stages of postzygotic isolation. The proposed work will explore
              the genetic basis of outbreeding depression using the copepod Tigriopus
              californicus.  This species is well suited for such a study due to its short
              generation time, ease of husbandry and remarkable population structure, with
              reproductively compatible populations that range from genetically
              indistinguishable up to more than 20% divergent in mitochondrial DNA. 
              Outbreeding depression is well documented in this species. 

The proposed
              study includes four objectives:

1) To develop a linkage map, using a battery
              of molecular markers.  Linkage group determination will be facilitated by the
              lack of recombination in T. californicus females.

2) To find the
              sex-determining chromosome in T. californicus. This will be accomplished as a
              byproduct of the screening of markers in (1) and will allow tests of the role
              of sex chromosomes in speciation.

3) To test fitness effects of whole
              chromosomes and interactions between chromosomes in a series of four crosses
              spanning a wide range of divergence.  This will involve measuring associations
              between viability and genotype in backcrossed hybrids.  Results will assess the
              extent of coadaptation across the entire genome and will reveal how conflicting
              gene interactions accumulate over time.  

4) To demonstrate the fitness
              effects of interactions both within and between chromosomes and to test the
              expected pattern of stronger coadaptation between physically linked loci.
              

Results will have significance for a number of different fields of biology.
               The data will contribute to basic evolutionary theory by measuring the
              magnitude of epistasis, a factor of increasing interest to evolutionary
              biologists.  Results will be particularly relevant to the mechanics of
              reproductive isolation and will allow interesting comparisons to the large and
              elegant body of work on Drosophila.  Finally, the proposed work will contribute
              to the field of conservation biology, which is becoming increasingly concerned
              over the consequences of interpopulation mixing.  Because the nature and extent
              of coadapted gene complexes has implications for the duration of outbreeding
              depression, this research may be relevant to the design of management
              strategies.

