Title       : Identification of Key Microbial Players Carrying Out Reductive Dechlorination of
               PCBs in Freshwater Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0077837

Award Number: 0077837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna L. Bedard bedard@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are widespread contaminants of aquatic
              sediments.  Anaerobic microorganisms in many of these contaminated sediments
              have the capacity to remove chlorine from the PCBs.  Dechlorination reduces the
              persistence and potential toxicity of PCBs. To date, none of the dechlorinating
              microorganisms have been identified and thus nothing is known about their
              ecology or about the evolution of PCB-dechlorinating enzymes/pathways. Previous
              studies have shown that PCB-dechlorinating microorganisms are present in the
              Housatonic River (Lenox, MA) and that they exhibit three distinct
              PCB-dechlorinating activities.  Each of these activities has distinct
              substrates, targeted chlorine positions, and pH and temperature optima.  This
              research project will use molecular techniques to identify the key changes in
              microbial community structure that occur when these different activities are
              stimulated and enriched and will use 16S rRNA-based phylogenetic analysis to
              identify the key microbial players carrying out reductive dechlorination of
              PCBs.  Long-term goals include isolation of PCB-dechlorinating bacteria and
              isolation and characterization of their PCB-dechlorinating enzymes.  This
              research will expand our understanding of an important environmental process
              and of anaerobic sediment communities.  


