Title       : A Novel Viral RNA-RNA Interaction Coupling Gene Expression and Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0077964

Award Number: 0077964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Lommel steve_lommel@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timmy L. Sit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              NSF MCB-0077964 ABSTRACT

Lommel

The project involves the characterization
              of the origin of assembly sequence (OAS) and other packaging signals directing
              virion formation of red clover necrotic mosaic dianthovirus (RCNMV). The genome
              of RCNMV is composed of two positive sense single-stranded RNAs totaling less
              that 5.5 kb. It is not known whether both genomic RNAs are packaged into
              virions together or whether each is packaged separately. It has been previously
              shown that the two genomic RNAs interact by base-pairing to direct the
              synthesis of a subgenomic RNA from the polycistronic RNA-1. (The subgenomic RNA
              encodes the capsid protein.)  Down-stream from this trans-activating element on
              RNA-2 resides another element that appears to direct virion assembly. Based on
              this observation as well as others, a testable hypothesis for how RCNMV
              packages can be proposed. The hypothesis is that the only cognate origin of
              assembly for RCNMV resides on RNA-2. RNA-1 is captured for packaging by
              interacting with RNA-2 via the partially characterized trans-activator (TA)
              interaction. Those RNA-1s that are base-paired with RNA-2 during packaging form
              an RNA-1 and RNA-2 particle. Those RNA-2's that are not paired with an RNA-1
              can still be packaged, if multiple copies of RNA-2 molecules coalesce into a
              forming virion. This hypothesis has a number of constraints that can be tested.
              I) The hypothesis precludes the formation of RNA-1 only virions. II) It allows
              for the formation of RNA-2 only virions. III) It states that no OAS is present
              on RNA-1. IV) No biologically active virion preparation or RNA-1 containing
              virions will form if the TA interaction is disrupted. V) It suggests that the
              OAS and trans-activating element, while mutually essential for packaging, may
              be physically uncoupled. The experimental approach to be taken to address these
              questions is outlined in the objectives summarized below:
1) Identify and
              characterize the RCNMV origin of assembly sequence and minimum/maximum
              packaging signal on RNA-2.
2) Uncouple the generation of sgRNA/CP expression
              from the assembly process.
	This research will allow, for the first time, the
              determination of the OAS for an icosahedral virus that packages more than one
              genomic component into a virion. This study will extend the role of RNA-RNA
              interactions beyond transcriptional activation to virion assembly and further
              suggest additional important regulatory and structural roles for either cis or
              trans RNA-RNA interactions. What is discovered in the context of this project
              will certainly be applicable to other multicomponent icosahedral RNA plant
              viruses and likely provide insights into similar animal viruses as well. The
              elucidation of this mechanism may lead to the development of molecular control
              strategies for virus diseases based on the specific disruption of virion
              assembly. Finally, plant viruses only cause a disease when they form a systemic
              infection.  For most plant viruses, virion formation has been implicated in
              this process, but not definitively established. The elucidation of the RCNMV
              OAS will allow for a direct test of the need for virion formation for
              long-distance transport and systemic infection.


