Title       : Functional Genomics of Plant Polyploids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0077774

Award Number: 0077774
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4996886            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Osborn tcosborn@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luca Comai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Birchler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Z. Jeffrey Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Martienssen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Polyploidy has played a prominent role in plant evolution. More than 70% of
              flowering plants have had at least one polyploid event in their lineage, either
              by doubling of a single genome (autopolyploidy) or, more commonly, by combining
              two or more distinct but related genomes (allopolyploidy). Many important crop
              plants, such as alfalfa, canola, cotton, potato and wheat, are obvious
              polyploids, and others, such as maize, soybean, and cabbage, retain the
              vestiges of ancient polyploid events.  Although the importance of polyploidy
              has been widely recognized, the reasons for its success are not fully
              understood.  Genome redundancy may provide some selective advantage, both
              through interactions of the combined genomes causing novel patterns of gene
              expression and through genome changes causing functional divergence of
              duplicated genes.  Thus, polyploidy does not merely result in additivity for
              all traits from the progenitors, but often produces novel phenotypes that are
              not present in the parents or exceed the range of the parents.  This phenomenon
              is analogous to heterosis, in which hybrid genotypes often have phenotypes that
              exceed those of their inbred parents.

Rapid progress in genomic research of
              model plants and important crops has prompted the assembly of this consortium
              to study functional genomics of plant polyploids.  The consortium is aimed at
              uncovering molecular mechanisms responsible for the evolutionary success of
              plant polyploids and agricultural utilization of plant hybrids.  The theme of
              the proposed research is to investigate changes in gene expression and genome
              structure in resynthesized and natural autopolyploids and/or allopolyploids of
              Arabidopsis, Brassica and maize.  Gene expression changes will be assayed using
              mRNA display and EST microarrays.  New microarrays of the genes identified in
              heterochromatic regions will be developed and used for gene expression assays
              in Arabidopsis and Brassica.  Changes in methylation state, transposon
              activity, chromatin status, and chromosomal arrangements will be determined
              using a combination of molecular, biochemical, and cytological techniques.  The
              diploids, autopolyploids, and allopolyploids of each plant system will be
              compared to determine the effects of polyploidy on gene expression and genome
              structure.  Inbred and hybrid maize at different ploidy levels will be compared
              to determine the relative effects of ploidy and heterozygosity on gene
              expression.  Early and advanced generation polyploids of Brassica will be
              compared to test for stabilization of changes in the generations after
              polyploid formation and whether these changes are concerted and mimic natural
              polyploids.  These studies will provide a comprehensive survey of the gene
              expression and genome changes accompanying polyploid formation and evolution. 
              Most importantly, they should reveal some of the major mechanisms giving rise
              to these changes, and illuminate our overall understanding of why polyploids
              have been so successful in nature and agriculture.

Participants:
Thomas C.
              Osborn, PI, University of Wisconsin
James A. Birchler, Co-PI, University of
              Missouri
Z. Jeffery Chen, Co-PI, Texas A & M University
Luca Comai, Co-PI,
              University of Washington
Robert A. Martienssen, Co-PI, Cold Spring Harbor
              Laboratory
Rebecca Doerge, Co-PI, Purdue University

