Title       : Heme Biosynthesis in Bradyrhizobium japonicum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0077628

Award Number: 0077628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark R. O'Brian mrobrian@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term aim of this project is to understand the regulation of heme
              biosynthesis in the symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacterium Bradyrhizobium
              japonicum.  The iron-containing porphyrin ring (heme) is involved in several
              enzymatic reactions requiring microanaerobic conditions necessary for efficient
              nitrogen fixation (free-living or symbiotic).   The multienzyme pathway for
              heme formation ends with the insertion of iron into the protoporphyrin ring in
              a reaction catalyzed by ferrochelatase.  Because iron may be a limiting
              nutrient and porphyrins are cytotoxic, this suggests the need for coordination
              of heme biosynthesis with iron availability.  A novel protein called Irr has
              been recently identified and proposed to mediate iron control of heme
              biosynthesis.   Irr is present under iron limitation and negatively regulates
              the heme biosynthesis gene hemB, preventing protoporphyrin accumulation from
              exceeding iron availability.  Irr is a conditionally stable protein that
              degrades rapidly when cells are exposed to iron.  Heme is an effector molecule
              in this iron-mediated degradation, binding to a specific motif in Irr.  Irr
              also binds ferrochelatase directly. This proposal will test the hypothesis that
              Irr mediates iron control of the heme pathway by responding to the status of
              protoporphyrin and heme at the site of heme synthesis.  The role of heme in
              mediating iron-dependent Irr degradation will be elucidated.  Specifically, two
              plausible mechanisms will be tested: heme catalysis of Irr oxidation leading to
              degradation, or heme-induced conformational change in Irr, rendering it
              accessible to proteases.  The binding of ferrochelatase to  Irr and the effect
              of this binding on Irr activity will also be studied.  This work focuses on a
              metabolic pathway that is important for energy production and its novel
              regulation by bacterial cells, and thus should provide insights on the ability
              of bacteria to adjust to diverse environmental conditions. The environmental
              adaptability of Bradyrhizobium japonicum is of special interest because this
              bacterium establishes a nitrogen-fixing symbiotic association with soybeans.
              Because this relationship is beneficial to a commercially important plant crop,
              B. japonicum is thus of economic and agricultural interest. These studies will
              also involve the training of graduate and undergraduate students, including
              women and underrepresented minority trainees.

