Title       : Toward a 3-Dimensional View of Permeation at CFTR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a0077575

Award Number: 0077575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nael A. McCarty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ion channels are membrane proteins responsible for the passive movement of ions,
              and sometimes other substrates, across cell membranes. Channels function in
              various cell types, including epithelial cells where they regulate the flow of
              ions across membranes that separate major compartments in the body, and
              excitable cells where they transduce electrical signals across cell membranes.
              Ion channels are often the endpoint, or effector, of signal transduction
              pathways. The overall structure of a typical ion channel can be broken into two
              major domains -- portions that form the pathway for ion permeation by creating
              a "pore" through the membrane, and (usually separate) portions that serve to
              regulate the open/closed configuration of the pore by gating in response to an
              appropriate stimulus. This proposal concerns one type of channel -- one crucial
              to the processes of chloride secretion and reabsorption in epithelial cells.
              This channel, the CFTR protein, is the product of the gene defective in the
              inherited disease, cystic fibrosis. A variant of CFTR is also involved in
              modulation of membrane excitability in cardiac ventricular myocytes. The
              long-term goal of this project is to understand the mechanisms of conduction,
              specificity, and gating in ion channels and transporters, with an emphasis on
              anion channels. Compared to cation channels, the structural architecture of
              anion channels is poorly understood. For this project, the overall objective is
              to determine the mechanisms controlling permeation in CFTR. Goal #1 is to
              identify transmembrane (TM) helices that line the pore, by localization of
              binding sites for open-channel blockers. Goal #2 is to identify groups of amino
              acids that serve as determinants of anion selectivity. The proposed approach
              relies upon the use of molecular biological techniques (site-directed
              mutagenesis) combined with expression in Xenopus oocytes and quantitative
              biophysical assays. The working hypothesis is that the pore is lined by TM
              domains 5, 6, 11, and 12. To achieve these goals, whole-cell and single-channel
              currents will be measured to determine the kinetics of two
              structurally-distinct classes of pore-blocking molecules, and to determine
              whether their binding domains contribute to the permeation pathway. Structural
              elements that contribute to the architecture of the pore will be defined by
              comparing the ability of wildtype and mutant channels to interact with
              open-channel blockers. Previous studies from the principal investigator's
              laboratory have shown that blocker kinetics are highly sensitive to the
              structure of the pore. A region within TM6 has also been identified that is
              critical for discrimination between different anions. This region also appears
              to lie close to the binding sites for pore-blocking molecules. To accurately
              describe the structure of the pore, it is necessary to consider the
              contributions made from portions of the channel other than TM6. This project
              will be guided by a three-dimensional model of the pore, proposed in the
              application, which takes into account the experimental data for TM domains 5,
              6, 11, and 12. This approach hypothesizes that multiple helical domains
              contribute both to the binding sites for drugs and to the selectivity domains
              of the channel. A specific subset of residues that may determine the
              biophysical features of permeation is proposed. Residues in TM6 and TM12 will
              be addressed initially. Testing the importance of these residues will allow the
              construction of a detailed map of the conduction pathway in CFTR. Basic
              mechanisms used for permeation are likely to be common between CFTR and other
              anion channels. Hence, it is likely that conclusions drawn from the study of
              this molecular model will be relevant to the understanding of permeation in
              other anion channels.
