Title       : Ion Channel Regulation in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0077791

Award Number: 0077791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian I. Schroeder julian@biomail.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


	Stomatal pores in the epidermis of leaves regulate the diffusion of CO2
              into leaves for photosynthetic carbon fixation and control water loss of plants
              via transpiration to the atmosphere. A network of signal transduction
              mechanisms in guard cells integrate environmental stimuli to regulate stomatal
              apertures for optimization of plant growth under diverse conditions. Control of
              stomatal movements in response to environmental stress conditions is an
              important factor in determining crop productivity and plant water loss during
              drought. The long-term goal of this project is to achieve a detailed
              quantitative understanding of the network of signal transduction events that
              regulate stomatal movements using the easily manipulated plant, Arabidopsis
              thaliana. Guard cells provide a powerful system for quantitative and
              time-resolved dissection of the complex molecular machinery mediating
              specificity in early plant signaling cascades. 

	During the preceding
              funding period a signal transduction model has been developed, suggesting that
              several types of both positively- and negatively-regulating protein kinases and
              PP1- or PP2A-type protein phosphatases play central roles in mediating stomatal
              closing by the phytohormone, abscisic acid (ABA). However, the genes encoding
              these protein kinases and PP1/2A-type phosphatases, as well as their locations
              and functions within cascades and their downstream targets remain largely
              unknown. From an Arabidopsis guard cell cDNA libraries, the cDNAs that encoded
              for the receptor-like kinases (RLKs), the Ca2+-dependent protein kinases
              (CDPKs), and the catalytic PP2A subunit have been isolated.. The large gene
              families and redundancies of these signal transducers in plants have limited
              direct genetic characterization of individual kinases and PP2As. Direct
              functional analyses of guard cell-expressed members will now allow
              determination of their redundancies and of their precise functions in signal
              transduction. Preliminary studies show that an insertional mutation in a
              regulatory PP2A subunit causes recessive ABA insensitivity in guard cells.
              Furthermore, disruption of a receptor kinase abolishes light-induced stomatal
              opening, illustrating the importance and feasibility of the proposed research.
              

	The following hypotheses will be tested in this project: That both
              positively- and negatively-regulating protein kinases and PP2As function in
              ABA-induced stomatal closing.  That CDPKs control ABA-induced stomatal closing.
              That specific PP2As may function either as positive or negative regulators of
              ABA signaling. 
	To test these, the following specific aims will be done:
              Insertional disruption mutant alleles will be identified and transgenic
              repression lines will be generated in the isolated guard cell RLK, CDPK and
              catalytic PP2A genes. Stomatal movement analyses will be pursued to
              characterize phenotypic responses to ABA and light stimuli in disruption
              mutants or double/multi mutants of redundant homologous CDPKs and PP2As.
              Effects of two to three kinase and PP2A mutations with the strongest stomatal
              phenotypes will be characterized on stimulus-induced regulation of guard cell
              anion or K+ channels and signal-induced cytosolic Ca2+ changes. Epistasis
              analyses with known guard cell signaling mutants will be pursued to determine
              the relative sequence of events in the guard cell signaling network. Selected
              CDPKs/PP2As will be analyzed for modulation of cloned guard cell ion channels.
              Furthermore screens for guard cell-expressed interacting proteins will be
              pursued for one of the regulators.

	The knowledge gained from these studies
              will reveal novel fundamental mechanisms by which a network of kinases and
              PP2As control signal transduction and mediate signaling specificity in a plant
              cell. Furthermore, these studies will lead to elucidation of key signal
              transduction mechanisms by which plants balance CO2 influx into leaves and
              transpirational water loss and may contribute to future strategies for
              manipulating gas exchange in plants.



