Title       : Functional Analysis of Plant Mitogen-activated Protein Kinase Cascades in Stress
               and Hormonal Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0077692

Award Number: 0077692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4559130            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jen Sheen sheen@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kan Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick M. Ausubel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The major goal of this project is to elucidate the molecular mechanisms by which
              plants respond to environmental stress and hormonal signals.  Numerous studies
              have shown that so-called mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascades are
              activated by abiotic stresses (e.g., cold, drought, salt, wounding and touch),
              pathogens and pathogen-derived elicitors and plant hormones.  MAPK cascades are
              evolutionarily conserved protein modules that function in molecular signaling
              pathways in a variety of eukaryotes, including yeasts, worms, flies, frogs,
              mammals, and plants.  MAPKs are protein kinases that activate regulatory
              proteins such as transcription factors by phosphorylating them.  MAPKs are in
              turn phosphorylated and activated by MAPKKs, and MAPKKs are phosphorylated and
              activated by MAPKKKs.  The Arabidopsis genome project has revealed large gene
              families encoding MAPKs, MAPKKs and MAPKKKs (referred to as MAPK cascade
              genes).  However, little is known about the constitution of plant MAPK cascades
              and the specific roles that particular MAPK cascade genes play in particular
              plant signal transduction pathways.  A comprehensive approach based on genomic
              information will be employed to generate a freely available set of MAPK-related
              resources including engineered MAPK cascade genes and transgenic plants
              overexpressing these genes.  Engineered MAPK cascade genes will be transiently
              expressed in Arabidopsis protoplasts (individual cells stripped of their cell
              walls to facilitate DNA uptake) to determine the function of Arabidopsis MAPK
              cascade genes involved in essential plant signaling pathways.  Since the
              functions of MAPK cascades in plant signal transduction pathways are likely
              conserved, studies using the Arabidopsis genome resources will have broad
              implications and applications in other plant species including important crop
              plants.

The four MAPK cascades that will be the focus of this project
              include those involved in osmotic stress protection, bacterial peptide
              recognition, hormone signaling, and oxidative stress responses.  The overall
              strategy will involve the identification and cloning of the complete set of
              Arabidopsis genes encoding the MAPKs, MAPKKs, MAPKKKs and relevant protein
              phosphatases.  Transient expression of immunologically-tagged protein kinases
              will be used to match particular MAPK cascades with particular abiotic or
              biotic stress or hormone signals in Arabidopsis and maize protoplasts. 
              Engineered MAPKKKs and MAPKKs, designed to be constitutively active or to act
              as inhibitors, will be used in conjunction with DNA microarray technology to
              identify Arabidopsis genes that are activated in response to particular
              signaling pathways.  Identification of Arabidopsis knockout mutants
              corresponding to key MAPK-related regulatory genes will be initiated. 
              Transgenic Arabidopsis, maize and soybean plants that over-express particular
              engineered MAPKKK genes will be generated.  The transgenic plants will be
              tested for the exhibition of agronomically useful traits. 

The experimental
              design is based on Arabidopsis and maize protoplast technology. The transient
              nature of the protoplast systems allows direct functional analysis of plant
              genes at an unprecedented high throughput rate and at a relatively low cost. 
              This approach takes full advantage of the Arabidopsis genome infrastructure
              that is being created as a part of the NSF Plant Genome Research Program,
              including DNA sequencing, gene expression technology, and knockout mutant
              libraries.  The experimental approaches are especially powerful in unraveling
              the functions of genes that are difficult to tackle by traditional genetic and
              biochemical approaches due to redundancy, lethality or low levels of
              expression.  The elucidation and manipulation of MAPK cascades in plants will
              reveal fundamentally important regulatory processes and provide new tools for
              crop improvement related to stress tolerance, disease resistance, and yield
              enhancement.  This project integrates three laboratories that provide
              complementary expertise in stress and hormonal signaling, pathogen responses,
              and transgenic crop plant generation and analysis.  The project will also
              provide excellent training opportunities in a multidisciplinary academic
              environment.  Information and materials generated from this project, including
              the full set of cloned and engineered MAPK genes, will be made freely available
              to the plant community via a web-accessible database.

