Title       : Use of Metallic Interlayers to Promote Metal/Metal Epitaxial Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0077534

Award Number: 0077534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342791             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Smith smith@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to investigate the potential for ultrathin,
              metal interlayers to stabilize the interface in multilayered, thin-film
              structures. The research will identify those metals which when deposited in
              monolayer amounts at the interface make possible abrupt, epitaxial interfaces
              in systems that are otherwise characterized by interdiffusion or roughness. The
              interlayer materials, unlike surfactants, will remain at the interface to
              promote chemical, thermal, and structural stability. The interlayer should be
              atomically thin, unlike conventional diffusion barriers, to minimize the impact
              on any magnetic properties of the device. Since current fabrication techniques
              for tunnel junctions involve the oxidation of Al films grown on various
              ferromagnetic metals (Fe, Co, Ni, and their alloys), the structure and thermal
              stability of these interfaces will be characterized first. The effect of the
              interlayer on these structures will then be studied. Previous work suggests
              that Ti, Zr, and perhaps Ta have the potential for serving as stabilizing,
              ultrathin interlayers in aluminum/transition metal interfaces. The structure
              and stability of these magnetic films on oxidized Al surfaces, with and without
              an interlayer, will be studied. The measurements will characterize the degree
              of ordered growth or interdiffusion at the interface using high-energy ion
              backscattering and channeling, low energy electron diffraction, low-energy ion
              scattering, and x-ray photoelectron diffraction. Core-level photoelectron
              binding energies will serve to identify compound formation at the interface.
              Monte Carlo computer simulations, using embedded atom potentials to calculate
              total energies, will guide the structure analysis. Test structures will be
              fabricated using those materials that appear to have the most stable and abrupt
              interfaces, and the magnetic switching and tunneling properties of these
              structures will be measured. 
%%%
The results of this research will provide a
              better understanding of, and ability to predict and grow abrupt epitaxial
              metal/metal interfaces. The work is directed primarily at improving the
              interfaces in thin-film magnetic tunneling junctions and giant magnetoresistive
              structures being considered for magnetic memory or sensing applications, where
              it is felt that more abrupt interfaces will result in devices with better
              magnetic switching characteristics and lower total resistance.
***

