Title       : Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Modified Phospholipid Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0077499

Award Number: 0077499
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max L. Berkowitz maxb@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Berkowitz
MCB 0077499

The goal of this project is to study the role of
              electrostatic forces in the interaction between phospholipid membranes and
              peptides.  This research has two major aims:  The first aim is to understand
              the benefits and limitations of simple continuum models that are often used to
              describe such interactions. Molecular dynamics simulations of typical
              phospholipid bilayer/peptide systems will be performed and the data obtained
              from these simulations will be compared with the data obtained from the
              continuum treatment of the system.  

The second aim of the research is to
              study the electrostatic contribution into the mechanism of gating in membrane
              channels. 

The biological cell and its internal compartments are separated
              from the surroundings by a membrane that contains mostly, phospholipid, sterol,
              protein and peptide molecules.  The molecules in the membrane self assemble due
              to mutual interactions.  When membrane molecules are uncharged, the main
              component of the interaction is the So-called van der Waals interaction, which
              is due to induced polarizability of the molecules.  When molecules are charged,
              it is believed that the main interaction is due to charge-charge interaction.
              

The overall goal of this research is to understand the role of
              electrostatic forces in membrane-protein interactions, using computational
              approaches.

