Title       : B Cell Lymphogenesis in the Fetal Piglet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0077237

Award Number: 0077237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Butler jebutler@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
	The heavy chain variable region (HVR) of swine antibodies is a surprisingly
              and comparatively simple system that is encoded by ~ 20 highly homologous VH
              genes, one single JH and apparently only 2 DH segments.  Only 4 or 5 of these
              VH  genes, clustered at the 3' end of the locus, are used in fetal and early
              neonatal life in non-mutated form.  This simple system operates in a species in
              which it is believed that fetal repertoire development occurs in the absence of
              maternal regulatory factors and environmental antigens.  Since combinatorial
              diversity in the HVR is restricted to 8-10 possibilities, i.e. <0.3% of that in
              mice and humans, swine may utilize other mechanisms to diversify their antibody
              repertoire.  Considering that an extensive Vl repertoire has been reported for
              sheep, this project will determine whether extensive light chain diversity or
              gene conversion compensate for the restricted combinatorial diversity of the
              HVR in swine.  Sequence analysis of VDJs from individual cells recovered by
              micromanipulation or single cell sorting, will test whether this species uses
              gene conversion.  Light chain diversity will be addressed by cloning and
              characterizing the Vk and Vl loci and then characterizing the Vk and Vl
              repertoire used during fetal life.  

	The 30-day fetal liver (114 day
              gestation) is the first site at which VDJ rearrangements can be found, of which
              an astonishing 95% are productive.  This conflicts with the concept that
              combinatorial joining is random.  Since the proportion of productive
              rearrangements progressively declines to "textbook" levels in older fetuses,
              this raises the question of whether early fetal liver B-cells comprise a
              distinct subset.  Since pro-B-cell-like VDJ rearrangements also occur in the
              thymus, this project will test the hypothesis that B-cells developed in fetal
              liver, bone marrow and thymus, may each generate different B-cell subsets.  
              

	Finally, the role of the ileal Peyers patches (IPP) of the fetal pig
              remains unresolved.  Are they a site for: (a) primary B-cell development? (b)
              antigen-independent diversification of primary rearrangements? or (c)
              development of the mucosal immune system?  It would be over-ambitious to think
              that this issue could be resolved in the proposed project period.  However,
              this project is designed to gain greater insight into the role of the IPPs by
              analyzing the clones derived from individual follicles in the IPP.  

	This
              project also addresses several testable hypotheses about B-cell lymphogenesis
              stemming from observations made during previous NSF-funded projects.  These
              hypotheses challenge certain paradigms of immunoontogeny that are based on the
              mouse model.  Addressing these hypotheses will not only provide a clearer
              picture of B-cell lymphogenesis in this non-traditional species but may also
              broaden the perspective of B-cell lymphogenesis in all species.  




