Title       : Gene Discovery in Aid of Plant Nutrition, Human Health and Environmental
               Remediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0077378

Award Number: 0077378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4414643            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Lou Guerinot Mary.Lou.Guerinot@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Salt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Eide  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey F. Harper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julian I. Schroeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Uptake and translocation of mineral nutrients in plants is essential for plant
              growth and human nutrition.  In spite of recent advances in identifying genes
              involved in nutrient transport, the systems that control acquisition of
              individual nutrients remain largely unknown.  The major objective of the
              project is to identify gene networks that control uptake and accumulation of a
              wide array of plant nutrients and toxic metals.  The approach makes use of
              recent technical advances in inductively-coupled plasma atomic emission
              spectroscopy (ICP-AES) which now permit the measurement of up to 72 different
              elements in 35 seconds per plant sample.  Identifying genes controlling solute
              uptake and accumulation has significance for agriculture, human health and the
              environment.  For example, enhancing the ability of a crop plant to mobilize
              soil nutrients should reduce the use of fertilizers, thereby making agriculture
              more cost efficient and less polluting.  Because plants are the primary source
              of food for humans, either directly or through animal feed, the nutritional
              value of plants is of central importance to human health.  The most widespread
              nutritional problem in the world is iron deficiency.  Increasing the ability of
              plants to provide higher levels of minerals, such as iron, will have a dramatic
              impact on human health.  Furthermore, understanding the pathways by which toxic
              metals accumulate in plants will enable the engineering of plants to exclude
              toxic metals and create healthier food sources, or to extract toxic metals from
              the soil as a strategy to clean up polluted lands and water. 
	
The main aims
              of the project are to:
1) Use bioinformatics to identify genes that
              potentially encode transporters. 
2) Use mRNA expression profiling to identify
              genes that change expression in response to nutrient deprivation or
              overfeeding. 
3) Use nutrient profiling to screen for mutant plants with
              abnormal element compositions.  ICP-AES will be used in a high-throughput
              strategy to determine the relative element composition of approximately 50,000
              "tagged" mutagenized plants (Arabidopsis and either rice or maize if tagged
              lines are readily available in year 2). 
4) Use yeast to obtain functional
              predictions of plant orthologs.  The primary approach will be to conduct
              ICP-AES nutrient profiling of approximately 5,000 knockout lines of yeast.
5)
              Establish a Web site to provide access to data sets and enhanced annotation of
              genes.
6) Initiate collaborative research focused on selected mutations that
              control accumulation of Fe, Zn, K, Na, Ca, Se and Cd to further demonstrate the
              power of this novel approach.
7) Establish a program to train undergraduate
              and graduate students in genomics, informatics and plant molecular biological
              techniques. 
8) Work with the Montshire Museum of Science to develop science
              curricula on metals in the environment.

This project will functionally
              identify many important genes, including those that are involved in: 1)
              mobilizing nutrients in the rhizosphere, 2) cellular uptake and efflux systems,
              3) subcellular compartmentalization of solutes, 4) the operation of phloem and
              xylem translocation systems, 5) central regulation mechanisms, 6) sensing
              nutrient levels, and 7) controlling root structure.  This functional genomic
              investigation will provide the first integrated picture of the genes involved
              in a fundamental feature of all living systems - the selective accumulation of
              essential minerals.

Participants:
Mary Lou Guerinot, PI, Dartmouth
              College
David Eide, Co-PI, University of Missouri
Michael Gribskov, Co-PI,
              University of California at San Diego
Jeffrey F. Harper, Co-PI, The Scripps
              Research Institute
David E. Salt, Co-PI, Northern Arizona University
Julian
              I. Schroeder, Co-PI, University of California at San Diego

