Title       : Collaborative Research: Reproductive tactics in an androdioecious crustacean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0077602

Award Number: 0077602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56648              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Weeks scweeks@UAKRON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter R. Hoeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Plants and animals display an amazing array of reproductive systems.  One of the
              most intriguing is "androdioecy," in which males coexist with hermaphrodites
              (individuals in which both sexes are present), but there are no true females. 
              Androdioecy is rare, as predicted by theory, yet there are a few,
              well-documented cases in plants and animals.  This project is a continuation of
              earlier experiments exploring androdioecy in a freshwater crustacean, the clam
              shrimp Eulimnadia texana.  A three-year examination of this species revealed
              both benefits and detriments to males, and thus to better understand this
              mating system, refinement of these results is required.  Additionally, all
              previous experiments were conducted in laboratory settings.  To truly
              understand the system, field experiments need to be conducted.  The two
              proposed projects will accomplish both of these goals: (1) a laboratory
              experiment will measure the relationship between the proportion of males and
              male mating effectiveness in two natural populations, and (2) development of
              "microsatellite loci" will allow genetic "fingerprinting" of field-collected
              shrimp so that the previous laboratory experiments can be extended into the
              field.
	The proposed projects are one of the few attempts to delineate the
              benefits of outcrossing (offspring produced by mating with males) in an animal
              system.  This information is crucial for developing breeding programs, both in
              agriculture and for the maintenance of endangered species.


