Title       : Neural Basis of Visual Behavior of Limulus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0077583

Award Number: 0077583
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239514             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Barlow barlowr@upstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick A. Dodge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY, Upstate Med Univ
	      750 E. Adams Street
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/464-5476

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1191,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              How do we see? This simple question does not have a simple answer. Vision is a
              complex process that begins with the absorption of light by the eye and ends
              with behavior such as perception and locomotion. Because of the complex nature
              of the vertebrate visual system, especially that of primates, this project uses
              the relatively simple visual system of the horseshoe crab, Limulus polyphemus. 
              Recent work has uncovered the nature of the neural code for mate detection by
              this animal during the day, as the eye is "neurally tuned" for this important
              task.  This work will now be extended by a combined anatomical, behavioural,
              and physiological study of neural coding in the eye and brain with emphasis on
              understanding how the animal can see so well at night, when light levels are a
              millionfold lower than in the day.
	The animal's visual performance in its
              natural habitat (ocean) will be precisely measured in day and night.   The
              project will quantify  the neural information the eye sends to the brain when
              the animal sees in its natural habitat and then analyze how the brain processes
              the information it receives from the eye.  New behavioural and physiological
              techniques developed under NSF support together with a wealth of information
              about Limulus vision establish the animal as an excellent model for studying
              the link between neural coding and behaviour.
	Past studies with Limulus have
              provided milestones in vision research. The proposed studies should prove
              equally productive. They should reveal concepts of neural coding and behaviour
              common to other animals and contribute to our understanding of how sensory
              signals relate to behaviour.  In addition, there are outstanding opportunities
              for undergraduate participation in this multidisciplinary research.

