Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Germline Development in C. Elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a0077172

Award Number: 0077172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleanor M. Maine emmaine@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077172
Maine

The proposed studies investigate the regulation of cell fate
              during animal development.  Experiments focus on how cell proliferation is
              regulated in germline tissue of the model organism, C. elegans.  Germline
              proliferation in C. elegans is stimulated by a signal from cells in the somatic
              gonad. Germ cells that receive the signal will divide, whereas those that do
              not receive the signal will stop dividing and instead differentiate as sperm or
              eggs.  This signaling occurs via a "Notch-type" biochemical pathway. 
              Notch-type signaling pathways regulate development in diverse animal species;
              in mammals, they are implicated in certain cancers and other diseases. 
              
	
Many questions remain about the regulation of germline proliferation in C.
              elegans and how Notch-type signaling provokes a specific cellular response. 
              For example, little is known about the targets of pathway activity or how
              pathway activity is regulated.  Possible targets in the C. elegans germ line
              include genes that promote formation of gametes, such as gld-1 and gld-2. 
              Notch-type signaling could promote proliferation by turning off gld-1 and gld-2
              gene expression.  To better understand how germline development is regulated,
              Dr. Maine and colleagues have identified and studied genes that interact
              genetically with a known component of the signaling pathway, glp-1.  Here, Dr.
              Maine proposes to extend the analysis of several "ego" (enhancer of glp-1)
              genes.  

Previous studies from the Maine laboratory indicate that ego-1 gene
              activity is critical for both germline development and a poorly understood
              process called RNA silencing.  RNA silencing is a means of gene regulation that
              has been observed in plants, animals, and fungi.  It is thought to be a defense
              against viral infection, but the P.I. has data to suggest that it may also be
              an important regulatory mechanism during development.  Consequently, she
              proposes to investigate potential target genes that might be regulated by RNA
              silencing during germline development, including gld-1 and gld-2.   Several
              complementary studies will investigate (1) the expression of EGO-1 protein
              during germline development, (2) whether EGO-1 is essential for phenomena
              related to RNA silencing, (3) potential genetic interactions between ego-1 and
              other genes involved in RNA silencing, and (4) the role of EGO-1 in meiotic
              chromosomal pairing. 

Related studies will investigate other ego genes. 
              They will be tested to determine if they function in RNA silencing; if so, then
              molecular studies will be initiated.  Molecular studies of ego-3 will determine
              the nature of its gene product and how it functions to promote germline
              proliferation.  Analysis of ego-3 will receive reduced effort if it does not
              function in RNA silencing while other Ego genes do so function

