Title       : Characterization of G1sA, Hsp70, and other Asymmetric Division Factors in Volvox
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0077535

Award Number: 0077535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Miller stmiller@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077535
Miller

Cell division is a fundamental process executed by all living
              things, yet surprisingly little is known about how cells decide where to place
              their division planes.  Precise positioning of cell division planes plays a
              crucial role in the development of many plants and animals, by determining the
              relative sizes, shapes, and spatial relationships of the two cells formed by
              the division.  Cell-division geometry is particularly consequential in cases in
              which important cytoplasmic components ("developmental determinants") are
              unequally distributed in the predivisional cell.

This study will use the
              spherical green alga Volvox carteri is to explore mechanisms that regulate cell
              division symmetry.  V. carteri is especially well suited for this purpose
              because it consists of just two cell types, large reproductive cells called
              gonidia and small nonreproductive cells called somatic cells, that are
              generated by a set of visibly unequal, or asymmetric, cell divisions.  At least
              two different genes, called gls (for gonidialess), are required for the proper
              execution of these unequal cell divisions.

In previous work one gls gene,
              glsA, was isolated and shown to encode a protein (GlsA) that is closely related
              to proteins found in yeast, worms, flies, plants, mice, and humans.  GlsA
              protein appears to associate with the cell division machinery, and several
              lines of evidence suggest the hypothesis that it acts, together with at least
              two additional proteins (one of them a member of the well-studied Hsp70 family
              of molecular chaperones), as an adaptor-like molecule that targets the cell
              division machinery to an off-center location during asymmetric division.  The
              long term goal of this work is to test this hypothesis, and to identify the
              other factor(s) that are essential for asymmetric division.  The investigator
              will use cell biological, biochemical, and molecular genetic methods to further
              characterize the mode of action of GlsA and Hsp70 and to identify and study the
              additional asymmetric division factor(s) with which they are hypothesized to
              act.

