Title       : Regulation of Gene Expression by DNA Methylation Patterns in E. coli.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0077501

Award Number: 0077501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjan W. Van der Woude   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Phase variation is a form of heritable, but potentially reversible gene
              regulation, which occurs in bacteria. One of the regulatory mechanisms requires
              the heritable DNA methylation state of specific sites, as has been elucidated
              for phase variation of a group of fimbrial operons in Escherichia coli. This
              methylation-dependent regulation requires deoxyadenosine methylase (Dam). The
              biological significance of specifically Dam-dependent phase variation and how
              the DNA methylation state is inherited is yet to be understood. This research
              aims to address these questions by studying the molecular mechanism of
              Dam-dependent phase variation of the non-fimbrial outer membrane protein Ag43
              in E. coli, and by testing the hypothesis that phase variation is important for
              Ag43-dependent biofilm formation. The long-term goal is to understand the
              biological significance and mechanisms of heritable gene regulation in
              bacteria, specifically those involving DNA modification. Dam-dependent
              regulation of Ag43 requires the oxidative stress response regulatory protein
              OxyR. OxyR is proposed to repress Ag43 expression by binding to the regulatory
              region of the Ag43 encoding gene, which contains Dam target sites.
              Transcription is thought to occur when OxyR binding, and thus repression, is
              abrogated by methylation of those Dam target sites. In Aim 1 the specific roles
              of Dam and OxyR in transcription and phase variation will be addressed. In
              vitro and in vivo analyses will be used to analyze transcription, and genetic
              approaches will be used to identify essential regulatory elements. The Ag43
              locus has been implicated in affecting biofilm formation. Biofilms may
              contribute to bacterial survival and persistence in the environment. In Ag43
              mutants, biofilm formation is defective under certain growth conditions.
              However, the effect of phase variation of Ag43 on this tractable and
              biologically relevant process, has not been addressed. Aim 2 will define the
              role of Ag43 phase variation in biofilm formation using isolates with
              well-defined mutations in Ag43 expression. In addition, it will be determined
              whether Ag43 regulation is altered during growth in a biofilm, addressing the
              adaptive potential of the regulatory mechanism. Regulation of Ag43 expression
              is an amenable system to address questions concerning the heritable nature of
              Dam-dependent gene regulation. In Aim 3, cellular or physiological factors that
              are required to maintain the DNA methylation and gene expression state will be
              identified by isolating and characterizing mutants with altered switch
              frequencies. DNA replication can result in a change in DNA methylation state.
              Therefore, the role of DNA replication in initiating the switch in
              transcription phase will also be specifically addressed. Various bacterial
              species contain Dam homologues, suggesting that this mechanism of gene
              regulation is widespread. Supporting this hypothesis and the importance of this
              modification system was recently underscored by the observation that Dam is
              required for Salmonella virulence. Additionally, DNA methylases that do not
              seem to be part of a restriction-modification system are also found in other
              species, where they may be involved in gene regulation. Principles elucidated
              in this study may therefore be applicable to various bacterial species.
              Heritable gene regulation like phase variation, dictates gene expression in a
              daughter cell, and thus affects the composition of a bacterial population over
              more than one generation. Therefore examining the significance of phase
              variation will increase our understanding of the behavior of bacterial
              populations. Finally, by addressing how DNA methylation patterns are formed and
              maintained in a bacteria, general underlying principles can be elucidated that
              may be applicable to more complex methylation-dependent regulatory systems,
              perhaps even those in eukaryotic organisms.
