Title       : Gender Differences in Children's Hyperactivity, Inattention, and Impulsivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0077633

Award Number: 0077633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255207             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandra A. Brewis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Impulsive, inattentive and hyperactive children have greater social and academic
              problems than their peers, at least in the U.S. Teachers and parents find these
              behaviors difficult to manage, especially in mid-childhood. This research will
              use a comparative, cross-cultural design to clarify whether these behaviors are
              similar, have the same consequences for children, and pose the same challenges
              to parents and teachers, in different countries. This has significant
              implications for child learning and development in cross-cultural
              circumstances, whether in multi-ethnic classrooms in the U.S. or
              internationally. It also has implications for conditions in which children's
              behavior becomes classified as problem behavior, and how interventions for
              these behaviors might be designed to promote academic and social wellbeing for
              children and their caregivers.

The comparison will be made between children
              in three countries: US (Texas), Mexico, and Belize. These cultural settings
              have been chosen because they have varying teacher and parent values about
              children's talkativeness and activity.  Social and academic consequences of
              impulsive, inattentive, and hyperactive behaviors will be compared across these
              settings. Children's behavior will be assessed at home, in the classroom and on
              the playground, using a combination of anthropological, biological, and
              psychological methods.

Particular attention will be paid to sex differences
              in behavior, because previous clinical studies have shown that severe levels of
              impulsive, inattentive and hyperactive behavior are much more likely to be
              found in boys.  By using a biocultural research design, focusing on both
              biological and cultural contexts of the behaviors, this study will be able to
              clarify the roles of cultural and biological variation in producing sex
              differences in these behaviors.  Currently, there is a poor understanding of
              the girls' and boys' behavior patterns, and the different reactions they may
              get from teachers, parents and other children.  This research also has
              implications for children's academic and social well being, and why it may vary
              by sex and ethnicity. Most previous studies have focused only on pathological
              or extreme degrees of these behaviors, ignoring the fact that most children
              display these behaviors at least occasionally.  Yet, even lesser degrees of
              impulsive, inattentive and hyperactive behavior may also have significant
              positive or negative consequences for many children. This study will provide
              the first clear evidence of the naturally occurring range of these behaviors
              and should be of interest to researchers in the fields of anthropology,
              psychology and education.

