Title       : Regulation of Fiber Switching in Lobster Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0077422

Award Number: 0077422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301149             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Mykles don@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Skeletal muscle is capable of significant changes in contractile properties in
              response to normal and pathological conditions.  These changes are brought
              about by fiber switching (transformation), a remodeling process in which one
              set of fiber-type-specific isoforms of myofibrillar proteins (e.g., myosin,
              tropomyosin, and troponin) is replaced by another set in the contractile
              apparatus.  Both hormones and innervation play key roles in determining the
              fiber type composition in muscles from such diverse organisms as crustaceans
              and mammals.  At the molecular level, transformation requires the coordinated
              expression of dozens of genes located on different chromosomes.  In mammalian
              muscle, calcium-dependent signal transduction pathways involving calcineurin, a
              calcium/calmodulin-dependent phosphatase, and calcium-dependent kinases (e.g.,
              protein kinase C, CaM kinase) activate transcription factors that drive the
              expression of slow-type genes during fast-to-slow transformation.

This
              project uses the American lobster, Homarus americanus, in which transformation
              can be experimentally manipulated, to investigate the regulation of
              myofibrillar protein expression by molting hormone (ecdysteroid) and motor
              neuron activity.  Fibers in the claw closer muscles undergo a
              developmentally-regulated transformation as the isomorphic claws of larvae and
              juveniles differentiate into the heteromorphic cutter and crusher claws of the
              adult.  This fiber switching occurs at the boundary between the central
              fast-fiber and the peripheral slow-fiber regions, and thus the transformation
              of a specific fiber is determined by its position within the muscle.  The PI
              will determine the temporal and spatial expression of myofibrillar protein
              isoforms during the intermolt cycle in order to establish whether thin and
              thick myofilament proteins are coordinately expressed.  Another goal is to
              determine the effect of chronically-elevated ecdysteroid on transformation in
              juvenile lobsters in vivo using ATPase histochemistry and in situ
              hybridization.  Since preliminary results suggest that switching occurs during
              postmolt (when hemolymph ecdysteroid level is low), the hypothesis is that
              elevated ecdysteroid would delay or block transformation.  Chronic
              low-frequency stimulation of fast fibers in juvenile claws in vitro will induce
              fast-to-slow transformation.  Transcripts of slow-type genes will be detected
              in single fibers by RT-PCR and in situ hybridization.  The PI will also
              determine how ecdysteroid and serotonin modulate electrically-induced
              transformation and will use pharmacological reagents to identify components of
              signal transduction pathways that mediate transcriptional activation.

This
              research has broad application to understanding the control of fiber
              transformation in both invertebrates and vertebrates.  Exercise, motor neuron
              activity, disuse, disease, and hormones, induce fiber switching in mammalian
              and avian skeletal muscle, but the molecular mechanisms are poorly understood. 
              One of the long-range goals is to identify "master regulators", transcription
              factors that initiate and coordinate slow-to-fast and fast-to-slow
              transformation.  Signal transduction enzymes and transcriptional regulators are
              highly conserved in diverse animal species.  Thus, the study of transformation
              in lobster will provide important insights about the potential interaction
              between hormones and electrical activity on myofibrillar protein expression.

