Title       : Targeting Induced Local Lesions IN Genomes (TILLING) for Plant Functional
               Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a0077737

Award Number: 0077737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2633390            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Henikoff steveh@fhcrc.org  (Principal Investigator former)
              Luca Comai  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : F Hutchinson Canc Res Ctr
	      1100 Fairview Ave. N.
	      Seattle, WA  981091024    206/667-4868

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              There exist numerous genome-scale methods for obtaining mutations useful for
              functional analysis. In traditional genetics, random mutagenesis is followed by
              phenotypic analysis. The availability of large-scale genomic and cDNA sequence
              data, however, encourages reverse genetic approaches. In plants, reverse
              genetics based on transposon mutagenesis or directed anti-sense inhibition have
              succeeded in some cases, but the methods can be labor-intensive and unreliable.
              Even in Arabidopsis, where reverse genetic methodology is most advanced,
              directed antisense mutagenesis is typically the method of choice, in spite of
              the fact that it requires considerable front-end effort and frequently
              fails.

This project takes advantage of a new reverse genetic method that is
              especially suitable for plants. After ethylmethanesulfonate (EMS) mutagenesis
              and self fertilization, DNA samples from several individual plants are pooled,
              and pools are used as templates for PCR using primers that amplify a region of
              interest. To detect mutations, PCR reaction pools are heated and cooled to
              allow heteroduplexes to form between wild-type and mutant fragments, and a
              sensitive mismatch detection method is applied to each pool. Mutants identified
              by this "TILLING" method (for Targeting Induced Local Lesions IN Genomes) can
              be crossed and subjected to phenotypic analysis. In a pilot screen using
              mutagenized seed from Arabidopsis thaliana, transition mutations were
              discovered at the expected frequency for selected regions of the genome,
              including at least one knockout mutation in a gene of interest. Based upon this
              experience, it is estimated that by successively typing ~10,000 plants, a
              scaled-up project will be capable of generating useful mutations more
              efficiently than other methods used thus far in plants. Moreover, this is the
              only reverse genetic method that provides a range of point alleles that may be
              used for analysis of interactions. Given the current concern about genetically
              modified crop plants, there may be agricultural interest in producing variants
              without introducing foreign DNA of any type into a plant's genome.

Using the
              current pooling strategy for Arabidopsis and denaturing HPLC (High Performance
              Liquid Chromatography) as a mismatch detection method, ~100 genes per year may
              be TILLed. However, the use of enzymatic detection of mismatches should
              eliminate the need to sequence individual mutant DNAs, and this could increase
              productivity 10-fold or more. This means that knockouts of most genes in a
              plant are potentially feasible with a modest future scale-up and with future
              improvements in throughput.

Genes will be chosen for TILLING based on the
              needs of the community, both through co-ordination with the Plant Chromatin
              project and from individual requests. TILLING complements forward and other
              reverse genetic approaches, and collaborations are anticipated for extending
              this methodology from Arabidopsis to corn and other organisms.

