Title       : Morphological Evolution, Vocal Performance, And Speciation In Darwin's Finches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2000 
File        : a0077891

Award Number: 0077891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey E. Podos jpodos@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Darwin's finches of the Galapagos Islands, Ecuador, are well known for having
              evolved a wide diversity of beak forms, ranging from the thin probing beaks of
              warbler finches to the massive seed-crushing beaks of large ground finches. 
              Recent data suggest that the evolutionary diversification of beak shape has
              driven corresponding changes in mating song structure, because of the
              functional role played by the beak in song production.  This project aims to
              characterize patterns, causes, and consequences of correlated evolution between
              beak shape and vocal traits. During three field expeditions, finches will be
              captured, banded, measured, released, and their songs recorded.  Evolutionary
              correlations between beak shape and vocal traits will be assessed, the
              functional role of the beak in sound production characterized, and the
              relationship between song structure and song function evaluated, using playback
              experiments.

This project is significant in addressing the mechanisms and
              dynamics of speciation (speciation refers to the process by which new species
              are generated).  In Darwin's finches and many other animal groups, speciation
              is driven by the evolutionary diversification of mating signals.  Mating
              signals provide cues about species identity and thus help to maintain genetic
              barriers among evolving lineages.  The causes of mating signal diversification,
              however, have remained largely undocumented.  The present project will document
              the contribution of ecological diversity and anatomical adaptation in shaping
              mating signal diversification.

