Title       : Development of New Genetic Resources for Auxin Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0077769

Award Number: 0077769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1348086            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Estelle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry D. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Celenza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie Bartel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer Normanly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During the last 60 years, physiological studies have implicated the plant
              hormone indole-3-acetic acid (IAA or auxin) in the regulation of virtually
              every aspect of plant development. Auxin is synthesized in meristems and young
              organs, transported through the plant by a dedicated transport system and
              ultimately produces a specific cellular response. Since the hormone functions
              in all higher plant species, a thorough understanding of auxin homeostasis and
              response will impact all aspects of agriculture. Qualities such as stature,
              shoot and root architecture, shoot strength, seed and fruit size, fruit
              ripening, and the senescence program are all regulated in part by auxin and may
              be targets for directed engineering. Previous studies have demonstrated a high
              level of genetic and biochemical redundancy in most areas of auxin biology. For
              this reason it is important to study a model plant system such as Arabidopsis
              that is amenable to high-throughput biochemical and molecular genetic
              techniques. 

This "proof of concept" award will support an integrated
              analysis of auxin biology that will include biochemical, genetic, and molecular
              strategies. The primary goal of the project is to develop novel high throughput
              genetic screens for genes that function in auxin homeostasis, transport, and
              response. Three screens will be conducted. 
1) Improved analytical techniques
              will be utilized together with robotic systems, to screen large numbers of
              chemically mutagenized Arabidopsis seedlings for changes in IAA levels. 
2)
              Large-scale activation-tagging screens for mutants affected in all aspects of
              auxin biology will be conducted. 
3) A functional screen for genes involved in
              auxin metabolism will be conducted in E. coli cells. 
These screens are broad
              and are expected to recover a diverse collection of mutants. The mutants will
              be subjected to detailed biochemical analysis of auxin metabolism and response
              and molecular studies of gene function. The results of the project will
              establish the groundwork for a comprehensive functional genomics study of auxin
              biology. 

