Title       : Testing Membrane Adaptation Models in Laboratory-selected E. coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0077759

Award Number: 0077759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen G. Gibbs agibbs@arl.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Cell membranes serve as barriers between cells and their environments, and
              between compartments within cells.  Maintenance of membrane function is
              essential for life, but many environmental variables significantly perturb
              membrane properties.  Physiologists and biophysicists interested in membranes
              have proposed several competing hypotheses regarding which aspects of membrane
              structure must be conserved for proper membrane function, but comparative and
              biophysical experiments have not been able to distinguish between competing
              models in a consistent manner.  This study will use FTIR and fluorescence
              spectroscopy to investigate which properties of membranes are functionally
              important in the bacterium, Escherichia coli.  Lines that have been subjected
              to laboratory evolution at different temperatures for ~2000 generations will be
              compared with respect to membrane properties and composition, and new selection
              lines will be initiated to test specific membrane hypotheses.  The predicted
              responses of E. coli membranes to selection differ among models, so these
              studies will provide a strong test of competing hypotheses for membrane
              adaptation. 

In addition to testing membrane models, this research will
              provide testable hypotheses for membrane adaptation in natural environments.  
              If temperature has been as important a factor in membrane function and
              evolution as is believed, the membrane changes observed in E. coli may also be
              found in other organisms adapted to different thermal environments.  This work
              will also have implications for understanding how rapidly organisms can adapt
              to environmental changes.  Many models for climate change predict both higher
              average global temperatures and increased variability.  If 2000 generations is
              not long enough for membranes to adapt to a constant, well-defined habitat,
              then many species will not be able to keep pace with the rate of climate
              change.  Alternatively, these studies may reveal that organisms can rapidly
              evolve improved acclimatory ability, which would allow them to better survive
              variable conditions. 



