Title       : Interneuronal Dynamics in the Neural Code for Taste in the Brain Stem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0077965

Award Number: 0077965
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Di Lorenzo diloren@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The "taste world" of most mammals, including humans, can be divided into a small
              number of taste qualities, e.g. sweet, sour, salty, and bitter. Because most
              tastes in the natural world are a mixture of these taste qualities, it is the
              job of the brain to decide what qualities are present in each taste stimulus
              that we encounter.  One of the ways that it might do this is to have different
              groups of cells that each respond to a different taste quality.  In reality, it
              turns out that most cells in the brain respond to more than one taste quality,
              implying that they can't distinguish between them.
	The proposed project is
              designed to study how the brain can tease apart the various taste qualities
              that we encounter in food by using cells that are broadly responsive. The
              general approach will be to record the electrophysiological responses to taste
              stimuli that are bathed over the tongue from cells in the brain stem and from
              the taste nerves that innervate the tongue in anesthetized rats. In these
              experiments we will test the hypothesis that when a given taste stimulus is
              presented, it generates both excitation and inhibition in the brain and that it
              is this inhibition that allows the cells in the brain to focus their activity
              so that the components of that stimulus can be determined.  We expect to
              confirm this hypothesis and to define the conditions under which this
              inhibitory influence is invoked. Further, we hope to determine the site, either
              in the brain or at the tongue, where these inhibitory effects originate. 
	The
              impact of this project will be a better understanding of how different tastes
              are processed by the brain and moreover, how complex perceptions, tastes and
              otherwise, might be analyzed into their components.

