Title       : Functional Microcircuits of Sensory Neocortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0077694

Award Number: 0077694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey A. Swadlow swadlow@psych.psy.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The cerebral neocortex plays a crucial role in perception, action and higher
              cognitive processes and this has led to an intense effort to understand the
              functional properties of
this tissue.  Major goals of this effort have been to
              elucidate the mechanisms whereby individual cortical neurons obtain their
              diverse response properties and how ensembles
of cortical neurons interact to
              produce global perceptual and behavioral capabilities.  The proposed research,
              conducted in the rabbit, is aimed at understanding the
mechanisms governing
              cortical function in the awake, intact, thalamocortical somatosensory
              system.
	The work is aimed at understanding the transformations performed upon
              thalamocortical inputs to the cortex by the intracortical circuitry, the role
              of feed-forward inhibitory interneurons
in producing these transformations,
              and how these transformations lead to parallel and distinct efferent outflows. 
              Using novel multi-electrode methodology, the activity of thalamocortical
              projection neurons, cortical output (projection neurons), and putative
              inhibitory interneurons will be simultaneously recorded, and interactions among
              these identified elements will be analyzed using methods of cross-correlation
              and microstimulation.  Paired intracortical recordings
              (intracellular/extracellular) will also yield information about interactions
              between interneurons and their neighboring intracortical targets.  Special
              emphasis will be placed on understanding: (a) the rules governing the
              specificity of functional connections among the populations of thalamocortical
              and cortical neurons under study, and (b) the mechanisms underlying
              feed-forward intracortical
inhibition.
	The data obtained from these
              experiments will offer a unique view of the physiology of individual cortical
              neurons studied under natural conditions, and will provide insight into
              interactive networks of cortical neurons and their varied functional
              properties.  Such information is
essential if  we are to understand how
              neocortical networks generates perception, action, and higher cognitive
              processes.  


