Title       : Mechanism of Phospholipase C-gamma1 Activation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0077827

Award Number: 0077827
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwenith A. Jones gaj5m@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077827
Jones
Proteins of diverse function and structural features often can
              be grouped together because they share common methods for controlling function.
               Such is the case for some proteins involved in signal transduction.  For these
              proteins, turning on the protein's function occurs when the protein is targeted
              to and binds to the cell membrane. In the absence of a stimulus, the signaling
              protein is essentially inactive.   It is a conformation of the protein itself
              that maintains it in this inactive state.  Binding of the signaling protein to
              the cell membrane causes a change in conformation that removes the inhibitory
              block, and allows the protein to effect its action within the cell. 
              Phospholipase C-g1 (PLC-g1A) is a signaling protein.  PLC-g1 is located within
              the interior of the cell and becomes activated when it receives signals from
              external growth factors.  Activated PLC-g1 binds to the membrane and hydrolyzes
              phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate (PIP2) to generate two-second messengers,
              soluble inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate and membrane-associated diacylglycerol.
              These second messengers then pass the signal along to other proteins and
              eventually effect an increase in cell division and cell motility. 
The purpose
              of this proposal is to determine whether PLC-g1 can be grouped with other
              signaling proteins that are maintained in an inactive state but become active
              when a change in conformation occurs upon binding to the cell membrane.  This
              project is designed to determine whether a domain of PLC-g1 keeps it in an
              inactive state and which part of the protein is responsible for maintaining it
              in that inactive state. To provide this answer, experiments will be conducted
              that will determine activity of a modified PLC-g1 that is missing a portion of
              the inhibitory domain and of a form of PLC-g1 that can no longer receive
              signals from growth factors. Techniques such as fluorescence, circular
              dichroism, and electron spin resonance will be used to determine changes in
              protein conformation.
The results of this study will increase our knowledge of
              how the function of PLC-g1 is regulated and add to our general knowledge of how
              proteins with divergent functions and structural features develop common ways
              for controlling protein function. 




