Title       : RNA Polymerase II CTD-Binding Proteins in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0077826

Award Number: 0077826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffry L. Corden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Corden
As nascent pre-mRNAs emerge from elongating RNA polymerase
              II (pol II), their post-synthetic fate is determined by a large number of
              RNA-binding proteins. Primary among these proteins are the heterogeneous
              nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) which have been shown to play multiple
              roles in mRNA processing and transport. The broad objective of this project is
              to understand how a subset of yeast hnRNPs interact with the transcription
              machinery to regulate specific gene expression. The central hypothesis of this
              project  is that a subset of hnRNPs and processing factors form a complex that
              binds specific cis-acting sites in some nascent pol II transcripts. The
              formation of such hnRNP-RNA complexes is proposed to lead to transcription
              pausing, arrest, or termination through interaction with the pol II C-terminal
              domain (CTD). CTD kinase I (CTDK-I) may regulate this process by
              phosphorylating the CTD and changing the nature of the interaction with the
              hnRNP complex.  This hypothesis will be tested in the yeast Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae. The first objective is to determine whether interaction between the
              Nrd1p/Nab3p hnRNP complex and the CTD is regulated by phosphorylation and, if
              so, whether CTDK-I carries out this phosphorylation. In vitro binding
              experiments will test the role of CTD phosphorylation in regulating this
              interaction. Genetic experiments will be used to test the role of CTDK-I. A
              second objective is to identify cis-acting RNA elements in genes that are
              regulated by Nrd1p and/or Nab3p. Both genetic and biochemical approaches will
              be used to characterize an autoregulatory element in the NRD1transcript.
              Similar elements will be sought in other genes that are regulated by NRD1 and
              NAB3. The final objective is to determine the stage in the transcription cycle
              regulated by Nrd1p and Nab3p. The autoregulation of NRD1 expression will be
              studied in vivo and in vitro to determine the mechanism of NRD1 function.
              Reaching these objectives will help to define a novel regulatory pathway in
              yeast. While RNA-binding proteins have been shown to regulate transcription in
              procaryotes and in HIV infection, no similar regulatory mechanism has been
              described in yeast. This project draws together the areas of hnRNP function and
              transcription regulation in an organism amenable to both genetic and 

