Title       : Molecular Genetics of Cell Patterning in the Arabidopsis Root Epidermis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0077900

Award Number: 0077900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Schiefelbein schiefel@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0779000
Schiefelbein

All multicellular organisms must solve a fundamental
              problem during their development:  How to generate different cell types from a
              single original cell?  The research conducted in this project is designed to
              address this question and help uncover the molecular mechanisms used by living
              things to produce distinct cell types in appropriate patterns.

This project
              employs a simple model system for studying cell fate specification; the
              formation of the root epidermis in the flowering plant Arabidopsis thaliana. 
              The Arabidopsis root epidermis is exceptional because its two cell types are
              produced in a predictable position-dependent fashion.  Furthermore, the root
              epidermis is formed continuously as the root grows, so the formation of the
              epidermal cells can be easily followed at all stages of development.  Finally,
              plants that lack either root epidermal cell type are viable, enabling
              sophisticated genetic experimentation.

In recent studies, four genes
              encoding putative transcriptional regulators (named TTG, WER, GL2, and CPC)
              have been found to control the patterning of the two epidermal cell types.  It
              appears that the normal patterning of the cell types is due the appropriate
              production, distribution, and interaction of these regulators during root
              development.  The research in the present project period is intended to:  (1)
              more clearly define the interactions between the WER regulator and each of the
              other factors, (2) illuminate the functional relationship between the WER and a
              closely-related transcriptional regulator affecting shoot epidermis cell fate,
              and (3) uncover new regulators of epidermal cell patterning.  The results of
              these studies are expected to provide a greater understanding of the molecules
              and mechanisms employed by Arabidopsis and multicellular organisms in general,
              to generate and regulate cellular diversity during development

