Title       : Genetic Control of Growth on Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2002      
File        : a0077327

Award Number: 0077327
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377607             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda McCarter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              V. parahaemolyticus is adapted to communal life on surfaces. When grown on a
              surface or in a viscous layer, the organism induces a large gene system and
              differentiates into a swarmer cell. Differentiation to the swarmer cell allows
              movement over surfaces and through viscous environments. Cells recognize each
              other, and movement is coordinated or social in nature, resulting in complex
              multicellular behavior and growth in organized communities. The swarmer cell is
              well-equipped to move over and colonize surfaces: it is elongated and
              hyperflagellated. The focus of this work is to unravel the regulatory networks
              that participate in the surface-adapted lifestyle in order to gain insight into
              how bacteria form and maintain communities on surfaces. The hypothesis is that
              different gene sets are turned on and off during the development of these
              communities. One large set, encoding the lateral flagellar motility system, is
              known. The first aim will be to identify genes induced by growth on surfaces; a
              novel transposon and delivery system has been designed to implement search for
              surface-induced genes. Completion of this aim will result in the identification
              of genes involved in the lateral flagellar hierarchy, which has not been
              systematically dissected, and new genes not required for motility but pertinent
              to the surface-adapted lifestyle. A comprehensive picture of gene activity
              (gene identity and timing of expression) of surface-attached bacteria will be
              developed; this will likely reveal the existence of interconnecting regulatory
              circuits to coordinate gene expression. The second aim focuses on one potential
              circuit that has recently been discovered. Mutations in two linked operons
              cause uninducible expression of swarmer cell genes. One operon (fim) encodes a
              fimbrial-like chaperone-usher pair and proteins that may be outer-membrane
              associated. The second operon (fli) encodes an ABC periplasmic-type binding
              protein (similar to Escherichia coli FliY) and a product that resembles a
              number of proteins in the GGDEF-type sensor family. The interactions between
              these gene sets and swarmer cell differentiation will be dissected by using a
              combination of mutagenesis, overexpression, and protein localization
              experiments. These studies should define gene activity pertinent to growth on
              surfaces and trace the network of regulatory circuitry that enables bacteria to
              establish growth and develop communities on surfaces. Understanding the pattern
              of surface-induced gene expression should reveal important principles about how
              bacteria adapt to their environment, coordinate behavior, and develop
              structured communities or biofilms. Moreover, this project will have
              significant educational impact for genetic analysis in Vibrio, specifically
              transposon mutagenesis and the genome-wide search for surface-controlled genes,
              will be used as an undergraduate and graduate level teaching tool.
