Title       : The Role of Supernumerary Subunit in the Bacterial BC1 Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0077650

Award Number: 0077650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Yu linda@okway.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1144,1164,1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077650
Yu
The overall objective of this research is to elucidate the role of
              the supernumeral subunit, subunit IV (Mr = 14,384), in the cytochrome bc1
              complex from a photosynthetic bacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides. Previous
              studies involving site-directed mutagenesis followed by gene complementation
              (in vivo reconstitution) have established that subunit IV is essential for the
              catalytic activity, Q-binding, and structural integrity of the complex.
              However, judging from the 3-D structure model of this bacterial bc1 complex,
              built with coordinates from their mitochondrial counter parts (cytochrome b,
              cytochrome c1, the iron-sulfur protein, and subunit VII), direct participation
              of subunit IV in the catalytic (Q-binding) sites of the complex seems unlikely.
              In this project, the PI wishes to continue to use in vitro reconstitution, in
              concert with biophysical, biochemical, and structural analysis, to probe the
              mode of interaction between subunit IV and the core bc1 complex.
The specific
              aims of this project are: (a) to identify amino acid residues of subunit IV
              involved in interaction with the three-subunit core complex; (b) to identify
              amino acid residues of cytochrome b involved in interaction with subunit IV;
              (c) to investigate the effect of subunit IV on the protein conformation and
              thermostability of the cytochrome bc1 complex by circular dichroism and
              differential scanning calorimetry; (d) to investigate the protein:lipid
              interactions in three- and four- subunit complexes; (e) to examine the Q
              sequestering role of subunit IV using synthetic Q- derivatives; and (f) to
              explore the possible association of supernumeral subunit function with extra
              segments in the bacterial core subunits. 
The research described in this
              project will increase our understanding of the structure-function and
              mechanisms of  action of the Rhodobacter sphaeroides photosynthetic bacterial
              bc1 complex. The knowledge gained will provide a better understanding of energy
              transduction mechanisms in the photosynthetic apparatus.  This may lead to the
              design of methods to improve photosynthetic efficiency and effective herbicide
              design.  It will also enhance our understanding of mitochondrial
              bioenergetics.



