Title       : A High Through-put Screen to Identify and Clone Maize and Arabidopsis Cell-wall
               Biogenesis-related Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0077719

Award Number: 0077719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas C. Carpita   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Discriminate analysis of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectra (FTIR) has been
              developed as a specific, high throughput method to identify mutations that
              affect plant cell wall components and architecture.  This method will be
              employed to demonstrate the throughput rates needed to identify, in mutagenized
              populations of maize and Arabidopsis, a broad range of mutants in the
              biogenesis and dynamic alteration of plant cell wall architecture during growth
              and development.  Both forward and reverse genetic screens will be employed. 
              The FTIR "forward" screen will detect specific alterations in wall structure
              and architecture caused by the insertion of DNA 'tags", regardless of the
              genetic basis of the alteration.  In this respect, the screen will be
              powerfully selective at the end-product level.  Mutations to be identified
              could include those causing defects in wall substrate formation, wall component
              secretion and targeting, wall architecture and dynamics during growth.  Genes
              disrupted in these mutants may subsequently be identified based on the
              insertion position of the tags.  The "reverse" genetics approach will examine
              the effects of inserting DNA tags into genes that are already known to be
              related to cell wall biosynthesis.  It is anticipated that this second approach
              will provide a broad set of cell wall mutants that will serve to further the
              development of FTIR spectrum libraries.  These libraries will be useful to
              diagnose FTIR-selected mutants of unknown genetic deficiency.  A major
              practical goal is to generate plants with genetically defined variation in cell
              wall composition and architecture to permit assessment of these modifications
              on plant development.  As FTIR mutations are confirmed, the plant biology
              community will be informed of them through a web site and seeds and clones will
              be provided to the community through established stock centers.
