Title       : Crystal Structures of the Transcarboxylase Multienzyme Complex and of its
               Subunits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0077488

Award Number: 0077488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $660000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vivien C. Yee yeev@ccf.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland Clinic Fdn
	      9500 Euclid Avenue
	      Cleveland, OH  441950001    216/445-6440

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Yee
MCB 0077488

The objective of this research is to identify the structural
              determinants of multienzyme complex formation and biochemical function for
              transcarboxylase. Transcarboxylase is a 1.2 million dalton multienzyme complex
              that catalyzes the transfer of CO2 from methylmalonyl coenzyme A to pyruvate,
              to form propionyl coenzyme A and oxaloacetate, by way of two biotin-dependent
              half reactions.  This multienzyme complex contains three different types of
              subunits and a total of 30 polypeptide chains: a 396 kDa hexameric central
              "12S" subunit, six 116 kDa dimeric outer "5S" subunits; and twelve 12 kDa
              biotinylated "1.3S" linkers.  X-ray crystal structures of the holo enzyme and
              of its largest (12S and 5S) subunits, in free form and bound to substrate or
              product, will be determined.  The first specific aim of this work is to
              determine the crystal structures of 12S substrate and product complexes, by
              heavy atom phasing and subsequent molecular replacement methods.  These
              structures will identify the structural determinants of substrate binding and
              catalysis for the first transcarboxylase half reaction.  In particular, the
              protein residues which interact with substrate or product molecules will be
              revealed; the geometry and chemistry of these amino acids as well as others
              nearby will be analyzed in order to speculate about likely catalytic
              mechanism(s).  The second specific aim is to determine the crystal structures
              of the free 12S protein, and of 12S bound to biotin, by molecular replacement
              methods.  Comparison of these structures with the substrate and product
              complexes will allow identification of the conformational changes which occur
              upon substrate or biotin binding, and may extend the structural insight into
              catalytic mechanism.  Finally, the third specific aim is to determine the
              crystal structures of the 5S, 6S, and holo enzyme forms of transcarboxylase,
              either free or bound to substrate, by a combination of heavy atom phasing and
              molecular replacement methods.  The 5S structures will provide insight into the
              catalytic mechanism for the second transcarboxylase half reaction, by
              identifying amino acids which are important in substrate binding and/or
              catalysis.  The 6S and holo enzyme structures will highlight conformational
              changes and interaction surfaces which are important for enzyme assembly and
              function.  

The assembly of transcarboxylase crystal structures which are
              being pursued will reveal the features important in homo-oligomeric subunit
              assembly as well as reveal the structural features of intersubunit assembly. 
              These results will provide a rare structural view of a multienzyme complex. 
              Transcarboxylase has historically served as a model system, which is valuable
              for understanding the mechanisms for other (de)carboxylase enzymes that carry
              out similar chemistry.  

