Title       : Comparative and Evolutionary Genomics of Self-Incompatibility in the
               Brassicaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2002  
File        : a0077289

Award Number: 0077289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mikhail E. Nasrallah men4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              June B. Nasrallah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077289
Nasrallah

Plants employ elaborate and sophisticated signaling
              systems that allow them to assess genetic relatedness among pollen donors.  In
              many species of the mustard family (the Brassicaceae), a cell-cell signaling
              system based on the activity of receptor and ligand proteins displayed at the
              surfaces of the stigma epidermis and pollen grains respectively, results in the
              arrest of self-related pollen at the stigma surface.  This self-incompatibility
              system, which is controlled by a large number of variants at the S locus,
              prevents self-fertilization and inbreeding, and promotes cross-pollination and
              outbreeding. The family Brassicaceae is comprised almost equally of
              self-fertilizing and outcrossing species, with self-incompatibility being the
              major determinant of this polymorphism in mating system control. As such, the
              presence or absence of a functional self-incompatibility system determines the
              patterns of genetic variation in populations and influences the rate and mode
              of evolutionary change in this family. 

The S loci of self-incompatible and
              self-fertile species belonging to diverged subgroupings of the Brassicaceae
              will be analyzed. In addition, transgenic experiments as well as interspecific
              hybrids and backcross populations between self-incompatible and self-fertile
              Arabidopsis species will be used to determine which genes are required to
              effect changes in mating system.  These studies will be facilitated by advances
              in comparative genomics, namely the availability of the Arabidopsis nuclear
              genome sequence, the feasibility of constructing large-insert genomic
              libraries, and the rapid generation of molecular markers and maps.  It is
              anticipated that the lineage of genes that play a major role in enforcing
              outcrossing will be traced, promising to shed light on the long-standing
              questions relating to the origin of SI in flowering plants and the genetic
              mechanisms underlying transitions between outcrossing and self-fertilizing
              mating systems. 







