Title       : Space Weather Climatology of High Latitude Electrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0077536

Award Number: 0077536
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Delores J. Knipp delores.knipp@usafa.af.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis K. Chun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda H. Krause  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Emery  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew G. McHarg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USAFA
	      HQ USAF Academy
	      USAF Academy, CO  80840    719/333-4195

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ATM-0001653
Knipp

The PI proposes to develop a concept that will improve the
              possibility of observing the impact of space weather on the
              magnetosphere-ionosphere system, and that will address fundamental physical
              processes related to space weather phenomena.  This will be done by focusing
              operations of sensitive ground based equipment to occur during potentially
              disruptive space weather conditions.  By analyzing these observations in
              conjunction with spacecraft observations, SRI can develop an improved
              understanding of the coupling between the solar wind and magnetosphere and
              between the magnetosphere and ionosphere (generally termed space weather
              "geoeffectiveness").  Thus, the overall objective of the proposal is to observe
              and analyze space weather geoeffectiveness by implementing an operational phase
              and a basic research phase to the program.  The operational phase of the
              program is designed to provide a space weather alert system that notifies
              observers of solar and space conditions during times of activity so that
              appropriate planning of ground-based operations can be established.  The
              development and implementation of such an alert protocol for the
              incoherent-scatter radar community was established under past NSWP funding. 
              The basic research phase of the program is designed to study the
              geoeffectiveness of the space weather event by analyzing data in the form of
              substorms, storms, and convection bays. As the acquired data sets will benefit
              all of these topics, it is anticipated that the results will contribute to a
              number of space weather research programs, present and future.  

