Title       : Nano-Structured Sensors and Other Gas Reactive Applications; II Ciocco, Tuscany,
               Italy; April 9-14, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a0077297

Award Number: 0077297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles V. Freiman engfnd@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : United Engr Trustees, Inc.
	      
	      New York, NY  10017    /   -

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0077297
Freiman

This action supports travel expenses and conference fees for
              selected participants in the United Engineering Conference, "Nanostructured
              Sensors and Other Gas Reactive Applications."  This conference will be held in
              Il Ciocco, Tuscany, Italy, April 9-14, 2000.  Within the broader field of
              nanostructured materials, microstructural engineering and surface reactivity of
              nanostructured materials are of great scientific interest and enormous
              technological potential, especially as they relate to the development of highly
              efficient and mote reliable gas reactive systems.  In fact, advances made in
              the last decade in the development of novel synthesis and processing methods
              make it possible to control the microstructure and the chemistry of these
              materials at the nanoscale level.  Improved characterization techniques and
              modeling permit improved understanding of microstructural effects on the
              complex gas-surface reaction processes. Motivated by the enormous scientific
              interest generated in nanostructured materials and considering their critical
              importance in the development of efficient and cost-effective gas reactive
              systems, it is timely to have this conference.  The conference brings together
              international researchers from academia, research establishments, and industry
              to discuss recent advances in the development of nanostructured materials and
              outline future research directions for this field.
%%%
The proper utilization
              of nanostructured materials, using new and versatile synthesis and processing
              methods, improved characterization techniques, and theoretical modeling, aided
              by system design and integration, will lead to the development of more
              efficient and cost-effective gas sensors, getters, fuel cells, and hydrogen
              storage devices.
***

