Title       : Polymorphism, Metastability and Structure in Conjugated Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0077698

Award Number: 0077698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Winokur mwinokur@wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Conducting polymers exhibit an enormous diversity of interesting and
              technologically important physical behavior.  In an idealized setting the
              quasi-one-dimensional aspects of charge transport along the conducting polymer
              skeleton create an intriguing environment for studying low-dimensional physics.
               The reality is that these materials are polymeric in nature and exhibit a
              wide, and sometimes bewildering, array of attributes which are intimately tied
              to structure-property relationships that exist at molecular length scales. 
              With the advent of increasingly more complex architectures and processing steps
              there is a continuing need to better understand the main underlying
              relationships and to identify the key structural attributes and the associated
              structural evolution. This research represents a continuing effort to exploit
              experimental methods which enable direct and quantitative measures of the local
              structural order in pi and sigma-conjugated polymers whether they are
              crystalline, semi-crystalline and/or amorphous.  Both x-ray and neutron
              scattering techniques will be utilized.  When advantageous, conventional
              scattering methods can be supplemented by anomalous scattering techniques and
              optical spectroscopy.  These experimental studies will be further complemented
              by modeling calculations which generate representative molecular structures. 
              In this way, it will be possible to more completely assess the nature of the
              local structural environment.   In addition to these initiatives, methods will
              be developed for studying the evolution of structure in situ so that subtle and
              transient effects can be discerned and analyzed.
%%%
The knowledge and
              techniques developed through the course of this research will provide basic and
              accurate answers of structure and its evolution within conducting polymer
              hosts.
***

