Title       : Transposable Elements in Rice: A Whole Genome Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0077709

Award Number: 0077709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3415866            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Wessler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sean R. Eddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan R. McCouch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A large fraction of the DNA sequence output from plant genome projects will be
              derived from transposable elements (TEs).  It is estimated that 30% of the
              small genome of rice (Oryza sativa cv. Nipponbare, 438 Mb), which is the focus
              of the next major plant genome project, is derived from TEs.  Unlike a TE, the
              function of a gene can be deduced, in part, through the phenoytpe of a knockout
              mutant, the localization of protein or mRNA and the analysis of microarrays. 
              Such functional genomics approaches are of little value in understanding the
              contribution of TEs to genome evolution and function.  What distinguishes TEs
              from the genic complement of an organism, among other things, is an ability to
              transpose and amplify.  TEs shake up an otherwise conservative genome and, in
              this way, both threaten and enhance genomic potential.  

This project uses a
              functional genomics approach to discern the contribution of the TEs of rice
              that includes three components: (1) the identification and characterization of
              all TE families, (2) the quantification of TE-mediated diversity in closely
              related Oryza sativa cultivars, subspecies and related species and (3) an
              assessment of the contribution of TE- diversity to the creation of phenotypic
              variation.  To this an interdisciplinary, whole genome approach will be used
              with five specific objectives.
(i) To computationally identify rice TEs and
              phylogenetically characterize TE families.  A major focus will be the testing
              of a novel automated repeat element identification algorithm.
(ii) To assess
              the activity of select TE families by using a rapid transposon display screen
              to assay a panel of wide-species crosses and a variety of stress
              environments.
(iii) To determine the chromosomal distribution of 1000 TE
              insertion sites that are polymorphic in two different mapping populations and
              to develop a subset of these into anchor markers.
(iv) To use the mapping
              populations and the anchor markers as the basis for correlating TE-based
              genetic variation with phenotypic variation for selected plant traits.
(v) To
              integrate all data from this project into the RiceGenes database thus adding
              value to the infomation in the form of annotation linking TEs to QTLs, mutant
              phenoytpes, genetic markers and germplasm diversity. 

Transposable elements
              probably account for the huge difference in size among the agronomically
              important members of the grass clade including rice, sorghum, maize and wheat. 
              This consortium will serve as a model for how TEs should be studied in these
              more complex genomes. 

