Title       : Modulation of a Neural Circuit in an Insect During the Molt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0077639

Award Number: 0077639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98553              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol I. Miles cmiles@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to identify a chemical in the blood of an insect that
              alters its feeding behavior. It focuses on the frontal ganglion (FG) of the
              moth Manduca sexta, a part of the nervous system that controls the ingestion of
              food. The FG drives the activity of the first part of the gut, the foregut.  In
              the caterpillar, the foregut is constantly moving, taking in food and moving it
              further down the gut.  Disrupting the function of the FG greatly reduces the
              amount of food ingested by the caterpillar or adult moth. At specific times
              during the moth's life cycle, the activity of the foregut is altered. For
              example, when the caterpillar is preparing to molt, it stops feeding and the
              foregut stops moving for about 16 hours.  A preliminary study found that this
              change in activity is triggered by a factor in the blood.  In the current
              study, experiments, several biochemical procedures will be used to isolate and
              purify the factor(s) in the blood of molting insects that alters foregut
              activity.  Further studies of how the factor(s) act on the FG and foregut to
              alter their activities will be initiated. 
 	This project addresses basic
              research questions and provides the potential for more practical applications.
              One of the most fundamental questions in neurobiology is how an animal's
              nervous system is modified to produce changes in behavior. The large
              identifiable neurons and relatively simple behaviors of insects have allowed
              investigators to carry out detailed analyses of alterations in the neural
              circuitry underlying insect behaviors.  Identification of a naturally occurring
              factor that disrupts a critical component of feeding behavior may prove useful
              for the development of specific chemical controls of insect feeding.



