Title       : Investigation of Charge Transport Along the DNA Double Helix
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2000   
File        : a0077251

Award Number: 0077251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Gruner gruner@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental condensed matter physics program will investigate the
              temperature and frequency dependent transport properties and charge excitation
              spectra of the various modifications of the DNA double helix.  The method
              employed - the measurement of the electric loss at micro and millimeter wave
              frequencies - allows the determination of the conductivity and dielectric
              constant without applying electrical contacts, and will be used in combination
              of optical studies.  The DNA modifications to be investigated include synthetic
              DNA oligomers with tailor-made base pair sequences, together with native DNA
              duplexes; the influence of various counter ions, buffer environment and
              denaturing will also be studied.  The experiments will shed light on the
              electronic and ionic charge transport process along the double helix, will lead
              to information concerning the role of disorder, molecular fluctuations and
              interactions between the electrons and will thus distinguish between the
              different models which have been proposed.  These studies will also lay the
              groundwork for the investigation of electronic effects associated with
              biological processes, such as radiation induced defects and repair.
%%%
DNA
              is an important biological molecule whose function and properties in connection
              with genetic phenomena are well known.  Less studied are its fundamental
              physical properties, for example electronic processes such as charge migration,
              which may be related to oxidation processes and radiation-caused damage and
              repair mechanisms.  This experimental condensed matter physics program will
              study the motion of electronic and ionic charges on the DNA double helix by
              conducting experiments at radio frequency, microwave and optical frequencies. 
              Such experiments should determine whether DNA is a nanoscale conductor or
              semiconductor and help clarify electronic mechanisms of possible biological
              significance.  In the long term the techniques to be developed to study charge
              migration may also be useful as diagnostic tools for the detection of molecular
              properties related to genetic events. 

