Title       : Anomalous Metal in Two Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0077825

Award Number: 0077825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Gershenson gersh@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Haruo Kojima  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dmitrii Maslov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elihu Abrahams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Boris Altshuler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental and theoretical project will address the strong; metal-like
              temperature-dependence of the resistivity, that was observed in the early
              1990's in a low-density and high-mobility two-dimensional electron gas in zero
              magnetic field.  If this effect is actually a metal-insulator transition in 2D
              (2D MIT), the one-parameter scaling theory of localization would be violated. 
              Despite intensive efforts, even the most basic features of the 2D MIT are not
              yet understood.  This research is focused on two interrelated key issues: (a)
              the origin of the anomalous temperature dependence of the resistivity in the
              "metallic" state, and (b) the nature of the ground state of interacting
              electrons in the "metallic" state.  A suite of transport and thermodynamic
              measurements is planned that should distinguish between two major scenarios of
              the phenomenon: a zero-temperature quantum phase transition versus a
              finite-temperature crossover due to the temperature dependence of the
              scattering time.  An important feature of the work is the extension of the
              experimental parameter space down to the lowest accessible temperatures (T ~
              20mK). The experimental studies at Rutgers University are supplemented by the
              theoretical work at University of Florida.  Whereas the main focus of this
              proposal is on fundamental topics, some anticipated results on transport in
              high-mobility silicon and silicon-germanium structures are expected to have an
              impact on a broad spectrum of applications. Graduate students involved in the
              project receive training in fundamental experimental techniques with cutting
              edge technology. 
%%%
According to the conventional theory of electrons in
              disordered conductors, two-dimensional conductors eventually become insulators
              at sufficiently low temperatures.  This theory has been challenged recently by
              observations of a metallic state, first in high-mobility silicon field-effect
              transistors, and later in a number of other two-dimensional structures.  This
              metallic state is driven by changes in the carrier density.  The unexpected
              metallic state might be an evidence for a new ground state owing to strong
              electron-electron interactions (the zero-temperature quantum phase transition).
               Other explanations have also been suggested including those based on the
              temperature dependence of disorder, percolation of carriers through macroscopic
              inhomogeneities, etc.  This combined theory and experiment project is aimed at
              establishing the true nature of the novel metallic state in two dimensions by
              carrying out a variety of transport and thermodynamic measurements.  In order
              to expand the space of experimental parameters, cutting-edge
              ultra-low-temperature cryogenic technologies will be combined with novel
              nano-lithographic techniques.  The experimental studies at the Rutgers
              University are conducted in conjunction with the theoretical work at the
              University of Florida.  Students involved in this research receive rigorous
              training in advanced experimental techniques, and are prepared for careers in
              either academic or industrial environment.

