Title       : Functional Group Interactions in DNA - Protein Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0077667

Award Number: 0077667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry W. McLaughlin larry.mclaughlin@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1144,1154,1166,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
MCB-0077667
McLaughlin

McLaughlin
	In order to probe the weak
              contacts between proteins and nucleic acids in sequence-specific complexes,
              isosteric nucleoside analogues will be employed to introduce incremental
              changes into the DNA recognition site, by what amounts to "atomic mutagenesis"
              of the functional group character.  If a given functional group is critical to
              the formation of the protein-nucleic acid complex then an incremental response
              in the ability to form the complex should be present.  If a functional group is
              unimportant, then no change in complex formation should occur.  The most useful
              analogues are those that do not otherwise alter native inter-strand hydrogen
              bonding or other helix-stabilizing effects.  The analogues used in this project
              will also permit the study of critical structural parameters such as the
              importance of the minor groove spine of hydration and/or metal ion binding for
              the stability of B-form DNA duplexes. Three sequence-specific protein-nucleic
              acid complexes will be examined during the course of this project:  (i) The
              important transcriptional pre-initiation complex (TBP-TATA box complex), one
              that is critically important for eukaryotic transcription, will be studied. 
              The complex itself is unusual in that the protein interacts with the A/T rich
              recognition sequence by binding solely through the minor groove.  Newly
              developed minor groove base analogues will be used both to examine the
              importance of functional group interactions in the minor groove, as well as to
              determine the energetic cost of burying a hydrophilic functional group in a
              hydrophobic interface.  (ii) A study of the Gene-4 proteins, responsible for
              the RNA primase activity in bacteriophage T7 will be pursued.  Photo-affinity
              labeling techniques will be developed.  The information generated should
              complement the data already obtained through nucleoside analogue studies. 
              (iii) DNA polymerases and/or reverse transcriptases will be studied using
              analogues lacking the critical O2-carbonyl or N3-nitrogen in the minor groove. 
              Differences between the DNA polymerase and reverse transcriptase (RT)
              activities may lead to a new class of RT chain terminators.  The studies in
              this project will help to further the understanding of DNA structure as well as
              sequence-specific protein-nucleic acid and ligand-nucleic acid interactions by
              elucidating the location and relative importance of functional group
              interactions that contribute to overall specificity and affinity in such
              complexes.  

