Title       : Characterization of Genes Disrupting Sense Organ Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0077865

Award Number: 0077865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Poole poole@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077865
Poole

New genes are being rapidly identified by genome projects, and
              their functions must be determined. Genetic analysis is a powerful tool for
              identifying the roles a gene plays in complex developmental processes, but if
              the loss of a gene's activity can be partially or fully compensated for by the
              activity of another gene, or if the effects of a gene's loss in one
              developmental process overshadows the effects on other processes, then a
              loss-of-function approach may not help reveal the gene's function. A dominant
              misexpression approach, in which random insertions of a mobile regulatory
              region activates genes, can overcome some of these limitations. A screen to
              disrupt the development of external sense organs in Drosophila was used as a
              candidate system to successfully test the approach. Eight independent
              insertions that resulted in dominant cell fate changes in the sense organ
              development pathway or changes in bristle cell shape were isolated. 
The
              objectives of this of this proposal are to identify the adjacent genes whose
              misexpression results in changes in sense organ cell fate or bristle
              morphology. Once identified, the roles the genes play in normal development
              will be determined, with the goal of understanding how misexpression of the
              genes results in specific cell fate changes or altered morphology. Inverse PCR
              will be used to obtain the sequence flanking the insertion site, and comparison
              with the Drosophila genome project sequence will identify the affected gene.
              RT-PCR will be used to test whether a transcript originating in the insert is
              induced under misexpression conditions. For some of the insertions that change
              the fate of cells in the sense organ lineage, markers that are expressed in
              subsets of cells in the sense organ lineage will be used to identify whether
              under dominant misexpression conditions sensory organ precursor (SOP) cells
              arise normally in each line and divide properly to produce the cells that make
              up a sense organ. The roles the most interesting genes normally play in
              development will be assessed by determining their RNA and protein expression
              domains and their loss-of-function phenotypes. 
The proposed work will make a
              specific contribution to elucidating the mechanisms of how networks of genes
              assign specific cell fates during sense organ development and how gene
              activities contribute to cell morphology. The work also has general
              significance, since as genome projects continue to identify genes, the problems
              caused by redundancy and complex expression will grow. The analysis of genes
              identified by dominant misexpression screens should provide an alternative
              means of assigning functions to genes.

