Title       : Homogenization Applied to Integrate Across Spatial and Temporal Scales in
               Forest/Insect Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0077663

Award Number: 0077663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320850             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Powell powell@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jesse A. Logan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. Bentz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Richard Cutler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Powell
0077663
     In one ecological problem of current interest all
              the
elements exist for application and testing of homogenization to
resolve
              the scale issue and simulate climate and human impacts on
outbreak insect
              species.  The investigator and his colleagues have
developed a deterministic
              spatial model of Mountain Pine Beetle
(MPB, Dendroctonus ponderosae) dispersal
              and mass-attack of pine
hosts.  The model is validated and descriptive on
              spatial scales
of hectares and time scales of days.  In this project they
              use
techniques of homogenization on the MPB/host system to construct
a forest
              scale (> 100 hectare/years) model reflecting the
large-scale emergent
              consequences of current small-scale spatial
and temporal models of insect
              development, dispersal, and
response to climate.  Direct computation on such
              large scales
would be prohibitive; similar difficulties face most
              ecological
simulations involving spatio-temporal heterogeneity at
              realistic
scales and life-system/dispersal interactions.  The
              investigators
develop homogenization procedures that make this type
              of
ecological simulation generally tractable, and implement and test
these
              procedures in the MPB/host system.  The homogenization
procedure generates an
              integro-difference equation (IDE),
operating with year-long clock `ticks' on
              landscape scales.  In a
validation phase, the IDE model is used to classify
              landscapes.
Statistically analyzing misclassifications in comparison
              to
aerial imagery makes the simulation methodology self-correcting.
Finally,
              scenario studies are used to examine consequences of
hypothetical climate and
              management trajectories on host/insect
dynamics.  This illustrates the power
              of homogenization
approaches in an ecological context, and provides needed
              examples
to make these techniques accessible to biological and
environmental
              researchers.
     The method of homogenization is a mathematical
              technique
that allows deduction of large-scale properties from
deterministic
              small-scale models.  To the best of our knowledge
the method of homogenization
              has never been applied to ecological
problems, where issues of scale are the
              focus of much debate.  One
possible angle of attack is joint use of models and
              simulation,
followed by validation with spatially explicit data. 
              Direct
computational approaches to ecological problems with full
description
              of spatial heterogeneity and climatic variation are
extremely difficult due to
              interaction of scales in time and
space.  The difficulty is exacerbated on the
              one hand by the
paucity of validated, deterministic spatial models at
              any
ecological scale, and by the difficulty of extended spatial
observations
              on the other.  In this project the investigators and
his colleagues apply the
              technique of homogenization to the
Mountain Pine Beetle/Lodgepole Pine
              ecosystem to resolve the
scale issue and simulate climate and human impacts on
              population
outbreaks of insect species.


