Title       : Establishment of a Replication Timing Program in Mammalian Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0077507

Award Number: 0077507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Gilbert gilbertd@mail.upstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY, Upstate Med Univ
	      750 E. Adams Street
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/464-5476

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The overall objective of this project is to elucidate how the timing program
              for the replication of chromosomal DNA is established. It is proposed that
              repositioning of sequences in early G1-phase creates microdomains that
              establish thresholds for the initiation of replication.  Specific hypotheses
              derived from this model will be tested. The first project will be to examine
              whether the re-positioning of sequences in the nucleus is associated with a
              remodeling of chromatin.  This work will determine whether the differential
              DNaseI accessibility of early- and late-replicating chromatin is established in
              early G1-phase.  It will also examine whether hypoacetylation of histones or
              association with the chromo-domain protein HP1 is necessary to establish or
              maintain the late-replication time of heterochromatin. A second project will
              test the hypothesis that chromosome architecture mediates replication timing by
              setting thresholds that restrict the access of initiation proteins to a subset
              of origins, focusing on mammalian homologues of Cdc45 and the Cdc7/Dbf4
              complex.  These replication initiation proteins have been implicated as key
              targets for regulating initiation events during S-phase progression in S.
              cerevisiae. This project will examine whether over-expression of these proteins
              can advance the replication timing program in mammalian cells. The final
              project will use a proteomics approach, combined with an in vitro replication
              timing assay, to identify novel candidates for proteins that establish a
              replication timing program.  The working model predicts that intranuclear
              microenvironments are created through the association of specific proteins with
              chromatin.  This project will identify those proteins that associate with
              chromatin during the relatively brief period of domain re-positioning.  It will
              also exploit a cell-free system to enrich for those proteins essential to the
              establishment of a replication timing program. Proteomics offers a potentially
              powerful means to approach complex biological problems that do not lend
              themselves easily to traditional genetic and biochemical approaches. Hence,
              this project will also test the power of this novel technology. 

	How is the
              structure of chromosomes related to the functions that they have to carry out
              in the cell?  Chromosomes can be divided into independent domains.  When they
              duplicate in a process called DNA replication, there is a defined order in
              which the domains are replicated.  Furthermore, all DNA within a single domain
              is replicated simultaneously, coordinated by starting replication synchronously
              from many sites within the domain.  Intriguingly, domains that are not in use
              in any given cell-type are replicated last, while those that are active are
              replicated first and changes in the order in which these domains are replicated
              take place at key stages during the development of organisms.  The relationship
              between changes in the replication timing of domains and the functions of those
              domains during development has been very difficult to study, due to the lack of
              tools.  Recently, a system in which replication of chromosomes can be carried
              out in a test tube was developed and shown to accurately recapitulate the
              replication program of chromosome domains.  These studies have opened up an
              exciting new avenue of research into the relationship between gene expression,
              chromosome structure and DNA replication.  This project will test the
              hypothesis that proteins previously thought to regulate the structure of
              chromosomal domains may directly regulate the replication program of those
              domains.




