Title       : Molecular Genetics of the Yabby Gene Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0077984

Award Number: 0077984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Bowman jlbowman@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077984
Bowman

Most lateral organs of vascular plants are polar in nature,
              exhibiting asymmetries in both their proximo-distal and abaxial-adaxial
              (dorso-ventral or top of the leaf versus the bottom of the leaf) axes.  For
              example, in angiosperm leaves these asymmetries are often manifested as a broad
              distal blade and a narrower proximal petiole in the proximo-distal axis and
              differences in the morphology and distribution of cell types in the
              abaxial-adaxial axis.  This proposal is focused on the establishment of
              abaxial-adaxial polarity in lateral organs.  Specifically, a molecular genetic
              approach to elucidate how cell fate is specified in the abaxial regions of
              lateral organs will be focused on the roles of members of the YABBY gene
              family.  It has been shown that CRC, the founding member of the family, is
              required for the specification of abaxial cell fate in the carpels, and that
              other members of the YABBY gene family promote abaxial cell fate in all lateral
              organs produced from the apical meristem.  This conclusion was based on genetic
              analyses of both loss and gain of function alleles of CRC and gain of function
              alleles of other members of the YABBY gene family.

The aims of the present
              proposal are three fold.  First, four members of the YABBY gene family whose
              functions appear to contribute to the specification of abaxial cell fate in
              lateral organs, will be characterized specifically assessing the shared and
              unique functions of members of the gene family.  Second, experiments aimed at
              elucidating the genetic relationships between members of the YABBY gene family
              and genes that promote adaxial cell fates and other genes that promote abaxial
              cell fate will be undertaken.  Third, the ability to manipulate polarity in
              lateral organs should allow an assessment of interactions between lateral
              organs and the meristems from which they are derived.  In particular, the
              effect of lateral organs consisting entirely of abaxial fates on the fate of
              the apical meristem will be followed.  These experiments should lead to a
              better understanding of how polarity is established and maintained in
              developing lateral organs.

