Title       : Structure and Function of RNase MRP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0077949

Award Number: 0077949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lasse A. Lindahl lindahl@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janice M. Zengel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077949
Lindahl
Ribosomes, the protein-synthesizing machines of all cells, are
              essential for cellular growth and survival. The biogenesis of ribosomes has
              been related to growth rate, development, and even disease and aging. 
              Therefore, it is important to understand the process of ribosome formation. The
              synthesis of these complex organelles requires a series of activities,
              including processing of the precursor rRNA transcript, modification of specific
              nucleotides, and assembly of rRNA with 50-80 proteins. The key features of
              ribosome biogenesis are shared in all eukaryotes from yeast to humans, allowing
              one to make generalizations from what has been learned in studies of model
              organisms. In this project, Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been chosen as the
              experimental organism because of its well-developed systems for genetic
              manipulation. 

These studies will focus on the structure and function of
              RNase MRP, an enzyme that cleaves the precursor rRNA in the Internal
              Transcribed Spacer between the sequences destined for small and large ribosomal
              subunits. This nucleolar enzyme contains one RNA subunit and nine proteins. The
              architecture and mechanism of action of RNase MRP are poorly understood. The PI
              will use phylogenetic sequence comparisons, mutant analysis,
              immunoprecipitation and protein tagging to analyze how each protein subunit and
              territories of the RNA subunit contribute to enzyme structure and substrate
              specificity. The genetic approach will be complemented with RNA structure
              probing and computer analysis of RNA structure and protein-RNA interactions.
              The final goal is to provide a model for the structure and function of RNase
              MRP. 
 


