Title       : SGER: High Energy "Exchange-Spring" Permanent Magnets via Spark Erosion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a0077588

Award Number: 0077588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87958              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ami E. Berkowitz aberk@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth S. Vecchio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0077588
Berkowitz

The goal of this SGER program is to determine the
              feasibility of using a novel technique, spark erosion, to provide the particles
              for a material with strong technological potential, high-energy product
              'exchange-spring' permanent magnets (ESPMs). ESPMs are duplex alloys of
              magnetically 'hard' and 'soft' phases in which the required length scales for
              the two phases are in the several tens of nm range.  These length scales must
              be well controlled for optimum performance and this has been a principal
              obstacle to achieving a satisfactory production method. The spark erosion
              approach controls the sizes of the phases by precipitating them within
              particles of suitable diameters and microstructure. The idea is to produce
              amorphous particles of the appropriate composition and diameter such that,
              after annealing to the equilibrium duplex crystalline state, the length scales
              of the two phases are constrained by the particle size and initial
              microstructure as optimum for ESPM. Spark erosion is an under-appreciated, but
              extremely versatile and economical particle production method. The particle
              synthesis method is on firmer ground than the control of particle
              size/microstructure constraining equilibrium phase dimensions, since a large
              variety of powders have been produced by this method. Hot pressing is the
              primary method for preparing the final product, high-density bulk magnets with
              dimensions of several cm.  A second approach for preparing the bulk magnets is
              thermal spraying, and this technique will be pursued if warranted by the
              results of the hot pressing. Both of these methods should benefit from the
              initial amorphous state expected for the spark-eroded particles since the
              equilibrium crystalline duplex structure can be developed during or after
              consolidation. The conceptual approach, although reasonable, is currently
              unproven. Particle production by spark erosion without contaminants seems
              feasible, but must be demonstrated. In addition, the particle synthesis method
              is a novel and economical one, which deserves attention. It is a technique that
              has great potential for a wide range of applications. Finally, there is new
              materials science to be clarified by examining the influence of particle size
              on precipitate dimensions. 
%%%
The concept for exchange-spring permanent
              magnets (ESPM) has been available since 1991, and it has been intensively
              pursued because ESPM offer the promise of permanent magnets with higher energy
              products than currently available, at a much-reduced cost for the rare-earth
              materials used. The permanent magnet market is huge, and this has inspired a
              great deal of very useful processing and modeling work on ESPM. However, no
              bulk processing technique is available at present.
***

