Title       : Functional Genomics of the Interactions of Tomato and Pseudomonas syringae pv
               tomato DC3000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0077622

Award Number: 0077622
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5728106            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Collmer arc2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Alfano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoyan Tang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Schoelz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Robin Buell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory B. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


Rapid progress has been made in understanding the molecular basis of
              plant-microbe interactions. Tomato has been important in that research because
              of its genetic tractability, its economic value, and the cost of the many
              diseases that afflict it. A centerpiece of that work has been the gene-for-gene
              interactions of Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato DC3000 and tomato. DC3000 has
              emerged as an important model in molecular plant pathology because of its
              genetic tractability, because it also is a pathogen of Arabidopsis, and because
              its interactions with plants appear representative of many prevalent bacterial
              and fungal pathogens. An additional factor that makes DC3000 experimentally
              attractive is the evidence that its parasitic abilities are largely based on
              (an unknown number of) effector proteins that are injected into plant cells by
              the type III secretion system. Identification of these effectors will provide
              the basis for orderly dissection of the molecular processes underlying
              pathogenicity, and these proteins, which presumably have evolved to exquisitely
              alter plant gene expression and metabolism, are a likely source of new tools
              for plant biologists. Consequently, the first objective of this project is the
              sequencing of the complete genome of DC3000 by The Institute for Genomic
              Research and genome-based searches for genes encoding effector proteins and
              other potential virulence factors. Subsequent objectives involve microarray
              analyses to identify genes and regulons in both DC3000 and tomato that are
              likely to be important in the interaction and the development of a series of
              green fluorescent protein-based tools for monitoring molecular/cellular events
              in living plant tissues during bacterium-plant interactions. Because DC3000
              interactions with tomato (and Arabidopsis) involve highly localized cellular
              events and appear to be highly multifactorial and dependent on redundant
              factors, these new tools will be essential for a functional genomic analysis of
              pathogenesis and defense. Other important objectives of the project involve the
              establishment of a community-oriented functional genomics annotation web site
              and database that will serve the wider research community and also provide the
              centerpiece for educational outreach activities involving high school students.
              

Deliverables

The key deliverables for the project are the complete
              genomic sequence of P. s. tomato DC3000, cell biology indicator plants, and
              bacterial mutants. The draft sequence of the genome is available through <a
              href=www.tigr.org/tdb/mdb/mdbinprogress.html>
              www.tigr.org/tdb/mdb/mdbinprogress.html </a>, effector gene coordinates and
              other resources are available through the project web site <a
              href=http://pseudomonas-syringae.org> http://pseudomonas-syringae.org <a/>

