Title       : Low Energy Nuclear Physics at Princeton - The Borexino Solar Neutrino Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a0077423

Award Number: 0077423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2100000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank P. Calaprice calaprice@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay B. Benziger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1234      LOW ENERGY NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0077423
Calaprice
In 1938, Hans Bethe provided the first explanation of the
              energy production inside the Sun that was able to account for the energy flux
              we have observed over the lifetime of the Earth.  This theory is based on
              thermonuclear reaction processes occurring in the Sun's core.  In Bethe's
              seminal work, two energy production mechanisms were discussed: the so-called
              carbon-nitrogen-oxygen (CNO) and the proton-proton (pp) cycles.  Today, it is
              the latter process that is thought to be responsible for the production of more
              than 98% of the energy flowing from the Sun.   The pp cycle consists of a
              series of nuclear reactions that convert four hydrogen atoms to a helium atom,
              releasing an energy of 26.7 Mev for each conversion.  The energy is released in
              the form of charged particle kinetic energies, gamma rays, and neutrinos. 
              Because of their weak interaction, the neutrinos leave the sun with very few
              interactions.
The "solar neutrino problem" came in existence more than 35
              years ago, when the pioneering "Chlorine" experiment of Ray Davis and
              collaborators showed that the actual number of neutrinos measured on Earth was
              only about 1/3 of the number predicted by the "standard solar model".  Since
              then, other experiments have been performed and all find a deficit of observed
              neutrinos, compared to the prediction.  The present body of experimental
              evidence indicates that the deficit is not due to a flaw in our understanding
              of the Sun, but rather, is caused by fundamental neutrino processes that
              convert the normal electron-type neutrinos produced in the sun to neutrinos not
              readily detected in the current detectors.   The neutrino conversions or
              "neutrino oscillations" can occur if the neutrino has a non-zero mass.  But a
              non-zero neutrino mass is contrary to standard particle physics theory.  Thus,
              the "solar neutrino problem" has become an issue of fundamental importance to
              elementary particle physics.  If the neutrino does have mass, as suggested by
              the current experiments, new fundamental physics theories will be
              required.
Borexino is a new solar neutrino detector designed to detect  low
              energy solar neutrinos by use of a large 300 ton liquid scintillator.  The
              detector will be located in the Gran Sasso underground laboratory in Italy. 
              It's principle objective is to detect the mono-energetic Be-7 neutrino at an
              energy of 0.86 MeV.  According to current analysis of solar neutrino data, the
              Be-7 neutrino is expected to exhibit maximal neutrino oscillation effects. 
              Borexino will attempt to observe direct evidence of neutrino oscillations and
              confirm the present hypothesis of neutrino mass.  The signals to be searched
              for include very large annual and day/night variations in count rate  that are
              uniquely caused by neutrino oscillations. 


