Title       : Regulation of Ribosomal Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0077529

Award Number: 0077529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360691             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kalpana Chakraburtty chakra@mcw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Medical Col of Wisconsin
	      8701 Watertown Plank Road
	      Milwaukee, WI  532263548    414/257-8296

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 0077529
Charkaburtty
The central theme of this proposed research is to
              investigate the molecular mechanism of the novel yeast elongation factor 3
              (EF-3) uniquely required by yeast ribosomes for translation. A unique
              structural feature of EF-3 is the presence of the duplicated ATP-binding
              cassettes (ABC or NBS motifs) similar to that present in transporter proteins
              such as CFTR and multidrug resistant protein MDR.  EF-3 is an ATPase. It's
              function in translation requires ATP  hydrolysis.  The intrinsic ATPase
              activity of EF-3 is stimulated two orders of magnitude by yeast  ribosomes. In
              this project, the PI will investigate the function of the duplicated
              ATP-binding sequence motifs in translation by oligo-directed mutagenesis
              studies. The role of these motifs will be analyzed by directed mutation of the
              invariant lysine residue in motif-A, the aspartate in motif-B and the invariant
              glycine in motif-C.  Each of these amino acid residues has been shown to
              coordinate with ATP.  Na-orthovanadate will be used to selectively inactivate
              one of the two NBS motifs.  The cooperative or independent function of the two
              NBS motifs will be analyzed by trapping the Mg-ADP-orthovanadate complex
              preferentially at one site. A battery of biochemical tests are available to
              analyze the effects of NBS mutation in EF-3 function. The second objective of
              this research will be to initiate x-ray crystallographic analysis of the
              ATP-binding domain of EF-3.  The structural analysis will be initiated in
              collaboration with the macromolecular crystallography group at the University
              in Aarhus, Denmark. The PI will attempt to crystallize the full length EF-3 and
              the ATP-binding domain in the presence and absence of ATP analogs. The
              ATP-binding domain will be expressed in an E. coli expression system to obtain
              seleno-methionine substituted EF-3. This substitution allows rapid structure
              determination by the multiple anomalous dispersion method. 

Deciphering the
              function of EF-3 at the molecular level can be expected to provide new insights
              into the biochemical mechanism of translation-elongation and the role of EF-3
              in maintaining translational accuracy. YEF3 gene is essential for the growth of
              fungi. The  indispensable role of EF-3 in fungi remains an enigma in the face
              of its apparent dispensability in all other non-fungal systems.  Clearly, the
              question is what protein or RNA species replace(s) the function of EF-3 in
              higher eukaryotes. In order to determine whether there is an equivalent factor
              in other systems, it is important to know more about this protein.  It will be
              interesting to learn why mammalian ribosomes do not require EF-3.  The answer
              to this last question is of significant practical importance as EF-3 is a
              potential target for anti-fungal drugs. The availability of the x-ray crystal
              structure data of  EF-3 and its ATP-binding domain is expected to further our
              understanding of its binding site on the ribosome. The information, in turn,
              should provide better understanding of the function of EF-3 in translation.  
              

 

