Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Arabidopsis COP9 Signalosome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0077217

Award Number: 0077217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $650000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xing Wang Deng xingwang.deng@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Higher plants can monitor environmental signals and control growth and
              development in a manner optimal for the prevailing environment. The long-term
              goal of this research is to understand the molecular mechanisms whereby the
              COP9  signalosome is used to integrate environmental and developmental signals
              in plants. The COP9  signalosome is an eight-subunit protein complex which was
              identified and characterized in this laboratory. Molecular cloning and
              identification of the corresponding COP/DET/FUS loci for each subunit is close
              to completion. The COP9 signalosome has recently been found in mammals and is
              probably present in most multicellular organisms. Recent work has suggested
              that the COP9 complex directly interacts with both a SCF type ubiquitin protein
              ligase associated with auxin regulation and the 26S proteasome and thus
              probably plays a role in regulated protein degradation mediated by the
              ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Those findings will be extended and their
              functional implications in light and auxin regulated development examined. The
              specific aims of this research are:

1. The in vivo association of an
              Arabidopsis CUL 1 containing SCF type ubiquitin ligase (E3) complex with COP9
              signalosome will be confirmed and its possible regulation by light and other
              light regulatory genes investigated,
2. The possible association of the COP9
              signalosome with the auxin specific SCFtir1subtype E3 complex and its possible
              role in regulating auxin controlled physiological responses will be
              investigated.
3. Yeast two hybrid or in vitro binding assays will be used in
              combination to examine the pairwise interactions among the COP9 signalosome
              subunits and between the subunits of SCF complex and the COP9 signalosome. The
              proteins outside the complexes including COP1, HY5 and the demonstrated nuclear
              localized phyochromes and crytochromes will also be examined as time
              allows.
4. The phenotype of the transgenic lines which specifically alter the
              expression or activity of individual subunits of the COP9 signalosome will be
              characterized at the morphological, molecular and biochemical levels in both
              seedlings and adult plants. Weak or inducible phenotypes using reverse genetic
              approaches will be created in order to investigate both COP9 and possibly
              subunit function in developmental stages after the seedling stage. 
              

Accomplishment of these objectives will reveal fundamental cellular and
              biochemical functions of the evolutionarily conserved COP9 signalosome and its
              linkage with the environmental and developmental signals that regulate plant
              growth.

