Title       : MAA Isomerase to Tetrachlorohydroquinone Dehalogenase: Evolution in Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0077569

Award Number: 0077569
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelley D. Copley copley@cires.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077569
Copley

Xenobiotic compounds released to the environment exert
              selective pressures on microorganisms that promote the evolution of new
              catabolic pathways.  Recruitment of pre-existing enzymes to serve new functions
              is one important strategy by which microorganisms assemble new catabolic
              pathways.  Sphingomonas chlorophenolica appears to have recruited
              maleylacetoacetate (MAA) isomerase to serve as a tetrachlorohydroquinone (TCHQ)
              dehalogenase during biodegradation of the toxic xenobiotic pesticide,
              pentachlorophenol.  MAA isomerase catalyzes the glutathione-dependent
              isomerization of a double bond during the catabolism of tyrosine.  TCHQ 
              dehalogenase replaces chlorine substituents on TCHQ and trichlorohydroquinone
              with hydrogen atoms, a process which results in the oxidation of two molecules
              of glutathione to glutathione disulfide.  Although these reactions are
              remarkably different, TCHQ dehalogenase has considerable sequence identity with
              known MAA isomerases in the active site region and has substantial isomerase
              activity.  Initial efforts will be directed at a rigorous analysis of the
              function of the progenitor protein, including elucidation of the reaction
              mechanism and identification of the roles of active site residues. 
              Subsequently,  a detailed analysis of the mutations required to develop and
              optimize the altered activity will be carried out, with emphasis on
              understanding the function of each residue that is changed. Finally, in vitro
              evolution techniques will be used to try to evolve a more effective enzyme by
              alleviating the substrate inhibition that limits the catalytic ability of TCHQ
              dehalogenase.  

This work will provide new insights into the evolution of
              new enzymes in response to environmental toxins. It will also yield important
              information about the adaptation of the generic catalytic capabilities of a
              protein scaffold for dramatically different purposes that should provide
              inspiration for protein engineers interested in developing new catalysts. 
              Finally, it will provide a gene for an improved TCHQ dehalogenase that should
              be useful in the engineering of an improved strain of S. chlorophenolica with
              an enhanced ability to degrade pentachlorophenol. 



