Title       : The Genetic and Molecular Basis of Sex Determination in Ceratopteris
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0077558

Award Number: 0077558
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo Ann Banks   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Pruitt  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Gametophytes of the fern Ceratopteris richardii are sexually
              dimorphic, either hermaphroditic or male.  The determinant of sex in this and
              other ferns is antheridiogen, a gibberellin-like pheromone that is secreted by
              the hermaphroditic gametophyte and promotes male development of other sexually
              undetermined gametophytes.  The plant hormone abscisic acid blocks the
              antheridiogen response.  The primary objective of this proposal is to
              understand how antheridiogen and abscisic acid govern the sex of the
              Ceratopteris gametophyte.  The genetic analysis of five phenotypic classes of
              sex-determining mutants (12 loci) has led to a hypothetical sex-determining
              genetic pathway in this species.  To understand how these genes regulate sex
              determination at the molecular level, it will be necessary to clone these
              genes.  The objectives of the proposed research are to continue the genetic
              analysis of sex determination and develop methods required to clone the
              sex-determining genes in Ceratopteris.  These methods include transformation,
              which will allow us to incorporate reverse genetic approaches to study gene
              function, and endogenous transposable element identification, which will
              provide new options to clone the many genes that have been identified by
              mutation.

	Understanding how sex is determined in plants is an important
              developmental question whose answer may ultimately have practical applications
              in agriculture and plant breeding.  The proposed studies will provide a basic
              understanding of the genes involved in this process and will also be of value
              in understanding how the fate of a plant cell (the fern spore) is ultimately
              regulated by antheridiogen, a gibberellin-like pheromone.	  

