Title       : Tunicate Lectins as Acute Phase Reactants in Innate Immunity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0077928

Award Number: 0077928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerardo R. Vasta vasta@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hafiz Ahmed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Quesenberry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              From the early studies on invertebrate lectins, their designation as
              'protectins' was proposed to suggest that, because invertebrates lack adaptive
              immunity mediated by immunoglobulins, B and T cells, these proteins would
              mediate internal protection for the adult or its eggs against microbial or
              fungal infection. The modern era of research on animal lectins has seen a vast
              expansion on these foundations, to find lectins from vertebrates in direct
              participation in innate immune functions, as LPS-binding molecules, opsonins,
              and complement-activating factors. Numerous lectins with immune-related
              functions have been described, particularly among the C-type, lectins that
              require Ca++ in their carbohydrate-recognition domain (CRD) for binding to
              ligand, and share a CRD sequence motif. Recently, some members of the galectin
              family, another major structural class of lectins which do not require Ca++ for
              binding and share a different CRD motif, have been proposed to participate in
              immune functions.
This laboratory has focused on lectins as 'non-self'
              recognition molecules, as the first step of the immune response in
              invertebrates, using the protochordate Clavelina picta as the model organism.
              Protochordates lack adaptive immunity, and thus, are suitable models to examine
              innate immunity mechanisms of invertebrates that may have been conserved
              through the vertebrate lineages. With prior NSF support this laboratory has:
              (a) identified and characterized in C. picta a unique soluble C-type lectin
              (CPL-III) that not only carries both MBL- and selectin-like CRDs, in a single
              polypeptide subunit, but also binds both 'non-self' (environmental bacteria)
              and 'self' (tunic sulfated glycan) ligands, (b) achieved partial
              characterization of putative molecular partners for complement activation, the
              serine protease MASP, and complement component C3, (c) demonstrated the
              presence of a CPL-III-like protein on the surface of the hemocytes, and (d)
              characterized two distinct galectins, one of which is distinctly expressed in
              hemocytes. 
By addressing the structure and functional aspects of CPL-III,
              MASP, C3, and galectin, and investigating their coordinated activity, this
              research will establish a link between C-type lectins and galectins in
              complement activation and opsonization. Preliminary results make C. picta an
              ideal model system to examine the potential coordinate expression and
              biological roles of the two lectin classes (C-type lectins and galectins) in
              innate immunity. The tandem organization of CPL-III distinct CRDs, their
              homologies to mammalian MBL and selectins, and their binding to 'self' and
              'non-self' carbohydrate ligands, may provide insight into the evolutionary
              history of mammalian collectins and selectins. Furthermore, to establish the
              role of CPL-III as the 'trigger' of an integrally functional lectin-mediated
              complement activation pathway, would constitute the strongest indication that
              this pathway preceded the antibody-mediated pathway in evolution, as proposed
              earlier upon the discovery of C3 in deuterostome invertebrates. This would
              represent a fundamental advance in our understanding of innate immunity, which
              would transcend the invertebrates/vertebrates boundary.



