Title       : Functional Genomics of the Arabidopsis gp91-phox NADPH Oxidase Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0077887

Award Number: 0077887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery L. Dangl dangl@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9260,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plants recognize and respond to pathogen attack with specific
              defense
mechanisms. The rapid production of Reactive Oxygen Intermediates
              (ROI),
from molecular oxygen, in plants has been correlated with
              resistance
responses against pathogens. These oxygen derivatives can be toxic
              to
invading microbes and can serve as signals to the plant cells
              being
invaded. ROI accumulation is frequently correlated with the
              Hypersensitive
Response (HR), a kind of programmed cell death (PCD) which
              probably also
requires nitric oxide (NO) formation. In addition, ROI play a
              role in
morphogenetic phenomena like cell elongation, strengthening of the
              cell
wall, lignification and response to other stresses such as wounding
              attack
by insects, saline and cold stress. Examples of developmentally
              regulated
cell death include the formation of specialized structures like
              xylem,
organ sculpting (formation of certain leaf lobes, floral organ
              abortion),
the degeneration of organs once they have accomplished their
              function (the
embryo suspensor, or the aleurone and the endosperm after the
              seed
germination) and senescence. In flowers, the interior cell layer of
              the
anther locule (the tapetum) undergoes PCD during pollen development.
              The
role of ROI in these processes is largely unexplored.

Several
              biochemical mechanisms have been proposed to explain ROI generation
by plants.
              However, various lines of evidence implicate an NADPH oxidase,
analogous to
              that which generates the respiratory burst in mammalian
phagocytes, as the
              source of the ROI detected in plants, at least upon
infection.

This
              investigator has found transposon insertions in the coding region of 8
              Arabidopsis Atrboh
homologs of the mammalian gp91phox, the key membrane bound
              NADPH-binding
flavocytochrome b558 so far identified. These mutant lines are
              an
incomparable tool to dissect the role of specific gp91phox homologues,
              not
only in plant defense but also in relation to developmental processes,
              PCD
and other responses to the environment. Preliminary data demonstrate
that
              there is redundancy in this gene family, and that ROI generated via
the
              gp91-phox protein play a role in at least one critical
              developmental
process.

The identification of the Atrboh genes enables the
              PI to look for more
components in early steps of the signal transduction
              pathway to defense,
and to study the mechanism that activates the plant NADPH
              oxidase.

