Title       : Molecular Code for Cooperative Free Energy Transduction in Human Hemoglobin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0077596

Award Number: 0077596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary K. Ackers ackers@biochem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jo Holt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ackers
MCB 0077596

Research under this program has yielded the first
              determination of cooperativity contributions by all eight
              configurationally-distinct O2 bound intermediates of human hemoglobin at
              physiological pH. Results showed that the site-specific distribution of O2
              affinities through the 16-step binding cascade does not conform to either of
              the traditional allosteric models ("concerted" MWC or "sequential" KNF).
              However, the experimentally-resolved distribution was fully consistent with the
              Symmetry Rule model (Ackers et. al (1992) Science 255, 54) which incorporates
              both sequential and concerted structural transitions according to site-specific
              rules. In the next phase, these studies will be extended to learn how the
              O2-linked proton release (i.e. the physiologically important Bohr effect) is
              modulated at all sixteen reaction steps of the binding cascade. To accomplish
              this objective, the ten combinatorial forms of human hemoglobin having 0 -> 4
              O2 bound will be investigated at a series of pH values (7.0 - 9.5) to evaluate
              their site-specific contributions to the classical Bohr effect. Experimental
              methods developed previously under this program for hybrid tetramer studies
              will be employed (i.e., stopped-flow and haptoglobin kinetics, isoelectric
              focusing, dimer hybridization, analytical gel chromatography and direct O2
              binding). The resulting databases will be analyzed using thermodynamic linkage
              theory to yield the 16 site-specific Bohr proton contributions of the
              cascade.

The significance of this research lies both in its methodological
              innovation for experimentally dissecting the functional rules of a complex
              macromolecular system at the site-specific level and in the importance of human
              hemoglobin itself, as a prototypic model for numerous other allosteric
              proteins.  While the importance of understanding complex multi-subunit protein
              systems is widely recognized, as a result of the explosive growth of genomic
              and proteomic databases and the numerous discoveries from cell biology and the
              exciting goals of protein design, there is much ongoing interest and debate
              over the molecular mechanisms of allosterically-regulated proteins, including
              that of human hemoglobin. 


