Title       : Functional Organization of a Continuously Growing Compound Nose
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0077474

Award Number: 0077474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309929             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles D. Derby   (Principal Investigator current)
              Pascal E. Steullet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is to understand how nervous systems are organized to allow animals
              to perceive their odor worlds and to respond appropriately. The animal model to
              be used in this work is the spiny lobster, and the system is its chemosensory
              system -- the olfactory organ, called the 'antennule' or 'nose').  The spiny
              lobster is ideal as an animal model because its sense of smell is very well
              developed and has been well studied at many levels, thus providing us with an
              intellectual framework from which to ask higher-order questions about sensory
              processing.
To understand the functional organization of this system, it is
              necessary to understand not only the adult pattern of organization, but also
              how during growth and development this pattern is established and maintained.
              So, the first major aim of our project is to compare the central connections
              and behavioral roles of the several distinct components of the olfactory organ
              of adult animals - what is the role of each pathway in olfactory discrimination
              and orientation tasks, and how are these roles related to their peripheral and
              central neural organization. Behavioral and anatomical techniques will be used
              to answer this question.
The second major aim is to understand how this
              olfactory organ maintains its functional organization throughout the animal's
              life, even while there is a continuous process of birth, maturation, and death
              of olfactory cells. This aim will be answered with cellular, molecular, and
              physiological approaches to development. These studies will generate an
              understanding of the dynamic nature of this chemosensory system and of the
              developmental factors that control olfactory processing. In the end, it will
              lead to a comparative view of neural solutions to fundamental problems of
              sensory processing.

