Title       : Specificity and Range of NO/cGMP Signaling in the CNS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0077812

Award Number: 0077812
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry A. Trimmer btrimmer@emerald.tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077812
Trimmer

RANGE AND SPECIFICITY OF NO/CGMP SIGNALING IN THE CNS Pi
              Barry A. Trimmer, Tufts University

One of the biggest challenges in biology
              is to understand how the brain produces thought and actions.  It is clear that
              these processes depend on complex communication between nerve cells (neurons)
              through the secretion of specific chemicals called neurotransmitters.  These
              chemical messages are non-nally detected and interpreted by receptor proteins
              on nearby cells.  However, some neurons signal by the production of an unstable
              soluble gas, nitric oxide (NO).  This unusual messenger was discovered only
              recently hence comparatively little is known about its role in the brain.  This
              research project seeks to understand the special functions of nitric oxide when
              it is released from neurons.  We have identified individual nitric
              oxide-producing and responding neurons in the living nervous system and our
              goal is to establish how they communicate.  In particular, how far does nitric
              oxide spread in the brain and how is it targeted to specific neurons?  These
              experiments use well-established electrophysiological methods together with a
              novel technology in which nitric oxide is localized using a fluorescent
              dye.
Nitric oxide has important regulatory functions in the cardiovascular and
              immune systems but in the brain its ability to simultaneously contact vast
              numbers of neurons give it the potential to coordinate complex tasks.  By
              exploring the mechanisms, specializations and limitations of nitric oxide
              signaling this research will help to understand how groups of neurons work
              together to produce appropriate behaviors.



