Title       : Functional Genomics of Chloroplast Biogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0077756

Award Number: 0077756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2732420            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice Barkan abarkan@molbio.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Stern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maureen R. Hanson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The chloroplast is an essential organelle whose biogenesis is a complex,
              orchestrated process central to plant growth and development. Many hundreds of
              nuclear genes are involved in the import of nucleus-encoded proteins, the
              intra-organellar sorting of nucleus- and chloroplast-encoded proteins, the
              expression of chloroplast genes, the assembly of chloroplast enzymes, and the
              regulation of these processes. However, only a small proportion of such genes
              have been characterized in any detail. The goal of this project is to develop,
              use, and disseminate a set of complementary and powerful resources for the
              genetic and biochemical dissection of this complex process.  

Maize offers
              an ideal set of attributes for this project. In addition to its superb genetic
              tools and the capacity to generate mutations at high frequency with Mu
              transposons, this project exploits the fact that non-photosynthetic mutant
              tissue can readily be obtained for biochemical analysis.  The core resource
              that will be developed is a saturated collection of transposon-tagged
              chloroplast-defective maize mutants.  Mutants will be selected from Mu-active
              maize lines based upon their chlorophyll-deficient leaves and/or increased
              chlorophyll fluorescence, an indication of a block in photosynthetic electron
              transport.  Previous studies support the notion that one of these easily
              identified phenotypes will result from a disruption of most aspects of
              chloroplast biogenesis (import of proteins into the organelle, lipid, pigment,
              and prosthetic group synthesis, chloroplast gene expression, intra-chloroplast
              protein sorting, assembly of the photosynthetic apparatus). 

The mutant
              collection will be used in two ways:  (i) To determine the role of genes of
              known sequence but unknown function; and (ii) To discover new genes that play
              critical roles in chloroplast biogenesis and function.  

(i) Genome
              sequencing projects have unmasked thousands of predicted chloroplast-localized
              proteins, the majority of which have no known function.  To determine the roles
              of such proteins, the mutant collection will be used to develop a reverse
              genetics resource, called Photosynthesis Mutant Search (PMS).  PMS, already
              functioning on a small scale, consists of DNA pools from plants with
              chloroplast defects caused by Mu insertions.  1200 independently-arising
              mutants are currently in the collection; this number will be increased to
              ~2000, at which point it is predicted that the collection will be saturated.
              The small number of DNA pools can be screened in a cost-effective manner to
              find mutant alleles of genes of known sequence with suspected roles in
              chloroplast biogenesis. Mutants will be identified and provided as a service. 
              Users will analyze the mutant phenotypes to elucidate the function of the
              disrupted gene.

(ii) To discover new genes that play critical roles in
              chloroplast biogenesis and function, the same mutant lines will undergo
              "snapshot" characterization of visual phenotype and chloroplast protein and RNA
              defects. The description of each mutant will be incorporated into a web site
              and the mutants will be made available to other researchers.  From these
              snapshots, users will order specific lines for further study and cloning of the
              disrupted gene. 

In addition, the team of collaborators will form a
              synergistic partnership to use these tools to focus on one aspect of
              chloroplast biogenesis: chloroplast gene expression and its control. The study
              of many other aspects of chloroplast biology by the community-at-large will be
              facilitated by the unique genetic resources that will be produced. In addition
              to the agronomic relevance of genes that function in chloroplast processes, it
              is anticipated that this project will impact fields ranging from evolutionary
              biology to basic cell and molecular biology. 

