Title       : A Content - Indexed Image Database of Cetacean Fins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2002   
File        : a0077661

Award Number: 0077661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $810433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilbert R. Hillman gil.hillman@utmb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernd G. Wursig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nasser Kehtarnavaz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              During the three-year period 1997 to 2000, a computer software system was
              developed to assist biologists in identifying individual dolphins in field
              photographs. The system maintains a database of dorsal fin images, and matches
              new images to the individuals in the collection. The system is in use in the
              laboratories of colleagues. During the three year period of this award, new
              data acquisition, feature extraction and indexing techniques will be
              introduced, improving the system's performance and extending its use to
              additional biological species.

Many field photographs are unusable because
              of poor photographic quality, caused by motion blur, splashes, or glints of
              reflected sunlight that obscure part of the fin's boundary. This problem will
              be addressed by using digital video data acquisition. Sequential frames showing
              the same fin will be combined, reducing noise and interference and increasing
              the likelihood of obtaining usable images. 

The analysis of the shape of the
              trailing edge of the dorsal fin will be extended by using spatially coarse
              descriptors that capture the overall distribution of notches. These descriptors
              will be computed automatically and will capture properties such as "has deep
              notches" and "most notches are near the tip." These properties will be more
              robust than matching the exact edge shape, and will rapidly narrow the search
              and reduce errors.

A variant on the kd-tree search strategy, based on
              interval arithmetic, will be introduced. The use of interval-valued database
              indices will allow searching to accommodate scaling and geometric uncertainties
              without trial-and-error variation.

The system will be extended to humpback
              and sperm whale tail fluke images, introducing new features as indices.
              

Arrangements have been made for collaborative testing by prominent
              laboratories that maintain large collections of marine mammal sightings as
              photographic archives. The project will interact with these groups, supporting
              them as they use the project's system and using their criticisms and
              suggestions to improve the photo-identification system.

