Title       : Cellular, Genetic and Descriptive Analysis of Drosophila Heart Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  2001   
File        : a0077727

Award Number: 0077727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Skeath jskeath@genetics.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077727
Skeath

The elucidation of the molecular pathways that regulate heart
              development is critical to our understanding of heart formation.  In humans,
              congenital heart defects are one of the most frequent birth defects and occur
              at an incidence of 1% in live births and 10% in stillborns.  The genetic and
              molecular events that regulate heart development are just beginning to be
              explored in vertebrate and invertebrate model systems.  Initial insights from
              this work demonstrate a remarkable conservation of structure, expression and
              function between Drosophila genes expressed in the developing heart and their
              vertebrate homologs.  These studies as well as data from genome projects
              support the idea that the fundamental architecture of many biological processes
              are conserved between flies and humans.  Thus, research that aims to understand
              the genetic, cellular and molecular mechanisms that control Drosophila heart
              development should yield basic insights into heart development in
              general.

The focus of this grant is to dissect the developmental mechanisms
              that pattern and specify the identity of the different types of cells that make
              up the Drosophila heart.  Present models of Drosophila heart development rely
              heavily on the analysis of the mechanisms that regulate the development of only
              a small minority (~10%) of heart cells.  To obtain a more comprehensive picture
              of heart development, it is critical to clarify the genetic, cellular and
              molecular mechanisms that promote the development of all heart cells.  The
              first specific aim of this grant proposes to create a gene expression, cell
              division and cell lineage map of all heart cells.  The completion of this aim
              will establish a descriptive foundation of normal heart development at the
              single cell resolution from which we and others can initiate systematic studies
              on the genetic mechanisms that regulate heart development.  The second specific
              aim proposes (i) to dissect the genetic regulatory mechanisms that pattern and
              specify the fate of all heart cells, and (ii) to perform a detailed phenotypic
              and molecular characterization of two genes that regulate the number of
              contractile cells that form in the heart.  The integration of these approaches
              should paint an increasingly lucid picture of the genetic, cellular and
              molecular mechanisms that orchestrate Drosophila heart development.



