Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Timing of Reproduction: Nutrition-Endocrine Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a0077469

Award Number: 0077469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49195              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reed Bowman rbowman@archbold-station.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Archbold Biological Statn
	      P.O.Box 2057
	      Lake Placid, FL  338522057    813/465-2571

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              It is essential that animals initiate their reproductive effort at time of year
              that maximizes the likelihood of successful production of young. If dependent
              young are present either too early or late in a season, there may be
              insufficient food for the parents to feed their offspring. Unlike mammals, in
              which a lactating female converts available food resources into milk to be fed
              young, most nestling birds are fed insects whose abundance varies seasonally.
              The PIs noted that in the Florida Scrub-Jay (Aphelocoma coerulescens), jays
              that live in a suburban habitat begin breeding earlier than jays living in
              their natural environment (at Archbold Biological Station, ABS) and that one
              apparent result of early breeding is that suburban-young are in poorer
              condition and survivorship is lower that it is at ABS.  (Effects from causes
              such as automobiles and pets have been factored out of the analyses). 
              

Previous experiments and observations point toward human-provided food as
              the underlying cause of early breeding in the suburbs. Although food has been
              shown to be an important factor in the decision of when to begin breeding in
              females of many species, whether it is specific nutrients within the food, such
              as proteins (or specific essential amino acids that are the building-blocks of 
              proteins), fats, or a combination of these two is less clear.  The PIs will
              provide females at ABS with food supplements that are high in protein
              (including essential amino acids), high in fats, or high in both to determine
              the import of these nutritional cues upon the timing of reproduction. To better
              understand the physiological mechanisms by which the nutritional cues lead to
              the initiation of reproduction in female jays the PIs will answer the following
              questions: 1) Does the presence of a reliable food source, independent of
              content, lead to early breeding? 2) Are specific nutrients essential in the
              decision of when to begin breeding and, if so, which nutrient serves as the cue
              to inform a female when to begin breeding?  3) Are blood or whole body levels
              of these nutrients key in the female's decision to breed? 4) Is the information
              about the female's nutritional state communicated by hormonal means and, if so,
              what are the hormones involved? In addition to determining the effects of the
              different supplementary diets upon timing of clutch initiation, the PIs will
              answer the answer the preceding questions by measuring plasma levels of
              reproductive hormones (luteinizing hormone, testosterone, and estradiol) and
              total protein. The PIs will also measure levels of leptin, a hormone that is
              involved in the onset of reproduction in some mammals: this makes it a possible
              hormonal cue that informs a female that her condition is suitable to begin
              reproduction.  By considering numerous physiological factors, the PIs will
              learn how an organism integrates nutritional information into its decision of
              when to begin reproduction. This research will contribute significantly to the
              understanding of how resource availability affects the behavior, physiology,
              and fitness of seasonally breeding animals in the sub-tropics, especially the
              threatened Florida Scrub Jay.

