Title       : A Genetic Screen for Ecdysone Receptor Coactivators and Corepressors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0077841

Award Number: 0077841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Cherbas CHERBAS@INDIANA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lucy F. Cherbas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

	The nuclear receptors are an ancient and widespread family of
              transcription factors that includes the receptors for the vertebrate steroid
              hormones, those for many other small lipophilic hormones (for example thyroid
              hormone and vitamin D), and many orphan receptors that may not be associated
              with hormones.  The family also includes the polypeptides EcR and USP that
              together comprise the insect ecdysone receptor.  A general picture of nuclear
              receptor function has emerged from extensive biochemical studies: Receptors
              bind to specific DNA target sequences where they may activate or repress
              transcription from a nearby promoter by binding to protein coactivators and
              corepressors that link the DNA-tethered receptor to the transcriptional
              apparatus.  Binding of a ligand (steroid or other small lipophilic signaling
              molecule) to the receptor converts the receptor from one that binds corepressor
              to one that binds coactivator.  The transcriptional activities regulated by the
              nuclear receptors are central to normal development.  Moreover studies of
              nuclear receptor coactivators and corepressors are providing valuable clues to
              the rate-limiting steps in chromosomal gene activation and to processes that
              lead to tissue-specific regulation by hormones and other regulatory molecules. 
              The ecdysone receptor in insects is a heterodimeric nuclear receptor composed
              of the protein EcR and USP.  It mediates transcriptional responses to ecdysone,
              the steroid hormone that coordinates molting and metamorphosis in insects (and
              other arthropods).  Many lines of evidence indicate that it is similar (though
              not identical) in both structure and function to the largest group of nuclear
              receptors, the type II or heterodimeric receptors and prior work has probed
              molecular aspects of the EcR/USP transcriptional response.  Because of its
              well-developed genetics and because the Drosophila genome has been sequenced,
              the opportunity exists to begin to use genetic methods to identify proteins
              that interact with nuclear receptors.  This project will develop a genetic
              screen using flies engineered to be sensitive to small fluctuations in the
              concentrations of proteins that interact with EcR/USP.  The objective of the
              proposed experiments is the identification, by genetic means, of proteins that
              interact genetically (and physically) with EcR/USP.  It is anticipated that the
              genes identified will include coactivators and co-repressors, chaperones,
              chromatin-remodeling factors, and other proteins that may be required for
              EcR/USP function.  By distinguishing between global and tissue-specific
              interactions, the screen may provide insights into the roles of  multiple,
              functionally similar corepressors and coactivators known from vertebrate
              studies.

	This screen has the potential to increase  our understanding of
              gene expression and nuclear receptor function by: (1) Adding new molecules to
              the list of proteins that interact with nuclear receptors; (2) Identifying
              critical intermediates (coactivators and corepressors) in Drosophila where they
              can be integrated into on-going studies of gene regulation in development; (3)
              Applying a whole organism genetic approach to the analysis of a process
              (nuclear receptor interactions) that has heretofore been approachable only in
              cultured cells and by biochemistry; (4) Shedding light on tissue-and
              stage-specific aspects of coactivator and corepressor function


