Title       : Pollination in Lilium longiflorum and Arabidopsis thaliana: The Role of Adhesion
               Molecules in Pollen Tube Cell Movement in the Style
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0077886

Award Number: 0077886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Lord LORD@UCRAC1.UCR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077886
Lord

The goals of this study of plant reproduction are to describe
              the interaction between the pollen tube, which carries sperm cells, and the
              style, which must be traversed by the pollen tube before the sperm can be
              released in the ovule to the egg cell. Two adhesion molecules have been
              identified from the style in lily that are responsible for pollen tube cell
              adhesion and guidance.  These are the first adhesion molecules to be described
              in plants.  In lily, the transmitting tract is a secreting epidermis that lines
              the stylar canal which empties into the ovary.  Pollen tubes germinate on the
              secretory epidermis of the top of this canal, the stigma, and enter the style
              tracking the epidermal surface.  These secretions can be isolated from
              dissected styles and used to make an in vitro stylar matrix which serves as an
              adhesion assay.  When pollen tubes are added to this assay system, they adhere
              to each other and to the artificial stylar matrix.  This assay was used to
              isolate two fractions from the stigma/stylar transmitting tract that are
              necessary for adhesion; one is a small cysteine rich 9kD protein and the other
              a large pectic polysaccharide (sugar).  Neither of these molecules alone is
              adhesive; the combination of the two is necessary to induce pollen tube
              adhesion to other pollen tubes and to the stylar matrix.

The hypothesis is
              that the adhesive molecules are involved both in guiding the tube cell to the
              ovule and in the mechanism of tube cell movement that accompanies this
              guidance. A multifaceted approach incorporating the tools of developmental,
              cell and molecular biology is being used to:  1) decipher the mechanism by
              which the 9kD protein in lily acts with a pectin to induce adhesion of the
              pollen tube to the stylar matrix. 2) develop an in vivo test for the 9kD
              protein's role in adhesion using both lily and Arabidopsis. 3) understand the
              role of the cytoskeleton in tube cell movement and adhesion. 4) study tip
              growth in both lily and Arabidopsis pollen tubes. The proposed work on adhesion
              molecules in the lily and Arabidopsis pollination systems addresses two major
              questions: 1) What is the mechanism of adhesion of the pollen tube cell to the
              stylar extracellular matrix?  2) How is adhesion related to tube cell movement
              and what is the role of tip growth? Adhesion molecules, other than the two we
              have described for pollination, have yet to be described in plants though
              adhesion is critical for plant development.  There are few cases in plants
              where 

