Title       : Structure, Function and Biogenesis of Cyanobacterial Photosystem I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0077586

Award Number: 0077586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Bryant DAB14@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077586
Bryant
In cyanobacteria and plants, the Photosystem I (PS 1) reaction
              center (RC) is a membrane-bound, multisubunit oxidoreductase that catalyzes the
              light-driven transfer of electrons from reduced plastocyanin (or frequently
              cytochrome C6) on the lumenal side of the thylakoid to oxidized ferredoxin (or
              flavodoxin). The long-term goal of this research program is to understand the
              biogenesis of this complex enzyme, as well as the structural and mechanistic
              details that allow it to catalyze the above-mentioned reaction with a quantum
              yield approaching 1.0 and a very high thermodynamic efficiency (~45%). Taking
              advantage of knowledge gained during the present funding period, the powerful
              methods of site-directed and general mutagenesis, protein overproduction,
              biochemical resolution and reconstitution, chemical rescue and modification,
              optical kinetic spectroscopy, X- and Q-band EPR spectroscopy, transient EPR
              spectroscopy, pulsed EPR spectroscopy, NMR spectroscopy, and mass spectrometry
              will be employed to produce and to analyze PS I reaction centers with novel
              properties. The following (long-term) goals will be studied: (1) the roles of
              RubA and Ycf4 in PS I biogenesis; (2) electron transport kinetics in PS I
              complexes with modified quinone contents; (3) the role of the 2-methyl group in
              phylloquinone function and complete establishment of the biosynthetic pathway
              for phylloquinone biosynthesis; (4) establishment of the biosynthetic pathway
              for plastoquinone and the properties of mutants unable to synthesize
              plastoquinone; and (5) an examination of structural properties of PsaC that
              influence the magnetic and redox properties Of FA and F13. The successful
              completion of the proposed research program would contribute significant new
              information concerning the biogenesis of membrane- bound, electron transport
              proteins; would critically test current theoretical descriptions of biological
              electron transport processes; and would contribute important new information
              concerning the biosynthetic pathways for phylloquinone and plastoquinone in
              cyanobacteria.

All life on Earth is ultimately dependent upon light-energy
              capture and energy conversion to biomass through photosynthesis. Cyanobacterial
              photosynthesis is not only centrally important in the global cycling of carbon
              and nitrogen, but these organisms are the major primary producers of biomass in
              many ecosystems, including the oceans. Cyanobacteria are photoautotrophic
              prokaryotes whose photosynthetic apparatus closely resembles that found in the
              chloroplasts of higher plants. However, because cyanobacteria can be
              experimentally manipulated like other prokaryotes, and because relatively
              sophisticated genetic methods can be employed with these organisms,
              cyanobacteria provide unique opportunities as model systems for understanding
              oxygenic photosynthesis. A better understanding of these processes can lead to
              improvements in agriculturally important crop plants, to methods for the
              production of important biomaterials and biosensors, and to possible methods
              for greenhouse gas amelioration methods. This project also provides outstanding
              opportunities for multidisciplinary training of students and postdoctoral
              fellows in areas including microbial physiology, molecular biology,
              biochemistry, and biophysics.


