Title       : Calcium, pH and the Cytoskeleton in Pollen Tube Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0077599

Award Number: 0077599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $959999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Hepler hepler@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1132,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Pollen tube growth is the process by which flowering plants deliver the male
              gamete to the egg apparatus for fertilization, a necessary prerequisite to seed
              production.  Characterized by rapid rates and a high degree of polarity, the
              elongation process is of great interest, both because of its economic
              implications and its relevance to fundamental aspects of plant cell growth and
              development.  This project focuses on the role of calcium (Ca2+), protons (H+),
              and the actin cytoskeleton, and builds upon the recent demonstration that
              pollen tube growth rate oscillates, and that there are underlying oscillations
              in both ions and cytoskeletal activity.  Using pollen tubes of both lily and
              tobacco, an attempt will be made to correlate at high temporal resolution the
              oscillations in intracellular Ca2+ and H+ with those in the growth rate.  In
              addition, an exploration will be made on how these oscillations are changed
              when cell wall properties are modified by various agents, e.g., Ca2+, H+,
              boron, pectin methyl esterase, or Yariv phenyl glycoside.  By determining if
              and how these agents modify the oscillatory behavior, and its relationship to
              both the intracellular gradients of Ca2+ and H+ as well as the extracellular
              fluxes of these ions, it seems possible that a temporal hierarchy can be
              developed for the activity of factors that control growth.   Techniques
              involved here include ratiometric imaging for intracellular Ca2+ and H+, and
              ion selective vibration probe analysis to determine the magnitude and direction
              of extracellular fluxes.  In studies on the cytoskeleton, attention will be
              given to the structure and dynamic distribution of F-actin in the clear zone,
              where rapid turnover and formation of these elements is presumed to occur.  It
              will be particularly interesting to correlate these turnover processes with the
              oscillatory pattern of growth, again with the view of determining which events
              precede the rapid growth phases and which events follow.  For these studies the
              newly developed GFP-talin fusion will be used to fluorescently label F-actin in
              living pollen tubes.

When taken together it is anticipated that these
              studies will provide insight into the physiological and molecular factors that
              control growth and development of the pollen tube.  To the extent that other
              tip growing cells, e.g., root hairs, fungal hyphae, fern and moss protonemata,
              use similar mechanisms, the results from pollen tubes could be pertinent, and
              help us gain a general understanding of basic mechanisms involved in cell
              growth.



