Title       : Dynamics of Polypeptide Diffusion and Collapse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0077907

Award Number: 0077907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Hagen hagen@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hagen
MCB 0077907


This project will clarify the relationship between
              landscape and parameter regimes that have been explored in models and
              simulations of folding, and the properties of real protein molecules.  It will
              use time-resolved laser spectroscopy to probe the conformational dynamics of
              unfolded and partially folded protein molecules, with the aim of extracting
              basic parameters of importance to landscape descriptions of folding.  Laser
              photolysis experiments on unfolded cytochrome-c and other molecules will allow
              measurement of the rate of conformational diffusion of an unfolded polypeptide,
              the effect of inter-residue interactions on that diffusion, and the limitations
              that this diffusion places on overall folding speed.  They will also allow
              direct measurement of the time scales on which compact denatured proteins
              interconvert between different
configurations; this time scale directly
              indicates the degree of 'roughness' in landscape descriptions.  Using
              nanosecond-resolved laser temperature jump spectroscopy, this work will also
              examine the properties of a protein molecule that determine the dynamics of its
              collapse - the rapid transition from expanded to compact denatured
              configurations.  These experiments will enhance understanding of dynamical
              events that occur early
in protein folding, and they should also provide
              grounds for more detailed comparisons between protein folding theory and
              experiment.


The question of how proteins fold - how a randomly coiled
              polypeptide chain attains its proper compact structure - remains one of the
              most important and interesting problems at the interface of biology, chemistry,
              and physics.  The study of folding has benefited in recent years from several
              very significant advances in both theory and experimental technique. 
              Theoreticians have developed a "new view", or "energy landscape" description of
              protein folding, which uses statistical ideas from condensed matter physics to
              identify and explore those characteristics of proteins that directly control
              the speed and dynamics of the folding process.  At the same time, experimental
              advances have included the development of new optical methods for triggering
              and observing the rapid phases of folding, which occur on nanosecond or
              microsecond time scales.  Because these new techniques allow experimentalists
              to explore and resolve the very earliest events in folding, it is now possible
              to investigate the connection between real protein molecules and the simplified
              model proteins studied by theoreticians.  Applying new optical techniques, this
              work aims to strengthen the connection between theory and experiment by
              characterizing the shapes and statistical properties of energy landscapes of
              actual molecules, and the dynamics of diffusion on those landscapes.  


