Title       : Cooperation and Conflict in the Legume-Rhizobium Symbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0077903

Award Number: 0077903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122579             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Ford Denison Rfdenison@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Legumes, such as clover, alfalfa, and soybean, are important in agriculture
and
              in nature.  Soil bacteria known as rhizobia can benefit legumes when
they
              infect their roots, because they can take up atmospheric nitrogen and
supply
              it to the plant.  This extra nitrogen increases plant
photosynthesis, thereby
              indirectly increasing the energy supply to the
rhizobia.  Thus, symbiosis
              between legume and rhizobium seems beneficial to
both.  But what if, as often
              happens, two or more different strains of
rhizobia infect the same plant?  An
              initially rare strain that uses plant
resources for its own reproduction,
              rather than for nitrogen fixation,
could increase in numbers at the expense of
              both the plant and the more
cooperative rhizobial strain.  Although most
              rhizobia seem to be
predominantly beneficial, such "parasitic" strains do
              exist.

This research will determine whether plant responses to rhizobia that
              fail
to fix nitrogen can select for more beneficial rhizobia.  Previous
              research
shows that legumes can control the oxygen supply to rhizobia inside
              their
root nodules.  The PIs will determine how this oxygen supply changes
              with
changes in nitrogen fixation by rhizobia, and how this legume
              response
affects the survival and reproduction of the rhizobia.  Most of
              the
research will be conducted under controlled laboratory conditions, but
              a
field test will determine whether legumes alter the frequency
              of
cooperative vs. parasitic rhizobia in soil.  In addition to
              possible
practical applications in agriculture, the research will contribute
              to
overall understanding of the general problem of cooperation
              between
species.  Such cooperation is critical to the pollination of flowers,
              the
survival and growth of coral reefs, plant growth in phosphorus-poor
              soils,
and many other natural systems.



