Title       : IRCEB: Measuring and Modeling the Effects of Fire on the Structure and Function
               of Boreal Forests in North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0077881

Award Number: 0077881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2905859            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stith T. Gower stgower@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Norman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan A. Foley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Trumbore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Goulden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0077881
Gower
Quantifying the effects of disturbance and subsequent
              successional processes on the exchange of energy, water and nutrients between
              the land surface and atmosphere is central to many disciplines in ecology. The
              importance of such studies will only increase as the human population increases
              and disturbances increase in frequency. Boreal forests are the second largest
              forest biome in the world and contain approximately the same amount of carbon
              in the sols and vegetation as carbon in the atmosphere. About 5 million
              hectares of boreal forest burn each year, however, and in recent years this
              value exceeded 1.5 million hectares. A mechanistic understanding of the effects
              of fire on the structure and function of boreal forests does not exist,
              prohibiting even a precursory use of ecosystem process models to quantify the
              effects of fire on the carbon budget of boreal forests.
	This project has
              three major objectives. The first is to quantify the effects of wildfires on
              the microclimate, structure and function of successional boreal black spruce
              forests in northern Manitoba, Canada, and compare these results to other boreal
              forest age-sequence studies. This study will use integrated ecophysiological,
              biogeochemical, isotopic, and micrometeorological  field measurements to
              improve understanding of how individual processes change during succession, and
              the eddy flux approach to quantify how whole-system energy, water and CO2
              exchange between a black spruce ecosystem and the atmosphere change during
              succession following fire. The suite of measurements will be replicated in
              seven different-aged black spruce stands comprising an are sequence distributed
              across Manitoba. The second objective is to quantify active and past aerial
              extent of wildfires for North American boreal forests using current and future
              satellite-borne sensors, and determine if hypothesized earlier growing season
              green-up by vegetation caused by warmer soil temperature in recently disturbed
              forest can be detected. The third objective will use two terrestrial ecosystem
              models (IBIS and TEM) and spatially explicit fire extent values obtained from
              satellite-borne sensors to examine the possible effects of fire on exchange of
              CO2 between the North American boreal forest and the atmosphere. Model
              simulations will be compared to field data at a range of temporal and spatial
              scales. 
	The proposed study qualifies as an IRCEB project because (1) it uses
              past and ongoing field measurements made during previous studies to address a
              critical and unanswered ecological question, (2) it uses complementary
              measurements form many disciplines (ecophysiology, ecosystem ecology,
              meteorology, soils, geosciences, landscape ecology, atmospheric science, and
              global ecology) to address a fundamental question in ecology that is relevant
              to global carbon cycles, (3) it employs a suite of measurements that will
              enable the simultaneous determination of the effects of disturbance on
              individual carbon cycling processes and whole ecosystem net exchange which will
              provide standardized, independent estimates of NEE, (4) it establishes critical
              linkages with other scientists measuring the effects of fire on select
              components of the carbon budgets in boreal forests of contrasting climate,
              dominant vegetation and the importance of permafrost, (5) it establishes
              collaboration with scientists creating historic fire record and monitoring
              current fire status, (6) it contributes to the development and implementation
              of fire mitigation strategies for land managers, and (7) it will facilitate the
              training of undergraduate and graduate students in boreal ecology, and provide
              very badly needed basic forest ecology and management training to the Nelson
              House First Nation Cree Indians.

