Title       : Functional Genomics of Endosperm Development in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a0077676

Award Number: 0077676
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4999995            (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. McCarty drm@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen E. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Larkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joachim W. Messing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              L. Curtis Hannah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


Abstract

The endosperm of the maize seed is one the most economically
              important and scientifically interesting structures in plant biology.  The goal
              of this project is comprehensive genetic dissection of the molecular mechanisms
              underlying endosperm development and metabolism. Analysis of mutations that
              disrupt the endosperm will allow identification of genes that control endosperm
              development.  Molecular analysis of such mutants will in turn lead to other
              genes that function in the same or interacting pathways. The approach to
              identifying this critical initial set of genes can be viewed as passing all
              maize genes through a series of screens, each filtering genes by a different
              criterion.  In the end a large set of cloned genes that confer endosperm
              phenotypes are identified. 

1. Screen one is phenotype.  In principle, all
              genes that have visible phenotypes in endosperm can be tagged by transposon
              mutagenesis.   At least 2000 independent mutations may be needed to ensure
              tagging of all endosperm mutants (~300 genes).  A Mutator transposon tagging
              population large enough to contain the 2000 visible endosperm mutants has been
              created at Florida.  This population will be screened to identify a set of
              maize lines enriched for Mutator insertions in endosperm genes.

2. Screen
              two is endosperm expression. The goal is to identify the subset of tagged genes
              whose wildtype transcripts are present in a large endosperm cDNA microarray. 
              20,000 new endosperm cDNA's will be sequenced and used to construct the
              microarray.  DNA flanking Mutator insertion sites in the mutant lines is
              amplified by PCR.  By probing the microarray with PCR products from pooled DNA
              samples, insertions that are in genes represented in the array can be traced to
              individual maize lines.  cDNA hits will include candidates for the mutant gene,
              plus incidental gene knockouts not associated with phenotypes.  Independent
              mutants that hybridize to the same cDNA's define a hybridization group.  

3.
               Screen three is complementation testing.  Mutant lines within each
              hybridization group will be systematically tested for genetic allelism. 
              Finding independent mutant alleles of the same gene will confirm the identity
              of clones of mutated genes. 

4.  Screen four is bioinformatics and
              functional analysis. The mutant gene sequence and phenotype will be used to
              infer function and guide experimental analysis of selected genes.  The
              participating labs have complementary interests covering the essential
              processes underlying endosperm development. 

Participants:
Donald R.
              McCarty, PI, U. of Florida
Joachim Messing, Co-PI, Rutgers
Brian Larkins,
              Co-PI, U. of Arizona
Philip Becraft, Co-PI, Iowa State University
Karen E.
              Koch, Co-PI, U. of Florida
L. Curtis Hannah, Co,PI, U. of Florida

