Title       : Genes of Nitrogen Metabolism in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0077904

Award Number: 0077904
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $358580             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Reitzer reitzer@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Reitzer

The long-term objectives of this research are to analyze the pathways
              of nitrogen metabolism, their regulation, and their integration with other
              pathways in the model organism E. coli. The first specific objective is to
              construct and characterize mutants with defects in the Lrp-regulated
              ammonia-generating reactions, in order to test the hypothesis that a major
              function of Lrp is to control the major ammonia-generating reactions in
              bacteria. Although these reactions necessarily coordinate carbon and nitrogen
              metabolism, they have not been identified and characterized. The results might
              establish a new paradigm for bacterial nitrogen assimilation, since Lrp also
              controls the well-known nitrogen-regulated (Ntr) response. The second objective
              is to understand the metabolic basis for the stimulation of nitrogen-limited
              cells by aspartate and citric acid cycle intermediates. The results will
              further our knowledge of the coordination of carbon and nitrogen metabolism, of
              the factors that limit bacterial growth, and of the metabolic potential of E.
              coli and other bacteria. The third objective is to use commercially available
              genomic arrays to analyze the pattern of gene expression during nitrogen
              limitation. The results will test and refine our understanding of  the
              coordination of nitrogen metabolism with other aspects of metabolism (such as
              carbon metabolism) and the function of Lrp. The results might also help
              identify Nac-regulated genes and thereby help formulate a physiological
              function for Nac, which activates several genes during nitrogen limitation.
              

All cells require highly complex regulatory networks to coordinate the vast
              number of metabolic activities that constitute their lives.  This project will
              deepen our understanding of one of the most important of these networks, that
              coordinating carbon and nitrogen metabolism.  Knowledge of these networks is an
              important part of the foundation of virtually all  our scientific endeavors.

