Title       : The Ancient Innate Immune System in Sea Urchins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0077970

Award Number: 0077970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417314             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Courtney Smith csmith@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1148,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is a broad understanding of the ancient innate immune
              system of the purple sea urchin Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, a defense system
              that functions in the absence of adaptive mechanisms. A simpler alternative
              complement system has been identified and partially characterized in the sea
              urchin which is composed of SpC3 and SpBf, homologues of vertebrate C3 and
              Factor B (Bf) respectively. Although this simpler complement system appears to
              be important for host defense in this animal, additional components are
              predicted to be present. We propose two approaches to identify additional
              components of the sea urchin immune system. First, we will construct a
              normalized, subtracted cDNA library from activated coelomocytes (immune cells)
              based on subtractions using messages from immunoquiescent coelomocytes.
              Immunoquiescent cells will be obtained from sea urchins with no detectable SpC3
              in the coelomic fluid or in the coelomocytes, i.e., animals that have
              down-regulated their immune system as a result of being housed in our high
              quality, closed sea water system. Analysis of clones from this library will
              result in the identification of genes that are specifically expressed in
              activated coelomocytes, many of which will be immune response genes. Second, we
              will use the recently cloned sea urchin homologue of the transcription factor
              Nuclear Factor kappa B (NFkB), called SpNFkB, to identify additional immune
              response genes. Innate immunity in both mammals and insects is controlled to a
              great extent by members of the NFkB or Rel family of transcription factors. We
              will isolate and sequence the promoters of several immune response genes that
              we know are up-regulated by immune challenge (SpC3, SpBf, SpNFkB, and a lectin,
              Sp056), to identify consensus sites, called kB sites, that bind NFkB proteins.
              This will initiate future studies of the regulatory system that controls sea
              urchin immune responses through comparisons of consensus binding sites on these
              promoters and by gel shift assays. We will also use anti-SpNFkB antiserum for
              chromatin immunoprecipitation to isolate genes linked to kB sites, and perhaps
              controlled by SpNFkB. This will constitute a second set of genes that will
              include immune response genes. Results from these efforts will have a number of
              impacts on our overall understanding of innate immunity. Our knowledge of the
              immune functions in a simple deuterostome will be significantly expanded. Based
              on the phylogenetic relationship between the echinoderms (including sea
              urchins) and chordates (including mammals), the results will also expand our
              understanding of the complex innate immune system of higher vertebrates and
              will elucidate aspects that are central and essential for host defense. (The
              sea urchin complement system is the example of a component that corresponds to
              an essential and more complex component in the mammalian system.) Finally,
              results will provide a good estimator of the immune system that functioned in
              the ancestor of jawed vertebrates at the time when the progenitor of the RAG
              genes invaded the genome in a retrotransposon. This event introduced
              gene-rearranging capabilities into the vertebrate ancestor that was required
              for the evolution of the adaptive immune system. Analysis of the ancestral
              innate immune system in the sea urchin will allow us to predict the type of
              defense system that was present in the vertebrate ancestor and that was
              responsible for RAG-like gene selection and maintenance to allow the evolution
              of the adaptive immune system to occur. 
