Title       : Cooperation in Brown Capuchins when Partners Vary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2002     
File        : a0077706

Award Number: 0077706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279579             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frans B. M. de Waal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Reciprocal exchange of goods and services is a universal human economic
              activity. In animals, so-called "reciprocal altruism" or "tit-for-tat" is much
              discussed yet less investigated. It has been theorized that such behavior
              should occur in animals, at least to some degree: otherwise they could not
              build the highly cooperative societies that we see. This investigator will
              investigate cooperation in capuchins (Cebus apella), small monkeys known for
              their large brains and high intelligence.  An apparatus will be installed from
              which two or more monkeys can obtain food through cooperative effort. Tested in
              small subgroups, the monkeys can team up with any others present. The
              development of cooperative partnerships will be followed in detail as well as
              the tendency to preferentially share pay-offs with helpers. By manipulating
              partner availability, the investigator be able to measure the long-term impact
              of cooperation in the larger social group.

The proposed experiments seek to
              illuminate how cooperation arises between individuals, and to what degree it is
              regulated by tit-for-tat rules. Although the processes are undoubtedly simpler
              than those underlying the transactions and obligations in human society are,
              the underlying assumption is that there is a shared psychology that regulates
              many different kinds of cooperation in a great variety of species.

This
              study will provide a better understanding of how social relationships foster
              cooperation, and how cooperation affects subsequent social relationships.


