Title       : Mediation of Tritrophic Interactions by Oxidative Stress in a Model
               Plant-Insect-Entomopathogen System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0077710

Award Number: 0077710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelli Hoover kxh25@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Daniel Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Baculoviruses are a group of viruses that infect insects.  The effect of these
              viruses on insects, however, appears to vary with the chemical composition of
              the host plant that the insect consumes.  For example, baculoviruses are less
              able to kill tobacco budworm (Heliothis virescens) when the insect feeds on
              cotton, than when it feeds on its other host plants such as tomato or lettuce.
              

In this study, the PIs seek to determine the chemical interactions that
              cause some host plants to render their insect herbivores more resistant to
              infection by baculoviruses.  Preliminary studies have suggested that the
              generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a major cause of such disease
              inhibition, but it is unclear how this occurs or what steps in the pathway of
              infection are being altered by these reactive products.  Generation of ROS
              occurs as a consequence of normal cellular processes but can be altered by
              ingestion of dietary chemicals.  High levels of ROS lead to a condition known
              as oxidative stress which can damage cellular substances and has been
              associated with aging and cancer development.  ROS can also destroy many
              microorganisms and appear to interfere with the ability of baculoviruses to
              kill their host insects.  This study will examine whether diet-related ROS
              interfere with viral infection of insects by damaging the virus or by altering
              insect immune responses. 

These investigations should have broad
              implications for understanding the chemical basis of complex interactions among
              multiple trophic levels.  Additionally, results will contribute to a general
              understanding of the effects of oxidative stress on disease processes and
              disease ecology.  Finally, because baculoviruses are currently being used as an
              environmentally-friendly alternative to chemical pesticides, these results may
              help improve biological control practices in agriculture. 



