Title       : Protein Phosphorylation in the Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0077484

Award Number: 0077484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Kennelly pjkennel@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1136,1158,1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    The survival of living organisms and the development of complex life forms
              depend largely upon the proper coordination and control of the molecular events
              that take place inside cells.  The enzyme-catalyzed interconversion of proteins
              between physically and functionally distinct phosphorylated and
              dephosphorylated forms serves as a molecular switch that permits proteins to be
              turned "on" and "off" as needed.  The highly effective nature of the phosphate
              group as an agent for altering the functional properties of proteins coupled
              with the relative ease with which the phosphate group can be removed render
              phosphorylation-dephosphorylation uniquely potent and versatile.  Consequently,
              it has been applied to the modulation of virtually every aspect of cell growth,
              differentiation, motion, metabolism, and communication.   The long-term goal of
              this project is to uncover the fundamental principles through which this
              regulatory mechanism operates, by tracing its evolutionary history.  This
              project will exploit the phylogenetic diversity of nature to search for and
              study vestiges of these early events.  A set of primitive prokaryotic
              organisms, the Archaea, serve to some degree as a set of "living fossils" that
              preserve within their physical, genetic, and biochemical makeup strong echoes
              of the organisms of an earlier epoch.  This project will explore protein
              phosphorylation-dephosphorylation events in the extreme acidothermophilic
              archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus.   The gene for a protein-serine/threonine
              phosphatase, PP1-arch1, exhibiting 30% identity with the PPP-family of protein
              phosphatases from eukaryotes, has been cloned.  This discovery indicates the
              existence of a continuous line of development/evolution between the protein
              phosphatases in the Archaea and those in Eukaryotes.  The proposed study will
              dissect at the molecular level the protein kinase(s) and phosphorylated
              proteins that conform the archaeal protein phosphorylation network.   An
              Archaeal protein kinase will be purified by a combination of chromatographic
              and electrophoretic techniques, its amino acid sequence will be determined and
              the corresponding gene will be cloned.  Availability of the cloned gene will
              allow determination of the complete, DNA-derived amino acid sequence of the
              enzyme and expression of the protein using recombinant DNA technology.
              Phosphorylated proteins from Sulfolobus solfataricus will be isolated  and
              characterized.
