Title       : Assessment of the Insular Organization of the Wheat D Genome by Physical Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0077766

Award Number: 0077766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4435386            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Dvorak jdvorak@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Olin D. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ming-Cheng Luo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Common wheat, Triticum aestivum, originated by interspecific hybridization of
              three diploid species, Triticum urartu, Aegilops speltoides and Ae. tauschii.
              The wheat nucleus therefore contains three pairs of genomes, designated AA, BB,
              and DD, respectively.  One of the attributes of wheat genomes is that they are
              large compared to the genomes of the model plants Arabidopsis thaliana and
              rice.  In small genomes, genes are separated by intergenic DNA of a uniform
              length. This has been shown directly by sequencing the genome of Arabidopsis
              thaliana. In large genomes, stretches of noncoding DNA separating the genes are
              likely to vary. Indirect evidence suggests that in wheat, there may be
              gene-rich islands (gene insulae) in which genes are separated by short
              stretches of intergenic DNA. These gene insulae are speculated to be separated
              by gene-poor or gene-empty space.  To obtain a detailed picture of gene
              distribution in the wheat D genome, DNA fragments isolated from Ae. tauschii
              (the genome of Ae. tauschii is completely equivalent to the D genome of wheat)
              will be cloned in bacterial artificial chromosomes (BACs) and ordered as they
              are in wheat chromosomes. These groups of ordered DNA fragments are called
              contigs.  A total of 300,000 BAC clones will be characterized by the global
              fingerprinting method and assembled into contigs on the basis of fingerprint
              sharing among the clones. Fingerprinting of this large number of BAC clones and
              their assembly into contigs will be accomplished by automation of the
              fingerprinting process and computer-based contig assembly. The position of each
              contig on the chromosome will be determined and neighboring contigs identified
              and joined to generate the physical map of each of the seven D-genome
              chromosomes. Thousands of cDNA clones of wheat genes will be placed on the
              D-genome physical map to integrate the existing D-genome linkage and deletion
              maps with its physical map and to chart a detailed picture of gene distribution
              across each D-genome chromosome. The nucleotide sequences of these cDNA clones
              are being determined in another project funded by the NSF Plant Genome Program.
               Comparisons of the positions of corresponding genes on the physical maps of
              the wheat D-genome (large genome),  the maize genome (medium-size genome) and
              the genome sequence of the rice genome (small genome) will provide information
              on changes in genome structure as a function of genome size increase in the
              grass family.  The identification of gene insulae in the wheat D genome and
              their mapping will have great practical significance since it will facilitate
              gene discovery and isolation and, ultimately, the sequencing of the most
              relevant regions of wheat genomes.  
