Title       : Genetic & Molecular Analysis of the Regulation of Tropic Growth in Arabidopsis
               thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0077312

Award Number: 0077312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuel Liscum liscume@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to understand how plants perceive changes in their
              environment, transduce that information and ultimately alter growth and/or
              development to elicit proper adaptive differential growth responses.  The
              phototropic response is being used as a model system to study light-driven
              signal transduction and regulation of cellular growth.  Several loci,
              previously identified via mutation, have been characterized as necessary for
              normal phototropism in Arabidopsis thaliana L. Heynh.  The NPH4 locus
              (nonphototropic hypocotyl 4) is important not only for phototropism, but also
              for several additional differential growth responses, including gravitropism,
              apical hook maintenance and abaxial/adaxial leaf blade expansion.  The NPH4
              gene has been cloned and found to encode the auxin-regulated transcriptional
              activator, ARF7, suggesting that auxin-dependent changes in gene transcription
              are prerequisite for proper organ bending responses.  However, NPH4/ARF7 is not
              the sole regulator of these changes since the phenotypes of nph4-null mutants
              are conditional.  For example, phytochrome A (phy A) activation, which leads to
              enhancement of blue light-induced phototropism in wild-type, results in
              restoration of a partial phototropic response in nph4 seedlings.  Specific aims
              are 1) To identify genes that are transcriptionally regulated by NPH4/ARF7 and
              necessary for tropic reponsiveness and 2) To characterize components of the
              phytochrome A-dependent modulatory pathway(s) leading to phototropic
              enhancement. 

Because of their sessile nature, plants have evolved movement
              strategies that involve organ bending in order to respond to changes in their
              environment.  Dramatic, rapid and reversible changes in morphology can result
              from differential growth- or unequal cellular growth in one position of an
              organ relative to an opposing position.  Continued study of the nph4 mutants
              and in planta function of the NPH4/ARF7 protein will provide significant new
              insights into the basic cellular mechanisms leading to tropic responses, as
              well as the interactions between multiple signal-response pathways that
              modulate those tropic responses.

