Title       : Primary Electron Transfer Processes in Photosynthetic Bacterial Reaction Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0077187

Award Number: 0077187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dewey Holten holten@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine R. Kirmaier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Holten
MCB 0077187

The bacterial RC is a highly symmetric protein that has
              two chains of pigments, referred to as the L and M branches that are
              essentially mirror images of one another.  However, charge separation takes
              place exclusively via the bacteriochlorophyll, bacteriopheophytin, and quinone
              cofactors on the L branch (BL, HL, and QA, respectively).  The role of the M
              branch pigments (BM, HM, and QB-), or more specifically how "unidirectionality"
              of electron transfer to the L branch is achieved, has been a focus of the field
              for many years.  Recently, this laboratory has achieved an ~23% yield of
              electron transfer to the normally inactive M branch in a RC through targeted
              site-directed changes in the amino acids near BL, HL, and BM.  The current work
              seeks to build on this progress as well as on parallel and equally important
              advances in understanding the factors underpinning the high yield of charge
              separation along the photoactive branch. Specifically, further site-directed
              mutations will be made in the RC protein and comprehensive studies of their
              effects on all the primary events carried out in order to achieve the
              following.  (1) Elucidation of the participation of each cofactor in the
              primary events, the mechanisms of their involvement, and how the free-energy
              relationships of the associated charge-separated states impact the
              directionality of electron transfer and the rates and yields of charge
              separation versus charge recombination.  (2) Understanding the manner in which
              polar and ionizable amino acid residues modulate the electronic and vibrational
              properties of the nearby cofactors and, thus, the photochemistry.  (3) Deducing
              the contributions to directionality of the relative free energies and
              electronic couplings on the two branches (e.g. involving P* and P+BL- versus
              P+BM-).  (4) Obtaining a greater yield of electron transfer both to the M
              branch (forming P+HM-) and along this branch (forming P+QB-) than has been
              achieved to date.  This will open up many new and exciting avenues for work on
              P+QB- formed via the M-side versus the L-side and how the events on the two
              sides are manipulated by analogous mutations. 

Life on earth ultimately is
              dependent on photosynthesis, the process by which plants and certain bacteria
              convert the energy of sunlight into chemical potential energy.  This conversion
              occurs via a series of fast electron transfer reactions that separate charge in
              a specialized membrane-bound pigment-protein complex called the reaction center
              (RC).  Remarkably, charge separation in the RC takes place unidirectionally via
              one of two possible pathways and with a quantum yield of ~100%.  This research
              project focuses on RCs from purple photosynthetic bacteria and seeks to come to
              a comprehensive molecular level understanding of this primary charge separation
              process.  To this end, transient absorption spectroscopic measurements spanning
              the femtosecond (10-15 sec) to seconds time scales as well as other
              spectroscopic techniques will be used to directly probe the various stages of
              charge separation and the rates of formation and decay of the intermediates.
              These studies will provide further detailed insights into the molecular-level
              mechanism of one of the most important biological processes, aid in the
              development of biomimetics for solar energy conversion, and positively impact
              broader topics in biophysics including biological electron transfer and the
              role of a protein in modulating the functional properties of its cofactors.

