Title       : The Role of Photoreceptor Light Sensitivity in Expression of Classical
               Conditioning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0077509

Award Number: 0077509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim L. Blackwell avrama@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lay Symmary

Blackwell
IBN-0077509

The seaslug, Hermissenda crassicornis,
              is a model system for studying
associative learning because it shares
              properties of classical
conditioning with mammals.  In Hermissenda, individual
              brain cells have
been identified in which a change in cell properties is
              correlated with a
change in animal learning behavior .  Specifically, the type
              B class of
photoreceptors shows an increase in excitability consequent to
              classical
conditioning with light and turbulence.   The excitability of the
              type B
photoreceptor is affected by current flowing across the cell membrane
              in
response to light.  The measurement of this current, which has not
              been
adequately characterized, is one goal of this project.  The expression
              of
associative learning behavior depends on the interaction between type
              A
and type B photoreceptors in response to light.  This interaction
              is
affected by the light-induced current flowing across the membrane of
              the
type A photoreceptors.  Thus, a second goal of this project is to
              measure
this current in response to light of various intensities and
              durations.
The third and final goal of this research is to develop a computer
              model
of both (type A and type B) classes of photoreceptors and
              their
interaction.  Model simulations are used to evaluate the output of
              both
types of photoreceptors in response to light, and the change in
              output
consequent to an increase in excitability in the type B
              photoreceptor.

This project will significantly contribute to our knowledge
              of how people
learn.  Classical conditioning, also known as Pavlovian
              conditioning, is
studied extensively because it is a form of associative
              learning present
in many different species. A change in cell excitability is
              thought to be
a general mechanism of associative learning because it has been
              detected
in brain cells of mammals which have been classically
              conditioned.
However, the pathway between change in cell excitability and
              change in
animal behavior is not fully understood.  These is evidence
              that
expression of learning behavior emanates from modulation of the
              complex
interaction between groups of neurons.  This project begins to
              elucidate
how changes in cell properties modulate neuronal networks involved
              in
classical conditioning behavior.



