Title       : Role of One Double-Strand DNA Break in Yeast Meiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0077257

Award Number: 0077257
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387855             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Haber haber@hydra.rose.brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Meiotic recombination differs from mitotic recombination in many important
              respects. Meiotic recombination is initiated by double-strand breaks (DSB) made
              by the meiosis-specific Spo11 topoisomerase and requires at least nine other
              proteins to create the chromosomal environment in which these breaks occur. It
              is not known if these many proteins also dictate the outcome of Spo11-mediated
              gene conversions, which show a very high level of crossing-over relative to
              mitotic events. Meiotic crossing-over is also strongly influenced by at least
              two classes of proteins, the meiosis-specific Zip proteins that are components
              of the synaptonemal complex and the Mlhl-Msh4-Msh5 proteins. In contrast,
              mitotic gene conversions can be initiated by the site-specific HO endonuclease,
              which does not require the action of other proteins to make DSBs. 
In this
              project the HO endonuclease is expressed under the control of a meiosis
              specific promoter, so that it becomes possible to compare recombination events
              initiated by the same DSB in both meiosis and mitosis. A major goal of this
              work is to use this system to ask if  the 9 other proteins needed to make
              meiotic DSBs are also needed to ensure a high proportion of crossing-over. 
              Additionally, the system can be used to determine if the endonuclease can
              induce a high level of crossing-over in a "cold" region of chromosome III that
              represses normal Spo11-induced events. 
The second major goal of this work is
              to examine the control of meiotic crossing-over. An aspect of this will be to
              assess by cytological means if a single, HO-induced crossover is sufficient to
              promote equational chromosome segregation at the first meiotic division. This
              approach addresses the question whether such a reductional division will occur
              in the absence of SC, which appears to depend on the presence of many
              Spo11-mediated DSBs.  The third objective is to use this unique DSB to
              investigate the molecular mechanism of recombination, with a goal of
              distinguishing if meiotic recombination, like HO-induced mitotic recombination,
              proceeds by a synthesis-dependent strand annealing mechanism.   Finally, the
              system is used to investigate the important question of how one crossing-over
              event interferes with a crossover in an adjacent interval. It has recently been
              established that some chromosomal intervals do not actually exhibit any
              significant interference in Saccharomyces.  Once appropriate intervals have
              been identified, one or two HO cleavage sites will be inserted to ask if
              HO-mediated events interfere with adjacent Spo11-induced crossovers and if two
              HO-induced crossovers also show interference.

