Title       : Meiotic Chromosome Pairing in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0077705

Award Number: 0077705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374233             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim S. McKim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	Meiosis is geared towards ensuring the segregation of homologous chromosomes at
              the reductional division by forming links between the homologs.  The homologs
              are brought together in an elaborate pairing process that may begin with
              chromosomes aligned at a distance.  This process culminates in a more intimate
              association where the homologs are held together along their entire length by
              the synaptonemal complex (sc).  During this time meiotic recombination occurs,
              probably initiated with a double strand break (DSB).  The repair and resolution
              of the repair process is believed to occur within a sc-associated, the
              recombination nodule (RN).  Through our analysis of meiosis in Drosophila
              melanogaster females it has been shown that a key component of machinery that
              initiates meiotic recombination is conserved.  In contrast, it has also been
              shown that the relationship between meiotic recombination and sc formation is
              not conserved.  Long-term goals are to understand the mechanism and regulation
              of meiotic recombination and homolog pairing.  Genetic and cytological
              techniques will be used to test the model that sc forms before recombination is
              initiated and  genetic and chromosomal factors that regulate DSB formation will
              be identified and characterized.  Specific aims are: To test the model that
              recombination initiates after sc formation.  To identify genetic factors
              regulating double strand break formation.  To identify chromosomal factors
              regulating double strand break formation.

	Knowledge of the mechanisms
              resulting in chromosome pairing is critical to an understanding of inheritance.
              The results of this study will result in greater insight into phenomena central
              to a complete understanding of genetic mechanisms utilized by eukaryotic
              cells.



