Title       : Functional Analysis of the Oxa1p Export Machinery of Yeast Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0077961

Award Number: 0077961
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Stuart rosemary.stuart@marquette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The mitochondrion is the membrane-delimited organelle of eukaryotic cells within
              which a number of key metabolic processes occur, including the generation of
              chemical energy from the oxidative breakdown of nutrients via the complex
              process known as oxidative phosphorylation.  The mitochondrion actually has two
              membranes separating its inner content from the cytoplasm of the cell. 
              Although the mitochondrion does have its own genome and its own protein
              translational machinery, most of the proteins of the mitochondrion are encoded
              in the nuclear genome and are biosynthesized in the cytoplasm; these proteins
              are subsequently translocated across the membrane(s) to their appropriate place
              within the mitochondrion.   In the particular case of proteins that sit on or
              in the inner mitochondrial membrane (and which display a wide range of
              topological arrangements), most are imported into the mitochondria via protein
              translocation machineries located in the outer and inner membranes (TOM and TIM
              complexes, respectively).  A few polytopic proteins, all subunits of
              respiratory chain complexes, are encoded by the mitochondrial genome and are
              synthesized within the matrix compartment.

A number of distinct sorting
              mechanisms exist to direct nuclearly encoded proteins to the inner membrane. A
              subset of these proteins follow a circuitous route in which they are first
              imported into the mitochondrial matrix and then embark on an "export" pathway
              to the membrane.  Mitochondrial gene products have also been shown to undergo a
              similar export mechanism in order to become inserted into the inner membrane.
              Protein export from the mitochondrial matrix into the inner membrane bears
              similarities to Sec-independent protein export in bacteria. These similarities
              include membrane potential requirements and adherence to the "positive-inside"
              rule, described previously for the sorting of bacterial membrane proteins.
              Recently in yeast, the export of at least the N-terminal tails of both nuclear
              and mitochondrially encoded proteins has been shown to require the function of
              an inner membrane protein, Oxa1p. Oxa1p, which physically interacts with
              substrate proteins as they are undergoing export, has been proposed to
              represent a component of a novel protein export machinery in yeast
              mitochondria.

Oxa1p is conserved throughout evolution, from prokaryotes
              throughout eukaryotes (where it is found in mitochondria and chloroplasts). The
              function of these non-mitochondrial homologs is not known to date. It is
              tempting to speculate that they may perform a similar function as Oxa1p in
              mitochondria and mediate protein export events (at least of N-terminal tails)
              across the thylakoid membrane in chloroplasts and across the plasma membrane in
              bacteria. 

The major focal point of this project will be the further
              elucidation of the function and composition of the mitochondrial Oxa1p complex.
              The specific goals of the experiments that will be performed are:

1. To
              determine if the function of the Oxa1p complex is limited to the export of
              N-terminal tails of proteins. The involvement of Oxa1p in the export of
              C-terminal tails or hydrophilic loops between neighboring membrane-spanning
              segments of proteins will be analyzed.
2. To identify other proteins which may
              physically or functionally interact with Oxa1p.
3. To determine whether Oxa1p
              forms homo-dimers through coiled-coil structures.
4. To investigate the
              possible involvement of the Tim17-23 import machinery in the process of
              Oxa1p-dependent protein export.

