Title       : rRNA Modification Guide RNPs from the Hyperthermophilic Archaeon Pyrococcus
               Furiosus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0077863

Award Number: 0077863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Terns   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca M. Terns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
MCB-0077863
Michael Terns and Rebecca Terns

This project will
              investigate the structure and function of modification guide ribonucleoproteins
              (RNPs) in the hyperthermophilic Archaeon Pyrococcus furiosus.  A long-term
              objective of this work is to determine the composition and detailed structural
              organization of the RNPs and to obtain a mechanistic understanding of how these
              complexes contribute to rRNA modification and ribosome biogenesis.  The
              proposed work will also provide a foundation for detailed structural questions
              regarding the nature of the RNP interactions and the molecular basis of
              thermostability of RNA/protein interactions in hyperthermophilic organisms. 
              The findings should also provide valuable information on the extent of
              evolutionary conservation of the rRNA processing and modification machinery in
              Archaea and Eukarya.  The specific aims of this project are to identify the
              protein and RNA components of the modification guide RNPs, to characterize the
              RNA/protein and protein/protein interactions within the RNPs, and to establish
              a cell-free rRNA 2'-O-methylation system to study the function of the
              methylation guide RNPs.

Abstract
MCB-0077863
Michael Terns and Rebecca
              Terns

This project will investigate the structure and function of
              modification guide ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) in the hyperthermophilic Archaeon
              Pyrococcus furiosus.  A long-term objective of this work is to determine the
              composition and detailed structural organization of the RNPs and to obtain a
              mechanistic understanding of how these complexes contribute to rRNA
              modification and ribosome biogenesis.  The proposed work will also provide a
              foundation for detailed structural questions regarding the nature of the RNP
              interactions and the molecular basis of thermostability of RNA/protein
              interactions in hyperthermophilic organisms.  The findings should also provide
              valuable information on the extent of evolutionary conservation of the rRNA
              processing and modification machinery in Archaea and Eukarya.  The specific
              aims of this project are to identify the protein and RNA components of the
              modification guide RNPs, to characterize the RNA/protein and protein/protein
              interactions within the RNPs, and to establish a cell-free rRNA
              2'-O-methylation system to study the function of the methylation guide
              RNPs.


