Title       : Chromatin Charting: Organization and Dynamics of Plant Nuclear DNA in situ
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0077617

Award Number: 0077617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4326623            (Estimated)
Investigator: Naohiro Kato   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Lam  (Principal Investigator former)
              David L. Spector  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Martienssen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              W. Richard McCombie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The nucleus is the subcellular organelle in which the bulk of the genomic
              information within an eukaryotic cell is organized. From studies using
              hybridization technologies and microscopy work with serial or optical sections
              of fixed cells, a picture of an organized subnuclear structure has emerged.
              More recently, the application of the Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP) as an in
              vivo tag of genomic DNA has allowed the visualization of chromatin in live
              cells of animals and fungi.   Based on studies using 3-D fluorescence
              microscopy, the chromosomes within an interphase nuclei are perceived to have
              an ordered arrangement that is relatively static except for slow motions that
              can be attributed to Brownian movement. However, it is also clear that during
              other phenomena that are known to occur within a nucleus, such as transvection
              and recombination, that relatively large and long-range movement of chromatin
              must be possible. The goal in this project is to contribute to the general
              understanding of subnuclear architecture by charting the relative physical
              position and movement of sequences for each of the chromosomes in cells of
              living plants. To achieve the objective of visualizing and charting the
              sequences for all the chromosomes of Arabidopsis, GFP and two different color
              variants of this protein will be deployed as in vivo tags for about 1,000
              dispersed sites within the 5 chromosomes of Arabidopsis. Comparative analyses
              of the relative positions between defined regions of the genome in space and
              time will provide novel information about the organization principles that
              control the structure and dynamics of chromatin. Concurrent with optical
              studies to track the relative subnuclear location and movement for distinct
              regions of the genome, the effects of genome location on transcription
              potential of a reporter gene will be quanitified. Together, these studies
              should provide the first comprehensive 3-D physical and transcription activity
              maps for a genome and should contribute significantly to understanding the
              roles that subnuclear location may play in controlling gene expression.  This
              study should generate more than 1,000 mapped insertion lines of Arabidopsis
              with 3 distinct and optically tractable GFP-tags at defined locations within
              the genome. These materials should be invaluable for the characterization of
              chromatin-related mutations that affect gene expression and development. The
              number of such mutations are likely to rapidly increase due to the efforts of
              several genome projects that have been funded by the NSF in the past two years.
               Molecular tools generated from this project will also be applied to an
              important crop plant such as maize. The fusion of cutting edge imaging
              technology with the wealth of classical and modern cytogenetics in maize should
              provide new perspectives on global control of genetic information as well as
              epigenetic phenomena such as paramutation. These new insights will facilitate
              understanding of how genomic information is organized in plants and how gene
              expression can be regulated at a global scale. As such, the tools and knowledge
              generated by this proposed work should benefit future efforts to improve the
              quality and yield of crop plants.
