Title       : Trans-activation of the Drosophila Y Chromosome in Spermatogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0077817

Award Number: 0077817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ping Zhang ping@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	The presence of abundant repetitive sequences is among the most
              conspicuous
characteristics of eukaryotic genomes.  Since most repetitive
              elements have no obvious genetic functions, they are often regarded as
              'selfish' or 'junk' DNA.  However, it has become increasingly evident that
              these sequences could play important roles in regulating gene expression.  For
              example, the yeast telomeric repeats have been shown to regulate gene
              expression.  It has been proposed that gene silencing in yeast is mediated by
              the telomeric heterochromatin that behaves as subnuclear organelles to store
              transcription factors and modulate their nuclear concentration.  The overall
              objective of this research program is to elucidate the function of abundant
              repetitive sequences in the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster.  Approximately
              30% of this fruitfly's genome is composed of constitutive heterochromatin,
              which contains highly repetitive sequences.  The Drosophila Y chromosome is
              entirely heterochromatic and accounts for approximately 13% of a male genome. 
              Despite its large physical size, this chromosome carries only six genes that
              are mutable to male sterility.  Recent analysis has revealed that the Y
              chromosome carries a trans-activator that regulates transcription the male germ
              line.  The Y trans-activator is distributed within a distinct region on the Y
              long arm and is functionally redundant, suggesting the involvement of
              heterochromatic repetitive sequences.  In addition, the trans-activator is
              correlated with genetic factors that are dispersed within the same Y long
              region and are essential for sperm development.  These results indicate that
              the Y trans-activator plays an important role in spermatogenesis.  Further
              genetic and molecular studies have demonstrated that the Y trans-activator
              interacts with a genetic pathway that controls transcription in primary
              spermatocytes.  In addition, the analysis has identified two potential target
              genes of the Y trans-activator, the hsp26 and hsp60ms genes, both of which are
              required for spermatogenesis.  This project has three general goals: (1) The
              transcriptional regulation of the Y trans-activator on the hsp26 and hsp60ms
              genes will be investigated.  Studies of the hsp function will be extended to
              reveal the effects of the Y transactivator in spermatogenesis.  (2) The
              hypothesis that the Y trans-activator interacts with a branch of a pathway that
              regulates transcription in spermatogenesis will be tested and it will be
              determined whether the Y trans-activator controls spermatogenesis by regulating
              a specific set of genes required for spermatid individualization.  (3) 
              Reporter genes to identify the hsp26 regulatory sequence that is controlled by
              the Y trans-activator will be generated.  Site-directed mutagenesis will be
              used to precisely define this cis-element.

Results from thisresearch will
              provide important information about function of the heterocromatic Drosophila Y
              chromosome.  Furthermore, knowing how Drosophila heterochromatin plays an
              essential role will help to better understand the biological significance of
              all heterochromatin, which is a large, yet poorly understood, genomic component
              in nearly all eukaryotic organisms.

