Title       : Micromechanics of the Mammalian Cochlea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0077476

Award Number: 0077476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claus-Peter Richter cri529@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Dallos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The sense of hearing results from a series of complex events that transform
              acoustic pressure waves into the perception of sound.   During normal hearing,
              sound energy is converted to mechanical energy by the middle ear, which then is
              converted to mechanical motion in the structures of the inner ear, or cochlea. 
              Within the cochlea, the sensory cells-the inner and outer hair cells-are
              sensitive transducers that convert mechanical vibrations into electrical
              impulses in the auditory nerve.   The resulting nerve impulses are sent to the
              central auditory nervous system, where they are interpreted and experienced as
              sound.
The sensory hair cells play a critical role in the hearing process. 
              Both inner and outer hair cells have stereocilia located on their apical
              membranes.  Bending of these stereocilia results in a voltage change-or
              receptor potential-across the cell membrane.  The receptor potential in an
              inner hair cell results in transmitter release from the basal end of the cell. 
              In contrast, the receptor potential in an outer hair cell produces a somatic
              length change proportional to the membrane voltage change. These length changes
              in outer hair cells are thought to amplify the sound-induced movements of the
              cochlear partition.
The macromechanics of the hair cell/basilar membrane/organ
              of Corti system are well described.  What remains to be understood is the
              micromechanics, that is, the mechanical events that take place between
              displacement of the basilar membrane and deflection of the inner hair cell
              stereocilia.  Using the recently developed hemicochlea preparation, it now is
              possible to study the micromechanics of the passive cochlea in a radial
              cross-section.  The experiments proposed here are aimed at (1) clarifying the
              micromechanical processes that transform basilar membrane vibration into
              deflection of the inner hair cell stereocilia, (2) describing the
              micromechanical events that result solely from somatic length changes in outer
              hair cells, (3) investigating the effect of electrical stimulation on different
              cell types in the cochlea, (4) examining the interactions between somatic
              length changes of outer hair cells and the vibration of the basilar membrane
              known to occur in vivo, and (5) providing empirical data for finite-element
              models of the cochlea. 


