Title       : Evolution of Antigen Receptor Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0077747

Award Number: 0077747
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494246             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Steele resteele@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A key innovation during the evolution of multicellular animals was the ability
              to distinguish self from non-self. The molecular mechanisms underlying such
              recognition are understood in considerable detail in vertebrates, particularly
              as mediated by the various classes of antigen receptors. Despite considerable
              effort, however, it has not been possible to trace the evolutionary history of
              vertebrate antigen receptors into any metazoan taxon which diverged earlier
              than the jawed fishes. Such efforts have been focused on the use of molecular
              methods in attempts to identify genes encoding orthologues of vertebrate
              antigen receptors. This project will makes use of a different approach to
              address the origins of antigen receptor signaling, based on the finding in the
              early-diverging invertebrate Hydra of a Syk family protein-tyrosine kinase
              (PTK). Syk PTKs interact with phosphorylated tyrosine residues on the
              cytoplasmic tails of antigen receptors in vertebrates through two src homology
              2 domains. Thus the molecules with which Hydra Syk interacts are candidates for
              mediating recognition of foreign cells in this organism, and are potentially
              evolutionarily related to vertebrate antigen receptors. The objective of this
              project is to identify the molecules with which Hydra Syk interacts and thereby
              to trace the evolutionary history of the antigen receptor signaling pathway.
              Initial experiments will test the ability of Hydra Syk to bind to and function
              with vertebrate antigen receptors. A positive result in this case would provide
              support for conservation of the basic mechanics of Syk/receptor interaction
              over a wide range of metazoan evolution. Subsequent experiments will be
              directed towards identifying the molecules with which Syk interacts in Hydra.
              Comparisons of these molecules with vertebrate proteins should indicate whether
              there is any evolutionary continuity between them and vertebrate antigen
              receptors. If no such continuity is evident, the relationships of the
              interacting proteins in Hydra with the proteins of other metazoans will
              nonetheless reveal important, and currently unavailable, information regarding
              the evolutionary history of the signaling pathway which was modified for use
              with vertebrate antigen receptors.


