Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Organ Fusion in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0077979

Award Number: 0077979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Pruitt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Lolle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077979
Pruitt

Land plants are exposed to a variety of environmental
              fluctuations and 
challenges that require biological adaptations at the
              outermost surface 
or "skin" of the plant.  A better understanding of the
              biology of this 
surface has significance not only for plant growth and
              development but 
also pertains directly to the effective use and application
              of man-made 
agents such as agricultural herbicides.  Arabidopsis thaliana, a
              member 
of the mustard family, has been chosen as the model organism for these
              
studies.  Significant progress toward elucidating biological features of
              
the plant surface have already been made using this plant.  The research
              
described here will expand upon this body of work.  The biology of the
              
plant surface as it pertains specifically to its biochemical and 
molecular
              properties will be studied using a collection of plants with 
altered surface
              properties.  Using these plants it will be possible to 
identify additional
              components involved in the building and maintenance 
of the plant outer
              "skin".  By identifying the constituents that make up 
this complex outer
              layer and developing a guide for how this surface is 
put together, a better
              understanding of how plants mediate responses and 
adaptations to their
              environment will be achieved.  Insight into these 
fundamental processes may
              possibly have far reaching economic 
consequences by ultimately diminishing
              the cost of weed management and 
the impact of weed-based losses in crop
              productivity.  A reduction in 
herbicide use would have the added benefit of
              decreasing the 
environmental impact of modern crop management practices.


