Title       : Space Weather: Characteristics and Dynamics of CME Induced Radio Emissions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a0077413

Award Number: 0077413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul A. Evenson                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222936             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Reiner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              N. Gopalswamy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Kaiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Fainberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Raytheon Tech Services Co
	      4400 Forbes Boulevard
	      Lanham-Seabrook, MD  20706    /   -

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: ATM 00-77413

Proposal Title: Characteristics and Dynamics of CME
              Induced Radio Emission

Principal Investigator: Michael J. Reiner, Raytheon
              Technical Services Company 

The investigators will produce a comprehensive
              picture of the coronal mass ejection (CME) phenomenon as viewed at radio
              wavelengths from lift-off at the sun through the response of the terrestrial
              magnetosphere to its passage. The main effort is to continue to synthesize
              radio data from the Wind and Ulysses spacecraft, SOHO coronagraph data,
              ground-based data, and corollary measurements from instruments monitoring the
              solar wind and energetic particle environment. The work builds on several
              significant advances made in a previous award from NSF. The investigators
              developed triangulation methods that permit investigators to track the sources
              of radio waves (CMEs and finite regions along their boundaries) as they move
              out from the sun long after they cease to be visible to SOHO instruments. With
              this technique, regions where the radio waves originate are identified to allow
              detailed study, using the multiple supporting datasets, of the physical
              processes that produce the waves.

