Title       : Genomic Analysis of a Nematode-plant Interaction: A Tool to Study Plant Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0077503

Award Number: 0077503
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2607829            (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Bird david_bird@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Kieber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey L. Thorne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra W. Clifton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles Opperman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plant-parasitic nematodes reduce annual US agricultural production by more than
              $5 billion. The most important group are the root-knot nematodes (RKN:
              Meloidogyne spp.), which are devastating pathogens of food and fiber crops.
              With the loss of chemical control agents for health and environmental reasons,
              the economic importance of RKN is increasing world-wide. A prerequisite to
              developing any new, environmentally-safe and affordable control strategy is a
              thorough understanding of the biology of the plant-nematode interaction. Recent
              advances in genomic techniques make this previously intractable host-parasite
              system amenable to study. Because of the intimate nature of the interaction,
              and the obvious developmental and physiological perturbations to the host
              induced by the nematode, understanding the biology of this association will
              shed new light on basic plant processes. The very broad host range of RKN
              (excess of 2,000 plant species) implies that this parasite is able to modulate
              some very fundamental and widely conserved aspect of host biology.

RKN hatch
              in the soil as developmentally-arrested larvae prior to invading a root, where
              the parasite establishes an intimate relationship with its host. An elaborate
              permanent feeding site, characterized by the formation in the host of "giant
              cells" within a gall, is induced by the nematode. Giant cells serve as the
              obligate nutritive source for the developing nematode, which becomes sedentary.
              Functional genomic approaches will be applied to analyze this interaction. This
              approach is feasible because well developed models of the host and parasite
              (Arabidopsis and C. elegans respectively) have been established, including
              complete genomic sequences.

Suites of nematode and plant genes that define
              pathways for establishment of the parasitic interaction will be identified, and
              their expression quantified.  Host responses during feeding-site formation, and
              the biological transitions in the nematode that are coupled to the host (e.g.,
              exit from developmental-arrest at the onset of feeding) are especially
              interesting. The histology suggests that phyto-hormone levels are altered in
              infected roots, and expression of Arabidopsis gene sets, with an emphasis on
              hormone-responsive genes (new members of this class are anticipated to be
              identified) will be quantified, as well as genes previously identified as being
              specifically nematode-responsive. This project addresses three general and
              inter-related scientific questions: 1) how is the host recognized, and how does
              the parasite couple its biology and development to host cues, 2) what are the
              parasite-induced changes in the host, and in particular what is the source and
              role of phyto-hormones, 3) how has parasitism evolved, what has been the role
              of horizontal gene transfer, and is this reflected in the organization of
              parasitism genes?

A large body of mostly descriptive information exists for
              RKN and an important goal will be to couple the genomic findings with this
              biological data. Many features of the RKN-plant interaction (e.g., gall
              formation) appear canonical for a broad range of host-parasite associations
              involving diverse organism (including insects), and also represents a tractable
              model to study aspects of normal plant development, including phyto-hormone
              biosynthesis/regulation. Better understanding the host-parasite interaction
              will reveal the linch-pins from which novel nematode-management strategies can
              be derived. Furthermore, because this research will be performed within a
              framework of graduate and undergraduate education, it will provide students
              with significant opportunities for professional development. 

