Title       : RUI: Pigment Granule Dispersion in Teleost Retinal Pigment Epithelium:
               Cholinergic Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0077666

Award Number: 0077666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50487              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana M. Garcia dg08@swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9178,9181,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research looks at what happens when light hits the eye.
Research
              will examine what happens when the eye adjusts to changing light
levels and
              how that information is transmitted between the retina and the
retinal pigment
              epithelium (RPE). It will zero in on tiny chemical
messengers used by the
              retina to communicate with the RPE.  The RPE is a
thin layer of tissue located
              next to the retina.

The researchers will use fish eyes as a source of tissue
              for these studies.
Unlike human eyes, fish eyes have pupils of fixed diameter.
               Fish don't
adjust to changing light by dilating or constricting their pupils
              the way
people do.   Instead they rearrange their light-sensitive
              photoreceptors and
the pigment granules in the RPE to get just the right
              amount of light to the
photoreceptors, rods or cones, best suited for the job.
               In the light,
pigment granules in the RPE spread out into finger-like
              extensions that
interlace with the rods and cones. These rearrangements let
              the RPE shade
the rod photoreceptors, which are specialized for night vision,
              while still
permitting the cone photoreceptors, bright light and color
              vision
specialists, to detect light.

This study will examine the receptors
              through which acetylcholine, one of
the tiny chemical messengers, operates. 
              Receptors are like little antennae
found on the surface of cells, and they
              detect specific chemicals in their
environment.  There are many different
              types of receptors for acetylcholine.
Each detects acetylcholine, but each has
              a different effect on molecular
signals inside the cell.  This study will use
              chemicals that either mimic or
block acetylcholine to figure out what type of
              receptor is involved in
pigment dispersion.  This research will illuminate a
              novel signaling pathway
for light adaptation, enhancing understanding of how
              the eye works.

