Title       : RUI: Genetic and Epigenetic Mechanisms Generating r1 Gene Complexity in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0077538

Award Number: 0077538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Alleman alleman@duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,9109,9178,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The maize R gene (red-1) encodes a helix-loop-helix transcription factor that
              determines the timing and tissue-specificity of anthocyanin expression.
              Anthocyanin is a non-essential plant pigment that can be used as a marker for
              gene expression. The R locus exhibits epigenetic phenomena such as genomic
              imprinting and paramutation. Imprinting is apparent in the differential
              expression of aleurone depending upon parental inheritance of the gene.
              Paramutation is a form of epigenetic silencing in which the presence of a
              specific allele such as R-st affect the level of expression of a sensitive
              allele such as R-r. Both imprinting and paramutation are linked to structural
              properties of R haplotypes. These structural properties include 1) haplotype
              complexity or gene number, 2) gene structure, for example, the presence or
              absence of inverted repeats, 3) transposable element insertion, and 4) cytosine
              methylation. A molecular genetic approach will be applied to the problem of R
              gene complexity and expression. The specific aims are:
1. To characterize R
              haplotypes from races of maize. A phylogenetic tree will be constructed with
              these data. Tissue specificity of anthocyanin distribution will be surveyed and
              alleles will be characterized in terms of paramutagenicity, paramutability and
              imprinting.
2. To use genetic recombination to separate selected haplotypes
              into single transcriptional unit genes to compare the anthocyanin distribution
              for each gene.
3. To define the 5' flanking regions of each of the unique
              non-imprinting alleles and to determine the distribution of methyl-cytosine in
              the DNA.

The results from this study will give more insight into the
              structural and evolutionary aspects of genes exhibiting epigenetic phenomena,
              such as the maize R family.

