Title       : Development of Vectors for Virus-Induced Plant Gene Silencing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0077510

Award Number: 0077510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $635624             (Estimated)
Investigator: Savithramma P. Dinesh-Kumar savithramma.dinesh-kumar@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ability to sequence plant genomes has resulted in the identification of
              large numbers of novel open reading frames (ORFs). The challenge ahead is to
              gain information about the function of many known and novel genes that have
              been identified through these projects.  To this end, systematic efforts are
              underway to characterize the genes on a large scale using both bioinformatics
              and high throughput procedures.  Most of the high throughput methods entail
              analyzing nucleic acids: mRNAs, cDNAs, or genomic sequences. These data provide
              information about gene expression, genome sequence comparisons and target sites
              for DNA binding proteins. However, much information about genes comes from the
              analysis of gene function and gene products. Therefore, in the post-genomic
              era, large-scale functional genomics approaches are necessary for converting
              sequence information into functional information. A recently developed
              para-genetic approach called virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) offers rapid
              means of gaining insight into gene function in plants. The strategy is termed
              'para-genetic' because it effectively creates genetic suppressors in the
              absence of host genome mutation. 

The long-term goal of the project is to
              develop tools for plant functional genomics that will help to understand how
              plant resistance genes recognize pathogen elicitors and signal the induction of
              defense responses that ultimately halt the pathogen spread. The specific
              objectives are to: (1) develop viral vectors for plant functional genomics
              using a VIGS approach, and (2) identify 'global' and 'specific' suppressors of
              disease resistance signaling components using VIGS approach. The tools
              developed in this proposal will be of great utility to gain insight into plant
              signaling networks. The tools and information developed in this project will be
              made available to the scientific community for plant signaling studies.
              Eventually, the knowledge gained from these studies will provide new strategies
              for the engineering of improved crops.  

