Title       : AG Function and Interacting Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0077832

Award Number: 0077832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223333             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Ma hxm16@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0077832
 Ma

Flower development is a complex process and provides an
              excellent experimental system to study cellular regulatory processes.  The
              AGAMOUS (AG) gene of the small weed Arabidopsis is an important regulator of
              flower development.  However, the temporal requirement of AG function is still
              not known.  In addition, the AG protein encoded by the AG gene is a member of a
              group of related proteins that are thought to control the expression of other
              genes.  But the genes that are regulated by AG are not yet known.

This
              proposal takes advantage of a plant system that carries a modified AG gene
              whose function can switched on after the AG protein has been synthesized.  It
              is proposed here to use this system to determine the temporal requirement of AG
              function for the control of flower development. Furthermore, this system will
              be used to isolate target genes that are regulated by AG either directly or
              indirectly. A collection of genes has been generated that is enriched for
              AG-regulated genes.  Preliminary sequence analysis indicates that about of half
              of the genes are not similar to known genes discovered by others, and the
              remainder are similar to known genes, but have not been described by others
              except as DNA sequences.  The putative AG-regulated genes will be further
              studied to confirm and understand their expression patterns.  A few selected
              representative genes will be characterized using molecular genetic methods to
              learn about their role in flower development.

These studies will provide new
              insights about the control of flower development, particularly how a specific
              gene can regulate other genes, thereby influence cellular properties during
              development.  Moreover, the results from these experiments should also increase
              our knowledge about gene regulation and development in general.  

