Title       : Genetic Analysis of Pollen-Stigma Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0077854

Award Number: 0077854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne K. Preuss dpreuss@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   After pollen binds to the stigma, the extracellular coating diffuses along
              the stigma surface and facilitates water transfer to the desiccated pollen
              grains.  Mutations in CER genes cause a defect in pollen hydration by
              decreasing the levels of long-chain lipids on the pollen surface and
              destabilizing the entire pollen coating.  The pleiotropic nature of the cer
              defects has identification of a mutation in the GRP17 gene has revealed the
              function of the major pollen coat protein.  grp17 mutants have a normal
              complement of all other coat proteins and lipids, yet display severe delays in
              pollen hydration.  Genes encoding five other coat proteins have been identified
              in Dr. Preuss' laboratory; identifying mutations in those genes will make it
              possible to determine whether their products interact with GRP17, contribute to
              pollen hydration, or play a role in maintaining pollen coat structure. 
              Interestingly, most of the pollen coat proteins are encoded by a tandem array
              of GRP genes;  this arrangement raises the possibility that mating specificity
              in plants, like that observed in animals or algae, is controlled by concerted
              evolution of a single locus.  There is one specific aim:  to investigate the
              requirements for pollen hydration a) identify mutants defective in individual
              coat proteins, b) investigate interactions between pollen coat proteins and
              lipids by combining grip and cer mutations, c) determine the extent of GRP
              functional redundance by characterizing the effects of a deletion of the entire
              GRP locus and d) localize GRP proteins, determining their association with
              lipid droplets and migration onto the stigma surface.
     Fertilization in
              flowering plants depends on as elaborate series of cell-cell interactions that
              enable female pistil cells to discriminate among pollen grains and inhibit, on
              an individual basis, the invasive growth of foreign pollen and pathogens. 
              These interactions are essential for plant development and species identity,
              yet in most cases the molecular basis is not understood.  The long-term goal of
              this research is to uncover molecules required for Arabidopsis reproduction,
              including those that mediate pollen adhesion, recognition, hydration, tube
              initiation, and growth to the ovules.  This project focuses on the initial step
              in pollination - the interactions between pollen and stigma
              cells.

Nsf-funded investigations in Dr. Preuss' laboratory have determined
              that pollen-stigma adhesion relies on species-specific molecules within the
              extracellular pollen wall [1], and that the subsequent hydration of pollen
              requires a glycine-rich, lipid binding protein within the hydrophobic pollen
              coat [2].  In both cases, genetic and molecular studies confirm that these
              interactions involve novel classes of molecules and require extremely
              hydrophobic components.  The immediate goals of this project are to elucidate
              the roles of pollen surface lipids and proteins in pollen hydration.



