Title       : RUI: Abortive Initiation and Promoter Escape by E. coli RNA Polymerase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0077941

Award Number: 0077941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lilian M. Hsu lhsu@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
MCB-0077941
Lilian Hsu

Hsu 
Abortive initiation and promoter
              escape are reaction processes that accompany the transitional steps from
              initiation to elongation.  For some promoters, this last stage of transcription
              initiation contains the rate-limiting step governing the extent of productive
              gene expression.  Previously, it was shown that extensive replacement of the
              initial transcribed sequence could result in a promoter whose expression is
              severely limited at the promoter escape step.  Such a promoter produces an
              unusually high level of abortive RNA.  Thus, the initial transcribed sequence
              is an important factor influencing abortive initiation and promoter escape. 
              The overall goal of this research is to decipher the mechanism(s) by which the
              initial transcribed sequence exerts a rate block at productive transcription,
              and seek conditions/factors that can alleviate the rate limitation.  The first
              objective is to define the characteristics, if any, of initial transcribed
              sequences that impede or facilitate promoter escape. This will employ the
              quantitative analysis of random initial transcribed sequence mutants.  Recent
              evidence suggests that highly abortive promoters do so due to the formation of
              a high fraction of unproductive initial transcribing complexes that only carry
              out abortive RNA synthesis.  Thus, for promoters that are severely limited at
              promoter escape, a second objective will be to examine the formation of the
              productive versus unproductive complexes and identify conditions/factors that
              modulate the partitioning of the enzyme.  Finally, it is observed that
              supercoiling greatly increases the efficiency of promoter escape.  To pinpoint
              the exact step of activation, reaction rates after open complex formation will
              be measured from linear versus supercoiled templates.  In addition, the extent
              of productive and unproductive complex formation will be compared between the
              linear and supercoiled templates. The use of supercoiled template is the first
              step toward mimicking the in vivo transcription condition and will shed light
              on the in vivo relevance of abortive initiation and promoter escape.  Taken
              together, the combination of questions and approaches will clarify the role of
              initial transcribed sequence in promoter activity and offer many insights
              toward a better understanding of the mechanism of abortive initiation and
              promoter escape.  Given the universal nature of these reactions, the work in
              the E. coli system, supported by further progress on structural analysis of the
              transcription complexes, will have greater impact on achieving a general
              knowledge of transcription initiation.          

