Title       : Solution-Liquid-Solid Growth of Inorganic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2000   
File        : a9709104

Award Number: 9709104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Buhro buhro@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This new award to William S. Buhro at Washingon University is supported   by the
              Advanced Materials Program in the Chemistry Division and the   Solid-State
              Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research. The   focus of the
              research is the development of the Solution-Liquid-Solid   (SLS)
              crystallization technique as a general method for the   low-temperature
              synthesis of nonmolecular inorganic solids. The primary   feature of the SLS
              method is the dispersion of nonometer-size molten   Indium or Indium/Gallium
              droplets in an organometallic precursor   solution, from which the whisker
              crystals grow. Catalyzed organometallic   reactions occur at the
              droplet-solution interface, depositing the   products into solution in the
              droplet. The droplets become   supersaturated, driving whisker growth. The
              specific goals of the   research are to (1) establish the detailed mechanism of
              SLS growth, (2)   gain control of nanowhisker sizes and produce narrow size
              distributions,   (3) gain control of nanowhisker compositions in ternary
              systems, (4)   investigate fabrication of heterostructured nanowhiskers, and
              (5) assess   the generality of SLS growth to the synthesis of III-V nitrides
              and II-VI   chalcogenides.  This research will explore the mechanism and scope
              of a new   low-temperature route to solid state materials limited by chemical
              and   surface reactivity compared to traditional high temperature methods which
                are limited by precursor volatility. Since the new method is kinetically  
              driven, new solid phases can be expected. Solid state nanowhiskers of  
              controlled composition and size are likely to be useful in electronic and  
              optical applications.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
