Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Oral Advocacy and Supreme Court Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9709927

Award Number: 9709927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Epstein epstein@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This doctoral dissertation research award  is based on the idea that Supreme
              Court justices seek as much information as possible about cases heard on the
              merits.  The problem, for the justices, is that almost all the information they
              receive is what other actors want them to consider.  In other words, the Court
              has little control over the majority of information it is given.  As a result,
              unless justices ask that the parties brief a specific issue, there is only one
              time when they may gather information they themselves want:  the time set aside
              for oral arguments.  As such, these proceedings may play a unique and important
              role in the Court's decision making process.  In particular, this research
              addresses two main questions:  1)  What types of information do Supreme Court
              justices seek to obtain during oral arguments; and, 2) Are oral arguments
              important to their decisions on the merits.  In answering these questions, the
              project adopts a strategic approach to judicial decision making.  This approach
              suggest that Supreme Court justices seek to gather as much information as
              possible about a case, because if they are to create efficacious policies, they
              must formulate beliefs about how other actors will react to their decisions. 
              Further, if this information is important for the justices then it should be
              addressed, both in their private deliberations, and in the Court's final
              opinions on the merits.  To assess these two predictions, the research examines
              the specific types of information the justices gather during oral arguments,
              and then compares the issues raised during these proceeding with the conference
              notes, private papers, and final opinions of the Court to discern whether these
              issues are addressed by the justices in their deliberative process.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
