Title       : Target-Based Determinants of Social Categorization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9709797

Award Number: 9709797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Stroessner Ss233@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops a psychological model that helps to explain how people
              spontaneously categorize other people. In contrast to current assumptions, the
              model suggests that social targets are not always categorized as members of
              race or sex groups. Rather, categorizations depend on whether targets match a
              perceived `cultural norm` and on whether the perceiver has the motivation and
              capacity to engage in thorough processing of available category information. If
              no unusual information is available or if motivation and capacity to process
              the available information is low, judgments are likely to be based on
              perceivers' beliefs about people in general. If unusual information is
              available and motivation and capacity are high, however, judgments will be
              influenced by the ways in which the target is unusual or distinctive. Several
              different aspects of this model will be tested. A procedure based on measuring
              the speed with which different judgments are made will be used to assess
              whether there exists a perceived norm or default in terms of race and sex
              within our culture. The effects of the perceivers' own race and sex also will
              be examined. Manipulations of available cognitive capacity will be used to
              determine the types of judgments that can be made easily and those that require
              effortful processing. It is expected that individuals will easily recognize
              targets' features, regardless of how much cognitive capacity is available.
              However, categorization judgments based on that feature information may require
              greater deliberative processing and therefore should be affected by the
              availability of cognitive resources. Support for the model would demonstrate
              that race and sex categorizations are most likely to occur when the encountered
              individual is a member of a non-normative group and when the perceiver has the
              capacity available to make category judgments. It is expected that these
              studies will extend our understanding of the basic cognitive processes that
              underlie social perception and will provide a framework for predicting the
              types of beliefs that may influence interpersonal and intergroup interactions. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
