Title       : Physiological Role and Phylogenetic Diversity of Termite Gut Symbionts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2000       
File        : a9709000

Award Number: 9709000
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $511000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Breznak breznak@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Breznak  9709000    Roughly 2000 species of termites degrade 1 billion tons 
              annually of lignocellulosic plant material and residues  derived from it (e.g.
              humus) and in doing so derive  nutrition from some of earth's most abundant,
              but refractory  and nitrogen-poor food resources. To accomplish this feat, 
              they have evolved into spectacular symbioses with gut  microorganisms
              representing all known domains of life on  Earth -- Bacteria, methane-producing
              Archaea, and Eukarya  (protozoa). Such microbes are important in: (i) nitrogen 
              economy (via N2-fixation and excretory N-recycling); (ii)  production of
              acetate (a major carbon and energy source for  termites) from H2 + CO2; and
              (iii)production of digestive  enzymes. Nevertheless, a lingering source of
              frustration has  been an inability to culture (and thereby better understand) 
              some of the major members of the termite gut community, ea.  spirochetes.
              However, molecular biological tools now afford  a means to probe the nature,
              number, physiological role(s),  and phylogenetic diversity of termite gut
              microbes without  the absolute requirement for cultivation. Accordingly, 
              research in this project will integrate molecular biological  approaches with
              biochemical and physiological studies to  increase our understanding of termite
              gut spirochetes, as  well as a variety of other microbes relevant to termite 
              nutrition and vitality. It is expected that this research  will continue to
              reveal termites as a rich reservoir of  novel (and largely untapped) microbial
              diversity and a  fruitful system for discovering new principles of microbial 
              interactions.
