Title       : Novel Organic Cages as Moduli for Extended Three-dimensional Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1997    
File        : a9709330

Award Number: 9709330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elena Galoppini galoppin@andromeda.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9221,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Professor Elena Galoppini, Department of Chemistry, Rutgers University at  
              Newark is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Program of the  
              Chemistry Division under a Research Planning Grant to establish a   synthetic
              methodology leading to novel organic cage molecules.     Derivatives prepared
              from commercially available adamantanes and   tetraphenylmethanes are coupled
              to achieve robust, rigid cages with   internal cavities ranging from 18 to 28
              angstroms in diameter.     Professor Galoppini presents a clever approach to
              the synthesis of   organic cage structures that possess the rigidity needed to
              serve as   moduli for the synthesis of extended, porous, supramolecular organic
                networks.  A Research Planning Grant at this stage in Professor   Galoppini's
              career offers a means to exploit the chemistry, and develop   the methodology
              needed for an NSF research proposal in a very competitive   area.  Porous
              organic materials of tailorable architecture are an attractive   complement to
              currently available porous, inorganic materials.   The   synthesis of such
              materials, however, rests on building blocks of   sufficient rigidity to
              support an extended three dimensional array of the   individual units.  A
              synthetic methodology using commercially available   reagents will be developed
              to afford a series of rigid organic cages that   will serve as building blocks.
              Three dimensional materials will be   assembled with tailorable porosities to
              allow the diffusion and   encapsulation of different reagents.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
