Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Lie Groups, Algebras and Their Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9709820

Award Number: 9709820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey Mason gem@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ivan B. Penkov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT :  Support provided by this grant will facilitate the continuation and
              enhancement of the regional workshop "Lie Groups, Lie Algebras and their
              Representations", which has been operating in the Western US for several years,
              and help establish it on a regular basis. Lie theory is a central discipline in
              modern mathematics, playing key roles in harmonic analysis, number theory,
              algebra, differential geometry and several aspects of mathematical physics. The
              goals of the workshop are to provide opportunities for graduate students and
              junior researchers to avail themselves of the expertise of the many researchers
              who are working in this general area in the Western US.    The three CO PI's
              will continue to organize four weekend workshops per year at various campuses
              of the University of California. These workshops will feature both local
              experts and a few outside speakers. Funds will be awarded to graduate students
              and junior researchers in order to both facilitate attendance at the workshops
              and to encourage collaborative research with senior researchers. It has been
              the CO PI's collective experience over the past few years that this type of
              activity, creating as it does a unique opportunity to learn, is a particularly
              efficient and beneficial way for graduate students planning to work in this
              important branch of mathematics to acquaint themselves with both current
              research and the researchers who are producing it.
