Title       : Collaborative Research: The Dynamics of Collective Protest in the U.S.,
               1960-1980
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9709356

Award Number: 9709356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212183             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Olzak olzak@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,9278,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of collective protest in the United States during the period
              1960-1980, with special emphasis on the Environmental Movement, the Women's
              Movement, and the Peace Movement.  These years cover the peak and decline of
              the protest cycle of the 1960s and 1970s.  Analysis will systematically test
              hypotheses derived from social movement theories, particularly those
              emphasizing the centrality of political opportunity, using longitudinal data
              generated from newspaper reports of protest events.  In order to test political
              opportunity theory, protest event data must be placed in the context of ongoing
              changes, not only in dimensions of political opportunity, but also a host of
              other theoretically relevant "covariates." These covariates include changes in:
              public opinion, media attention, the structural "strain" or "demand" for
              protest activity, and the organizational strength of the movements themselves.
              Thus, besides assembling data on U.S. protest events from newspaper reports,
              this project will gather corresponding time-series data on each of these
              covariates.            The project seeks to answer two fundamental research
              questions. First, net of other important covariates, do changing features of
              the institutional political environment --shifting political opportunities --
              predict the emergence and subsequent development of protest activity in each of
              these three issue areas?  Second, is protest activity positively related to
              issue-specific institutional outcomes in the U.S. during this period?  If there
              is a positive relationship between protest and outcomes, the research will then
              examine the features of protest events (such as size or violence) and the
              mediating mechanisms (such as public opinion change or electoral shifts) that
              help explain the association.  The research will make use of event-history
              analysis, a technique which is uniquely well suited to the study of changing
              social and structural conditions.     This research examines the rise of the
              modern Environmentalist Movem ent in the United States, in comparison with two
              other movements of its period and in the context of formal theories of movement
              success.  It will help us understand whether such movements really are the
              prime source of socio-cultural transformation and the degree to which they
              merely exploit political opportunities that exist for other reasons.  Such
              knowledge is essential for a vigorous social science of global change.
