Title       : Laboratory Qualification and Field Behavior Studies of Piezometers for Measuring
               Earthquake-Induced Pore Pressures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9709334

Award Number: 9709334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138197             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro A. De Alba padealba@hypatia.unh.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Benoit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: CMS-9709334, Pedro deAlba & Jean Benoit, University of  New Hampshire 
                When a saturated sand deposit is shaken by an earthquake, there  can be a 
              significant build-up of pore-water pressure, with consequent loss  of  rigidity
              and strength of the soil, often ending in actual  liquefaction of  the deposit,
              and major damage to structures. While pore-pressure  buildup  has been
              simulated in laboratory experiments, there is only one  case  currently
              available in which the development of these pore  pressures to the  point of
              liquefaction was measured in a field deposit under  earthquake-induced
              strong-ground shaking. Unfortunately, the pore  pressure  records obtained in
              this case have certain unusual features, which  has led  some researchers to
              question their validity. Consequently, it is  of primary  importance to
              geotechnical earthquake engineers to obtain more  records, in  order to provide
              a final verification of mathematical models  developed on  the basis of
              laboratory and centrifuge testing.    This research project involves an
              extensive laboratory and field  study of  piezometer designs in current use. In
              the laboratory, piezometer  installation will be simulated in a test chamber,
              and piezometer  response  to dynamic pore pressure increases will be measured
              both in water  alone and  in saturated soil. Acceptable procedures for design,
              saturation  and  installation of piezometers will thus be identified. In the
              second  phase, a  field installation for periodically checking piezometer
              response  will be  developed. These second-phase tests will provide insight
              into the  problem  of response changes, if any, due to long-term biological or 
              chemical  interaction with the surrounding soil.    The outcome of this project
              will be a set of guidelines for the  design,  manufacture, installation and
              long-term monitoring of piezometer  arrays  designed to obtain much-needed
              field data on pore pressure  development  during earthquakes.    This project
              is being coordinated with a complementa ry research  program  headed by Dr.
              Behnam Hushmand of Hushmand Associates, California.
