Title       : Mechanisms of Sensorimotor Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9709361

Award Number: 9709361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192622             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Jeka jj96@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Human standing posture is inherently unstable; even when one is standing
              quietly, small disturbances and corrections of posture occur continually.
              Control of human upright stance requires sensory input to perceive the
              distinction between movements of one's own body and movement of the
              environment. These inputs include (1) visual information from the eyes; (2)
              vestibular (inner ear) information about head orientation; and (3)
              somatosensory (touch) information about position of body segments and external
              surfaces, from receptors in the muscles and skin. Most postural control studies
              have focused on isolating a particular sensory input through experimental
              manipulation or pathology (e.g., patients without a functioning inner ear), to
              determine how an individual sensory input influences postural control. However,
              a single input rarely works in isolation and there is a need to understand how
              multiple inputs interact.  The present study analyzes human postural control
              while simultaneously manipulating two sensory inputs, vision and touch.
              Previous studies have shown that vision can influence postural sway: A person
              standing quietly in front of a moving visual pattern sways at the frequency of
              the visual display. More recently, experiments in our lab have shown that the
              sense of touch can similarly influence sway.  Postural stability was enhanced
              when people lightly touched a rigid surface with a single fingertip; and, if
              the touched surface was moving, postural sway assumed the frequency of the
              moving surface. The intent of the present study is to provide visual and touch
              information simultaneously, to determine how these two sensory inputs interact
              in the control of postural sway.  Individuals will stand in front of a visual
              display consisting of a random dot pattern. At the same time they will touch a
              rigid metal plate. The experiments will explore how postural sway is influenced
              when 1) visual cues are moving and touch cues are static, and vice versa; and
              2) visual and touch cues are both moving. The question is whether postural
              responses are dominated by vision or touch, or whether instead a more complex
              relationship obtains. These studies should lead to a better theoretical
              understanding of how the central nervous system processes complex sensory
              information, and eventually to better rehabilitative techniques for patients
              who have lost sensory function due to neurological injury (e.g., stroke).      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
