Title       : Bayesian Analysis of Generalized Linear Mixed Models Using Non-informative
               Priors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1998   
File        : a9709091

Award Number: 9709091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17789              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranjini Natarajan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  We study a Bayesian analysis of generalized linear mixed models  using
              non-informative priors. Mixed models (also known as  hierarchical or
              random-coefficient models) extend the usual  generalized linear regression by
              incorporation of  a rich and flexible pattern of correlations among outcomes.
              The classic  non-informative prior for the Gaussian family (Box and Tiao, pg
              58, 1992)  is currently used as conventional objective priors for these models.
               In previously published work, the Principal Investigator has shown  that this
              family of priors does not lead to proper posterior  distributions for mixed
              models for binomial responses, thus making them  undesirable; further, their
              use in some situations can lead to seriously  misleading results in practice.
              This research  extends the Principal Investigators' previous work by exploring
              alternative  approaches for a non-informative Bayesian analysis of hierarchical
               models. Four objective specifications will be investigated:  Jeffreys's prior,
              the uniform shrinkage prior, flat priors and the  reference conjugate prior,
              and theoretical and practical  recommendations made for their use. The methods 
              developed in this proposal will be used to analyze real data from a 
              double-blind clinical trial to study the efficacy of Rifabutin in the treatment
              of Crohn's  disease. More generally, there will be a horizontal shift of these
              methods  to various disciplines where correlated data routinely arise.   
              Planning activities include: deriving the reference priors  and investigating
              propriety of the resulting posterior distributions;  examining methods for
              sampling from the posterior distributions.
