Title       : Mechanism of Ferric Enterobactin Transport Through FEPA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9709418

Award Number: 9709418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307842             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip E. Klebba @aardvark.ucs.uoknor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9709418  Klebba  This project addresses the transport mechanism of an
              Escherichia coli outer membrane (OM) protein.   FepA transports the bacterial
              iron chelator (siderophore), ferric enterobactin (FeEnt), across the OM into
              the periplasm.  This transport reaction is energy-dependent and TonB-dependent,
              involving two experimentally defined biochemical stages: binding and
              internalization.  The molecular mechanisms comprising FeEnt binding to FepA
              will be elucidated; the siderophore binding site will be investigated by
              identifying residues that confer affinity and chemical specificity to the
              binding event.  Using an abbreviated form of site-specific mutagenesis, termed
              double mutagenesis, two elements of the receptor-ligand interaction, ionic and
              hydrophobic bonds, will be explored.  Using chemical analogs of FeEnt, 
              chemical substitutions on the siderophore that impair or abrogate its binding
              to FepA will be identified. The PI will analyze conformational changes that
              occur in FepA during transport in vivo with electron spin resonance (ESR)
              spectroscopy, and study the proposed interaction between FepA and TonB with ESR
              by site-directed spin labeling (SDSL).  Random and site-directed mutagenesis
              will be employed to identify regions in FepA that are important to ligand
              uptake after binding, and SDSL used to study the effects of mutations in these
              sites.  Finally, the investigators will use a novel system of in vivo ESR to
              study biochemistry in the bacterial periplasm.      These investigations will
              determine how an iron-containing molecule adsorbs to a receptor protein in the
              outer membrane of a bacterial cell. It will define the parts of the metal
              complex and the parts of the membrane protein that interact together during the
              passage of the iron through the cell membrane.  Since all Gram-negative
              bacteria obtain iron using similar systems, the results of these studies will
              establish fundamental principles of binding and transport that are applicable
              to many different uptake systems in many  diffe rent organisms.  Electron spin
              resonance analysis of a spin labeled membrane protein (FepA)  will augment
              general knowledge of membrane protein structure, and provide information about
              how such  receptors function to allow entry of metal complexes. In many ways
              this process is akin to the opening and closing of a door on the outside of a
              cell, that allows the entry of certain molecules but not others; the proposed
              research will define the mechanisms underlying the operation of the membrane
              "doors."
