Title       : Land Use Change in The East African Savanna: A Case Study Of Northern Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9709762

Award Number: 9709762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Victoria S. Lockwood                    
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Galvin kathy@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This project supports the research of a team of anthropologists and ecologists
              from Colorado State University studying the degree to which indigenous peoples
              in Tanzania can continue to successfully pursue their traditional economic
              systems within the larger context of state and local government economic and
              environmental policies.  The site of the research is the Ngorongoro
              Conservation Area, a biodiversity conservation site inhabited by the Maasai
              people.  The researchers will compare the tribal economic life within the
              Conservation Area with the life of comparable people living in an adjacent
              district where conservation policies are less restrictive.  The project will
              examine the causes of the Maasai's economic difficulties, determine the extent
              to which they are related to conservation policies versus regional
              environmental and economic patterns, and assess how conservation policies,
              development interventions and local land use might be altered in the future to
              improve the people's situation while still maintaining ecosystem integrity. 
              Methods will include qualitative participant observation and interviewing with
              quantitative surveys and land use analysis.   This research is important
              because traditional people the world over often believe that conservation
              policies are antithetical to their own economic well-being.  By explicitly
              comparing the economic situation of the same people, one group living under the
              weight of conservation policies and the other relatively free of them, but both
              subject to regional and national economic and socio-political constraints, the
              project will advance our understanding of the specific effects of conservation
              policies.  The resulting information will be of great interest to conservation
              and  development planners who must confront similar issues in other parts of
              the world.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
