Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Interdisciplinary Mathematics: Applied and Numerical
               Analysis in Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9709494

Award Number: 9709494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Doering doering@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony M. Bloch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Krasny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eduard Harabetian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Barvinok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              (c) PROJECT SUMMARY        The purpose of this project is to enhance
              interdisciplinary mathematics research, teaching and the professional
              development of postdocs at the University of Michigan.  This funding primarily
              provides half-support for four postdoctoral researchers associated with the
              Department of Mathematics' Interdisciplinary Initiative, with the remaining
              support coming from half-time assistant professor appointments
              (non-tenure-track) teaching one course per term.  The postdoc/assistant
              professors will be selected for their ability and interest to conduct research
              and  teach mathematics inspired by and applied to problems arising in science
              and engineering (physics, chemistry, biology, geology; mechanical, electrical,
              chemical, industrial and operations engineering, and financial mathematics). 
              The central goal of the project is to support existing interactions and
              stimulate new interdisciplinary research and collaborations between the
              Department of Mathematics and researchers throughout the University of
              Michigan's science and engineering departments and at other centers of
              excellence.  These goals will be pursued by way of the following activities
              supported in part by the grant:        . A regularly scheduled
              Interdisciplinary Mathematics Seminar given by experts in mathematical issues
              and applications relevant to other disciplines.    . An annual research
              conference organized by subsets of the Pls and postdocs, focusing each year on
              a different specific area of interdisciplinary mathematics.    .
              Postdoc/assistant professors will teach and develop upper-division
              undergraduate level special topics courses in areas of interdisciplinary
              mathematics.    The Pls and other senior associated researchers represent a
              broad spectrum of experience in applied  and interdisciplinary mathematical
              research.  They will mentor, guide, and collaborate with the  postdoc/assistant
              professors.    Funding for this activity will be provided by the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities.
