Title       : Numerical Investigations of the Incompressible Euler Equations, the
               Vlasov-Poisson/Fokker-Planck Equations, and the Boltzmann Equation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9709123

Award Number: 9709123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori Ann Carmack   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract:      I propose to numerically address the question of  finite time
              singularity development in the  three-dimensional incompressible Euler
              equations  with smooth initial data.  These equations model  the flow of
              incompressible ideal fluids.  In particular,  I will consider the axisymmetric
              with swirl case which  allows for higher resolution than possible in fully 
              three-dimensional experiments.  Several different  finite difference techniques
              will be implemented.  I will investigate the performance of the different 
              numerical schemes in order to assess the quality of  each method.  Also, I will
              study the effects different  numerical boundary conditions have on vorticity 
              amplification as well as the fully three-dimensional  problem using particle
              methods.    In conjunction with these experiments, I will perform numerical 
              simulations of the Vlasov-Poisson equations in one dimension.  These equations
              model a collisionless plasma of electrons in a  uniform background of ions, and
              serve as a simpler analogue of  the two-dimensional incompressible Euler
              equations.  I will  numerically study the behavior of weak solutions to the 
              Vlasov-Poisson and Fokker-Planck-Poisson equations arising from  non-smooth
              electron sheet initial data.  An electron sheet  describes a concentrated beam
              of electrons.  The equations will  be regularized by either smoothing the
              initial condition or by  including collisions modeled by the
              Fokker-Planck-Poisson equations.  I propose to use both a a finite difference
              method developed  by Jack Schaeffer as well as particle methods to examine the 
              solution of the Vlasov-Poisson equations obtained in the limit of  vanishing
              regularization.    And finally, this proposed research will prepare me to
              afterward  conduct research related to the Boltzmann and Fokker-Planck 
              equations with non-qmooth initial data which has potential  medical
              appliations.  These equations are used in the computation  of dosage
              calculations in radiation therapy.
