Title       : Mechanical Control of Polymer Morphology and Properties: Theory and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a9709101

Award Number: 9709101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna C. Balazs balazs1@engr.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9709101  Balazs    This is a theoretical research grant to study the effects of 
              applied forces on polymer films and blends in order to  fabricate tailored
              interfaces and high-strength materials.  To do this, theoretical models and
              computer simulations will  be developed to incorporate external forces;
              determine how  these forces affect morphology; and, to correlate morphology  to
              macroscopic properties.    In the study of polymer films, the focus will be on
              polymer  chains tethered to solid surfaces.  The interactions between  such
              polymer-coated surfaces are responsible for stabilizing  colloidal solutions
              and reducing friction between  interfaces.  To model this problem of
              mechanically  compressing, stretching or deforming confined polymer  layers,
              two-dimensional self-consistent field calculations  and scaling theory will be
              used.  The results will provide  guidelines for fabricating optical devices,
              such as bistable  switches, flocculating agents, which are important in the 
              production of wood and paper products, and layered  composites with tailored
              properties.    In the study of polymer blends, the focus will be on the  mixing
              of "off-the-shelf" polymers.  This process holds  considerable promise as a
              means of creating new materials at  relatively low cost.  The actual
              fabrication of polymer  blends, however, poses significant challenges. Most
              polymers  are immiscible and phase separate into macroscopic domains.  Shear
              and flow can produce finer dispersements which improve  mechanical properties. 
              %%%  This research grant will use theoretical models and computer  simulations
              to study the impact of various forces on the  properties of polymers.  In
              particular, the research will  study polymer films, such as are used for
              coatings, and  polymer blends (mixed polymers).  These studies are at the 
              forefront of research in polymer science and engineering,  Besides being of
              great fundamental interest, and a  significant theoretical challenge, the
              research has the  potential to directly affect th e design and production of 
              new materials.  ***
