Title       : Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9709854

Award Number: 9709854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Block bblock@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9117,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Block         This grant is focused on the use of a new generation of  remote
              technology devices, called pop-up archival satellite tags  (PSAT).  This study
              combines physiology, oceanography and  engineering to develop technology that
              will permit studying the  migratory movements of open ocean fish.  The PSAT
              tags are  essentially computers that record navigational information, body 
              temperature, depth and ambient temperature data.  The tag  technology will be
              used in combination with established molecular  genetics techniques to
              establish the relationships between  distinct genetic haplotypes evident in
              certain populations oi  pelagic fish and their dispersal patterns in the open
              ocean.  Despite the economic and ecological unportance of highly  migratory
              pelagic fish such as bmfishes (e.g. marlins, swordfish,  sailfish) and tunas,
              little is know about their movement patterns  and population structure.  The
              PSAT tags will provide information  on how the movements of pelagic fish are
              influenced by  oceanographic factors such as temperature.  Although
              considerable  effort has been expended using fisheries statistics, tag and 
              release studies, and acoustic telemetry, the time scale and  resolution of
              these techniques are insufficient to characterize  migrations and address
              questions about life histories and gene  flow. This lack of information becomes
              more critical as fisheries  continue to pressure resources.  The NSF award will
              support the  development of prototype and first c,,eneration tags, and the 
              deployment of tags on captive and wild tunas.  Tracks of  approximately 20-30
              Atlantic bluefm tuna will be obtained for  periods of one-two years.  The PSAT
              tags will immediately  illustrate the potential existence and relative
              importance of  migratory corridors and temporal and spatial movement patterns
              in  relation to oceanographic conditions.  Until now this has been  challenging
              data to obtain.  The information gained will improve  our understanding of the
              biology of these species and increas e  our knowledge of stock structure.  The
              successful implementation  of the pop up archival tag technology will provide
              marine  researchers with a novel tool for studying inaccessible marine 
              vertebrates.
