Title       : Theoretical Aspects of Chemical Dynamics: Ion-Molecule Collisions, Energy-Time
               Analysis of Molecular Spectra, and Assignment of Quantum States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9709575

Award Number: 9709575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. Ezra gse1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Ezra of Cornell University is being supported by the   Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry program to continue his work on   the theoretical
              investigation of chemical dynamics.  Specifically the   project is a
              computational study whereby complex high lying vibrational   states are
              investigated by quantum, classical and semiclassical methods.    During this
              next grant period he will investigate the dynamics of   ion-molecule 
              collisions, with particular emphasis on the formation and   decay of  long
              lived collision complexes.  This research will also focus   on the  development
              of semiclassical periodic orbit theory as an aid in   the interpretation of
              molecular vibrational spectra which are of   sufficiently high energy that they
              lie beyond the regime of traditional   spectroscopic techniques.   These topic
              address several fundamental   problems in chemical and molecular physics namely
              the fate of energy   distribution of long lived molecular complexes and
              statistical versus   non-statistical  behavior in the unimolecular decay of
              transient species.   During the following two years Prof. Ezra will be
              concerned with the   theoretical analysis of the internal motions in molecules,
              as they   vibrate, rotate, and collide with one another. The study of these  
              patterns of nuclear motion leads to a deeper understanding of the factors  
              that determine the propensity of molecules to undergo reaction under   given
              conditions.  This research group will be studying a number of   topics relevant
              to this general theme.  First, they will investigate the   nature of the
              ``sticky'' collisions that can occur between charged   species and uncharged
              molecules in, for example, reactions of atmospheric   importance.  Such sticky
              collisions are often essential for subsequent   chemical reaction to occur. 
              Another major topic is the development of   methods that enable the nature of
              nuclear motions within molecules to be   inferred in a fairly direct way from
              molecular vibrational spectra.  Much   of this work exploits semiclassical
              ideas: that is, theories that are   correct with respect to quantum mechanics,
              while retaining the intuitive   appeal of classical ball-and-spring pictures of
              nuclear motion.  Periodic   classical motions of nuclei, those that repeat over
              and over ad   infinitum, are found to play an important role in understanding
              the   connection between spectra and nuclear dynamics.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
