Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Studies on Solar Rotation & Related Phenomena
               from the Kodaikanal & Mt. Wilson Sunspot Measurements, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1997     
File        : a9709908

Award Number: 9709908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14516              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. R. Sivaraman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst of Astrophys
	      
	      Bangalore, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9709908  Sivaraman  Description:  This award supports the U.S.-  India
              Cooperative Research: Analysis of  Kodikanal Solar Images, Award in U.S. and 
              Indian Currency.  The collaborators are Robert  Howard, National Solar
              Observatory, Tucson,  Arizona and K.R. Sivaraman, Indian Institute of 
              Astrophysics, Bangalore, India.  The  researchers will use two unique data
              sets, the  Kodaikanal and Mount Wilson sunspot data.  The  Kodaikanal data go
              back to 1906.  These data  sets constitute a particularly valuable set of 
              fundamental data on solar surface motions.   Using the combined data, the
              investigators will  study solar surface motions that are important  for
              answering many unsolved questions about the  solar dynamo processes within the
              sun.  The use  of complementary data will greatly improve the  precision with
              which to infer subsurface  physical conditions related to the solar  activity
              cycle.     Scope:  This project supports a collaboration  between two highly
              competent solar astronomers  and deals with a difficult but important 
              scientific problem.  Solar astronomy is a field  of Indian strength.  This
              award supports the  analysis of data collected under a project  previously
              supported by the Division of  International Programs (INT).  The project is 
              mutually beneficial and meets INT criteria for  support.      ***
