Title       : Information Casacades in Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9709530

Award Number: 9709530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa R. Anderson Lrande@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lisa Anderson  This is a Research Opportunities for Women/Research Planning
              Grant.    Information cascades are interesting phenomena that have received
              considerable attention from economic theorists. Cascades may form when
              individuals have private information and make public decisions in sequence. If
              early decisions match, it may be optimal for others to follow, regardless of
              their private information. Anecdotal examples of cascades include fads, trends
              in financial markets, and the influence of polls on voting behavior. It is
              difficult to rule out other explanations for conformity in most naturally
              occurring situations. Data from individual decision making experiments
              (Anderson, 1994 and Anderson and Holt, 1996) show that cascades form in a
              controlled laboratory environment where other motives to follow are minimized. 
              This research research introduces the possibility of information cascades into
              a richer market setting. Previous experimental studies focus on situations
              where information dissemination reveals the true value of the asset, and hence,
              benefits traders. In the proposed experiments, traders have private signals
              that provide incomplete information about the value of an asset. Trades are
              made in sequence and are publicly announced (e.g., prices come across a ticker
              tape). In some cases, these public trades reveal private information. If early
              traders are misinformed, a reverse cascade may form, where other traders follow
              with incorrect decisions even though their private information would lead them
              to do otherwise. A pilot session of a parameterized version of this model
              reveals that cascades and reverse cascades form in many cases where they are
              possible. The following preliminary research will be conducted during the
              period covered by this Research Planning Grant: developing a theoretical model,
              determining interesting experimental treatments, conducting pilot experiments,
              and preparing a formal grant proposal based on the findings of the pilot
              experiments.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
