Title       : Photochemical Studies of Multicomponent Molecular Devices inSolution and in
               Organized Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9709272

Award Number: 9709272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $471000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Devens Gust gust@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
              Directorate, Professor J. Devens Gust, Jr. and Professor Thomas A. Moore,   of
              the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Arizona State   University, are
              carrying out photochemical studies of multicomponent   molecular devices in
              solution and in organized assemblies.  Natural   photosynthetic reaction
              centers are photovoltaic devices of molecular   dimensions, and the principles
              dictating the operation of reaction   centers suggest design elements for
              synthetic optoelectronic switches.    New types of pigments and electron donor
              and acceptor moieties, including   functionalized buckminsterfullerenes,
              aromatic imides and amines, and   porphyrin derivatives, are being used to
              construct molecular-scale   photovoltaics, switches, and logic gates. 
              Biomimetic antenna systems   that gather light and transport excitation energy
              to these molecular   photovoltaics and switches will also be studied. 
              Incorporation of   switches into larger-scale devices will be examined both by
              interfacing   molecular species with microelectronic circuits and by
              incorporation of   molecular photovoltaics into liposomes.  Professor J. Devens
              Gust, Jr. and Professor Thomas A. Moore, of the   Department of Chemistry and
              Biochemistry at Arizona State University, are   supported by the Organic
              Dynamics Program and the Office of   Multidisciplinary Activities of the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences   Directorate for their studies of molecules
              and molecular assemblies   designed to harvest the energy of light.  Modeling
              their studies after   the structural motif designed by nature to carry out the
              process of   photosynthesis, Professors Gust and Moore prepare and study
              molecules   which absorb and use the energy of light.  By appropriate design of
                molecular systems, these studies address the fundamental phenomena behind  
              such interactions of molecules with light while paving the way for the  
              preparation of molecular-scale electronic and computational devices which  
              offer the possibility of optical processing and extraordinarily high   density
              storage of information.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
