Title       : Investigation of In Situ Interfacial Polymer Structure by Surface Sum-Frequency
               Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9709386

Award Number: 9709386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie C. Messmer mcm6@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9221,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This Research Planning Grant is supported by the Analytical and  Surface
              Chemistry Program.  Professor Messmer and her students at  Lehigh University
              will study the structure of polymeric interfaces  with the aim to understand
              how the structure of polymeric chains  affects the tribological properties of
              these surfaces.  This work  will correlate the orientation of surface chemical
              bonds and their  conformation with properties such as phase transitions and 
              frictional characteristics.  In situ sum-frequency generation  spectrometry
              will be used to determine the degree of bond order and  structure for these
              polymeric surfaces because this second order  optical method is sensitive only
              to interfacial regions and not to  bulk properties that often dominate signals
              in surface  spectroscopy.  The work will begin with model diblock polymers 
              composed of polyolefins and polyethylene oxide films on fused  silica surfaces
              so that C-H stretching, and C-C bending and rocking  modes can be quantified as
              a function of compositional and  environmental variables.  Results from this
              work will identify  surface properties that strongly influence the frictional
              character  of these interfaces.  This work aims to develop a foundation for
              predicting the surface  frictional properties of polymeric materials through
              the use of a  surface sensitive spectroscopic method, in situ sum-frequency 
              spectrometry.  Model diblock polymers will be studied initially.   Through
              sensitive measurements of the composition and structure of  these polymeric
              surfaces, small features that greatly control  surface friction will be
              established.  This work has broad  application in many important technological
              areas such as  lubrication, anti-flocculating agents, and protective coatings. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
