Title       : Efficiency and Stability in Economic Environments with Asymmetric Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9709392

Award Number: 9709392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153846             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Reny   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract  There are three projects making up this proposal. The first
              deals with the question of the stability of exchange in environments in which
              individuals possess private information that is relevant to others. When
              information is complete, economists understand well which allocations exhibit
              stability in the sense that agents will pursue no further trade once the
              allocation is established. However, to date there is no single agreed-upon
              notion of stability when the agents involved possess private information. 
              Different notions of stability have been introduced in this setting and each is
              characterized by the structure of communication between the agents that it
              allows.  We suggest that it might be helpful to attempt to endogenize this
              communication structure, thereby settling on a single, more fruitful notion of
              stability. Any success in this research would have practical implications for
              the design of trading institutions. For example, in the recent FCC spectrum
              auctions, the auction design may not have best taken into account the potential
              for resale.  Similar resale issues arise as well in many government procurement
              activities.  When such resale is desirable, it signals an instability in the
              outcome generated by the institution at hand (i.e., the FCC auction; or
              government procurement rules). The present research seeks to provide a
              framework within which institutions can be designed so that the outcomes they
              produce are not susceptible to advantageous manipulation.  This will not only
              enhance efficiency, but it may lead to increased revenues from the sale of
              government-owned entities as well.   The second project concerns the yearly
              process of matching new interns to hospitals in the US, which  is carried out
              using a version of what is known as the Gale-Shapley algorithm. In brief,
              hospitals list a number of candidates, in order of preference, that they would
              be willing to hire for positions that are open, and interns list, again in
              order of preference, the hospitals they would be willing to be matched with.
              The essential question is this: Is the matching produced by the GS algorithm
              stable, in the sense that no intern-hospital pair prefers one another to their
              GS-algorithm matches? This project is directed at showing that in large
              matching markets (such as the hospital/intern market) in which the preferences
              of agents are private information, but are independently generated across
              agents on both sides of the market, there is very little room for strategic
              manipulation of one's reported preferences when the Gale-Shapley algorithm is
              employed. More precisely, it appears that when the market is large, and interns
              can only submit relatively short lists to the algorithm (which is the case in
              practice), then it is best for interns to submit truthful lists. (Surprisingly,
              in other circumstances it can benefit an intern to place an inferior hospital
              above a superior one on his list; but it is always best for hospitals to submit
              truthful lists). This theoretical result implies that the outcome of the GS
              algorithm does indeed possess the crucial stability property that is a
              prerequisite for maintaining its use.   The third project centers on the issue
              of information and knowledge in the theory of implementation. An example
              illustrates the problem. Consider the rather common setting in which a
              partnership is being dissolved. How ought the jointly-owned assets be
              distributed among the partners? (The partners may be a divorcing husband and
              wife whose assets are their possessions, or the partners may be members of a
              law firm, whose assets are, at least in part, their clients.) In many
              instances, the partners do not wish to simply sell the assets and share the
              proceeds according to their ownership shares, but rather one or more of the
              partners wishes to maintain possession of the assets by paying off the other
              partners.  Which partners should maintain possession of the assets, and how
              much should they compensate the others? Both answers depend upon the intrinsic
              value each partner places on the assets, a value known only to that partner. 
              Determining the correct allocation and compensation is no simple task. Various
              institutions have arisen for handling this problem, including the `cut and
              choose` method, where one partner proposes a price, and the other must decide
              whether to buy (from the other) or sell (to the other) the assets at that
              price.  Despite its prevalent use, this scheme has undesirable properties: when
              the values placed on the assets are private information, this method can result
              in the `wrong` partner ending up with the assets. We seek as simple a scheme as
              possible that can achieve an efficient and envy-free outcome in a partnership
              dissolution context. Since some of our previous research has already resulted
              in a scheme that yields an efficient (although perhaps not envy-free)  outcome,
              we believe it is only a matter of time before the present (more important)
              problem is also solved.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
