Title       : Status/Dominance and Motivational Effects on Nonverbal Sensitivity and Smiling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9709032

Award Number: 9709032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231181             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Hall HALL1@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gender differences in nonverbal communication, including sensitivity to
              nonverbal cues and expressive behaviors such as smiling, are well documented
              but poorly understood. One proposed explanation for why men are less
              nonverbally sensitive and smile less (among other nonverbal differences) is
              that men have more status and dominance than do women. This proposed
              explanation rests on the assumption that people with greater status and
              dominance behave in the `male` stereotypic manner, such as being less sensitive
              to others and smiling less. However, little research exists to support these
              assumptions. The present research will address the relations between the
              status/dominance concept and nonverbal behavior, with special emphasis on
              nonverbal sensitivity and smiling.  Of central importance to understanding
              status/dominance effects on behavior is the way in which people define their
              respective roles. That is, role motives may guide behavior more than roles per
              se. Several experiments will be conducted in which status/dominance will be
              experimentally controlled in a laboratory setting, along with manipulations of
              role motives. An example is whether the subordinate is motivated to be pleasing
              or to be perceived as competent. The behavior of both superiors and
              subordinates will be studied to better understand how nonverbal behavior and
              nonverbal cue processing are influenced by roles and role motives.  This
              research addresses a number of complex issues relating to gender and sex
              differences. The research has strong potential for offering new insight into
              very basic and important societal and interpersonal problems.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
