Title       : U.S. Government Support for IAI Core Budget
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1998 
File        : a9709341

Award Number: 9709341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1355000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Armando Rabuffetti armando@dir.iai.int                     phone# 55123456854 fax# 55123414410  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradford P. Wilcox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Global Change Research
	      c/o INPE, Av.dos Astronautas
	      Brazil, BR  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              970341  Rabuffetti   The Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
              (IAI) was created   by an international agreement concluded among
              representatives of American States, namely the Agreement Establishing the
              Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research, done at Montevideo on May
              13, 1992 ("the IAI Agreement").  The IAI Agreement created an intergovernmental
              organization for the purposes of coordinating and promoting scientific research
              related to global change.  The Institute has an evolving "Scientific Agenda"
              identifying particular areas for research.  Full membership in the IAI is
              limited to States, although the IAI Agreement also provides for non-State  
              entities to become "Associates of the Institute."   The Institute is governed
              by an annual Conference of the Parties, and by a   subsidiary Executive Council
              (EC).  The US Government currently serves on the EC, and also serves as Chair. 
              The Institute has a permanent secretariat, the "Directorate."  The procedures
              and practices of the IAI's governing institutions are elaborated in detailed
              rules of procedure.  The IAI thus possesses the fundamental institutional
              characteristics of an international oreanization:  it was created by
              international agreement, is composed of States and is governed by governing
              bodies composed of representatives of States. The US Government participates
              actively in the IAI.   The United States played a leading role in the creation
              of the IAI and has been an active participant in the IAI since its creation. 
              Senior US Government officials have served on the Executive Council and held
              other responsible positions related to IAI activities.  Furthermore, the IAI
              has been listed by the State Department and by the Office of Personnel
              Management as an international organization within the meaning of the Federal
              Employees international Organization Service Act, covered by 5 U.S.C. 3343 and
              5 U.S.C. 3581. Core Budget support, for which this proposal is submitted,
              allows the operation of the Directorate of th e IAI.  Currently, the IAI
              Directorate is hosted by Brazil in S o Jose dos Campos, S o Paulo state, on the
              campus of the Brazilian National Space Research Institute (INPE), where the IAI
              Directorate functions as an internationally recognized juridical personality,
              with the corresponding privileges and immunities granted by the Government of
              Brazil.The IAI receives Core Budget contributions from the other Parties to the
              Agreement Establishing the IAI:  Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, Chile,
              Cuba, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela. Amounts are
              arrived at by consensus at an annual meeting of the Conference of the Parties
              to the IAI Agreement.  %%%   The Inter-American Institute for Global Change
              Research (IAI) was created   by an international agreement concluded among
              representatives of American States, namely the Agreement Establishing the
              Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research, done at Montevideo on May
              13, 1992 ("the IAI Agreement").  The IAI agreement created an intergovernmental
              organization for the purposes of coordinating and promoting scientific research
              related to global change.  The Institute has an evolving "Scientific Agenda"
              identifying particular areas for research.  Full membership in the IAI is
              limited to States, although the IAI Agreement also provides for non-State
              entities to become "Associates of the Institute."   The Institute is governed
              by an annual Conference of the Parties, and by a   subsidiary Executive Council
              (EC).  The US Government currently serves on the EC, and also serves as Chair. 
              The Institute has a permanent secretariat, the "Directorate."  The procedures
              and practices of the IAI's governing institutions are elaborated in detailed
              rules of procedure.  The IAI thus possesses the fundamental institutional
              characteristics of an international organization:  it was created by
              international agreement, is composed of States and is governed by governing
              bodies composed of  representatives of States.  The US Government participa tes
              actively in the IAI.  The United States played a leading role in the creation
              of the IAI and has been an active participant in the IAI since its creation. 
              Senior US Government officials have served on the Executive Council and held
              other responsible positions related to IAI activities.  Furthermore, the IAI
              has been listed by the State Department and by the Office of Personnel
              Management as an international organization within the meaning of the Federal
              Employees International Organization Service Act, covered by 5 U.S.C. 3343 and
              5 U.S.C. 3581.  Core Budget support, for which this proposal is submitted,
              allows the operation of the Directorate of the IAI.  Currently, the IAI
              Directorate is hosted by Brazil in S=E3o Jos=E9 dos Campos, S o Paulo state, on
              the campus of the Brazilian National Space Research Institute (INPE), where the
              IAI Directorate functions as an internationally recognized juridical  
              personality, with the corresponding privileges and immunities granted by the
              Government of Brazil.  The IAI receives Core Budget contributions from the
              other Parties to the   Agreement Establishing the IAI:  Argentina, Brazil,
              Canada, Costa Rica, Chile, Cuba, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, and
              Venezuela. Amounts are arrived at by consensus at an annual meeting of the
              Conference of the Parties to the IAI Agreement.  The IAI is a U.S. initiative
              to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific
              institutions of the Americas.  The National Science Foundation is the lead U.S.
              Government agency designated by the White House to carry out U.S.
              responsibilities within the IAI.   ***
