Title       : American State Constitutions: A historical Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2001 
File        : a9709490

Award Number: 9709490
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174153             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Wallis wallis@econ.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since 1776, American states have continually amended and revised their
              constitutions.  States have experimented with a wide variety of suffrage,
              representation, legislative structures, judicial structures, corporate law, and
              public finance.  The constitutions themselves are a record of fundamental
              institutional change in American history.  It is a record that not only
              reflects changes in the way Americans think about their governments, but a
              record of the changing institutional constraints on the American economy. 
              Despite its inherent interest, there is currently no readily accessible
              consistent historical series on the provisions of state constitutions.  This
              research will fill that gap by constructing a consistent, time series of state
              constitutional provisions from 1776 to the present.  Printed source materials
              are available from compilations of state constitutions.  The product of this
              research will be a detailed description of constitutional provisions, and a
              computer accessible data base of constitutional restrictions made publicly
              available through a Web site at the University of Maryland, linked to public
              data bases at the National Bureau of Economic Research and the Inter-University
              Consortium for Political and Social Research.  In addition, constitutional
              limitations on government debt will be investigated in detail.  The simplest
              question is whether these debt restrictions actually work..  The fundamental
              focus of this research is to solve the problem of endogeneity between the level
              and structure of debt and the creation of constitutional restrictions on debt
              issue.  The issue of endogeneity is central not only to understanding how
              constitutional restrictions, like a balanced budget amendment, may work.  It is
              central to understanding the interaction of economic behavior and institutional
              change over time.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
