Title       : Auctions in Pricing Excludable Public Goods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9709590

Award Number: 9709590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Razzolini laura@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9221,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                In this project we study the use of auction mechanisms to provide a public
              project for a soci ety with multiple individuals. We consider a public project
              that can be consumed without rivalry by all agents but where exclusion of
              individuals is pos sible. We adopt excludability as an instrument of economic
              policy in order to ensure obtain voluntary participation by the individuals in
              the project. While the infor mation about the cost of the project can generally
              be assumed known to the planner, we allow the in formation about the agents'
              preferences and endow ments to be private. In this framework, the issues become
              whether or not to provide the excludable public good, whom to include, and how
              the costs of provision are to be shared.  We borrow from the theory of auctions
              to charac terize two `auction-like` mechanisms for allocating excludable public
              goods. The first is a mechanism based on the increasing-bid, English auction we
              call the `English Auction-Like Mechanism.` The second is a mechanism based on
              Vickrey's second-price, sealed bid auction we call the `Sealed Bid Auction-Like
              Mechanism.`  We show that, as in Vickrey (1961), the English Auction-Like
              Mechanism and the Sealed Bid Auction-Like Mechanism are strategy proof, and
              that they lead to equivalent outcomes. Moreover, the latter is closely related
              to the serial cost sharing rule and the conser vative equal cost rule, proposed
              by Moulin (1994). We extend his model by limiting the number of individuals who
              may consume the good non-rivalrously; that is, by introducing congestion in
              consumption. Prices play a dual role of in ducing truthful preference
              revelation and of a ra tioning device to allocate the good.   The contributions
              of the project are two: to show that rules suggested by Moulin and Vickrey
              belong to the same family of extended auction-like mechanisms, thereby unifying
              two previously separate branches in the literature on mechanism design; and to
              character ize two well-defined auction-like mechanisms which can be shown to be
              easy to implement.  This project constitutes the point of departure for a
              systematic analysis of strategy-proof mechanisms for allocating and pricing
              excludable public goods. This is an important direction which will ultimately
              result in a better understanding of cost sharing rules, their performance
              characteristics, and the ways in which they can be practically implemented. The
              re sults from this investigation have the potential to affect meaningfully the
              way private and public or ganizations allocate scarce resources to finance ac
              tivities such as computer networks, telecommunica tions systems, political
              parties, museums, libraries, schools, etc. These extensions will be the topic
              of a future full NSF proposal.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
