Title       : Similarity Eyewitness Identification and Models of Recognition Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9709620

Award Number: 9709620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247758             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Clark clark@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Clark  9709620  This research extends theoretical development in
              human memory to the area of eyewitness identification.  A generalized global
              matching model is used to examine similarity effects in lineup and showup
              procedures used to identify suspects in criminal investigations.  Twelve
              experiments using standard laboratory procedures and staged-crime methods are
              used.  Extant research shows that recognition is more accurate when people
              choose between similar alternatives than when they choose between unrelated
              alternatives.  The first studies of this project extend that finding to facial
              stimuli and with response alternatives that include "both" or "neither" rather
              than a forced-choice.  Showup performance and lineup performance will be
              compared in another study.  Strategies for selecting distractors for lineups
              that test the proposition that suspect-matching strategies may backfire by
              increasing the likelihood of false identification of innocent suspects and a
              proposal that distractors should be selected based on their fit to a
              description of the perpetrator rather than their similarity to a suspect are
              tested.  Additional features such as the similarity of a distractor and the
              circumstances in which high-similarity distractors are falsely recognized or
              rejected are examined.  The results of his work will be useful to criminal
              justice system and will extend our knowledge of how witnesses make
              identifications from lineups and showups.  In addition, they will place
              identification research within a broader theoretical framework.    %%%    This
              research extends theoretical development in human memory to the area of
              eyewitness identification.  A generalized global matching model is used to
              examine similarity effects in lineup and showup procedures used to identify
              suspects in criminal investigations.  Twelve experiments using standard
              laboratory procedures and staged-crime methods are used.  Extant research shows
              that recognition is more accurate when people choose between similar alte
              rnatives than when they choose between unrelated alternatives.  The first
              studies of this project extend that finding to facial stimuli and with response
              alternatives that include "both" or "neither" rather than a forced-choice. 
              Showup performance and lineup performance will be compared in another study. 
              Strategies for selecting distractors for lineups that test the proposition that
              suspect-matching strategies may backfire by increasing the likelihood of false
              identification of innocent suspects and a proposal that distractors should be
              selected based on their fit to a description of the perpetrator rather than
              their similarity to a suspect are tested.  Additional features such as the
              similarity of a distractor and the circumstances in which high-similarity
              distractors are falsely recognized or rejected are examined.  The results of
              his work will be useful to criminal justice system and will extend our
              knowledge of how witnesses make identifications from lineups and showups.  In
              addition, they will place identification research within a broader theoretical
              framework..    ***
