Title       : Research on Dynamic Models of Earnings and Human Capital Accumulation in Partial
               and General Equilibrium settings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9709873

Award Number: 9709873
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454769             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Heckman j-heckman@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher R. Taber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      1155 E. 60th Street
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A major goal of this. project is the construction of the aggregate supply of
              skills to the U.S. economy.  This supply curve will be a tool for exploring the
              likely impacts of tax reforms, social security reforms, proposals for tuition
              subsidies, and other policies designed to promote the formation of skill in the
              economy.  A broad array of policy proposals will be evaluated.  Although the
              main focus is on tax policy and human capital accumulation, how taxes affect
              capital accumulation and hence wages; how employment subsidies affect skill
              formation and employment; and how subsidies to education and training affect
              physical capital formation and wage differentials will also be analyzed.  Both
              short run and long run impacts of public policies will be considered in a
              dynamic general equilibrium framework.  The following tasks will be undertaken:
              (A). To formulate and estimate microeconomic life-cycle models of earnings,
              labor supply, schooling and on the job training that can be used as inputs into
              rigorously justified policy simulations.  A major focus of this portion of the
              project is to produce estimates of the human capital production function that
              is the principal input into endogenous growth models and models in public
              finance used to simulate the impacts of policies. (B) A comprehensive
              assessment of the current and past tax and subsidy treatment of human capital
              will be undertaken. (C) Aligning general equilibrium forecasts with micro
              estimates is a distinctive feature of this project.  A general equilibrium
              framework is essential if the insights of modern dynamic public finance are to
              be applied to systematically investigate the effects of alternative policies. A
              major goal is to improve the empirical foundations of a class of general
              equilibrium simulation models. Current widely used calibration methods take
              micro parameters estimated from models that assume one economic environment and
              transport them without modification to very different economic settings.  This
              practice raises the possibility of inconsistency in the estimates used to
              simulate a macro model.  The simulation and micro estimation of the model will
              be integrated to ensure consistency of micro and macro estimates.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
