Title       : Minority Police, Affirmative Action, and Crime
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1997      
File        : a9709422

Award Number: 9709422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Levitt   (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Donohue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract  This project examines affirmative action, the racial and
              gender composition of police forces, and the resulting impact on arrest
              patterns and crime rates. We focus on three specific questions:  1) How has
              minority representation with police departments changed over time and to what
              extent are affirmative action programs responsible? To address this question
              data on police department minority hiring and retention gathered over a twenty
              year period by Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), but not
              previously used in empirical research, are combined with a database on
              city-level affirmative action litigation and policies.   Findings suggest that,
              on average, the racial composition of police forces today in large U.S. cities
              is twice as representative as was the case in the 1970s. Even as early as 1975,
              however, the flow of new hires by police departments nearly matched the racial
              composition in large cities. The fraction of female police officers has risen,
              but remains well below that of the population as a whole. The affirmative
              action litigation data set helps to distinguish the influences of nationwide
              legislation from litigation aimed at particular police departments.  2) Does
              the racial or gender composition of a police force have any impact on the
              department's ability to fight crime? For instance, do improvements in
              police-community relations engendered by an increased minority police presence
              lead to lower crime rates, or a higher fraction of reported crimes cleared by
              arrest? Using panel data for roughly 100 large U.S. cities, preliminary
              estimates suggest a strong negative correlation between crime rates and the
              number of black and female police officers in a city. The relationship between
              white or male officers is much weaker.   3) Are patterns of arrest affected by
              the racial composition of the police force, and if so, does this provide
              evidence of discrimination? Past studies have found evidence of more unfounded
              arrests of blacks than whites, but have been unable to link this phenomenon to
              the race of the police officer. Analysis of this question at the individual
              level, however, is complicated by the non-random assignment of police officers
              to patrols. The use of aggregated city-level data potentially ameliorates this
              sample selection problem. This question is assessed empirically using the
              city-level data.                                             ñ«^¬¼¬+^úá¼ñ^|<   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
