Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Mathematical Problems in Geophysics and Seismology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9709320

Award Number: 9709320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: George Papanicolaou papanico@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of Papanicolaou and an interdisciplinary group of scientists is  to
              establish a  Summer School on Mathematical Problems in Geophysics and
              Seismology at Stanford, and to support a year-round research program on various
              mathematical problems from geophysics.  Specific areas of interest are the
              following:  waves in random media, radiative transport theory and its
              applications in seismology, seismic and other methods for imaging, high
              contrast tomography, transport properties of disordered media, fluid-solid
              interaction, convection-diffusion, etc. The Group Infrastructure Grant will
              provide support for the Summer School and for the year-round research of
              graduate students and postdoctoral visitors who will work on projects that
              emerge from it.      Mathematical geophysics is very rich in basic mathematical
              problems  that are challenging but not well-known to mathematicians.  Most
              these are of great interest in geophysics research, which  will certainly
              benefit from the infusion of new mathematical ideas and techniques.  A
              one-month Summer School will be established that will help promote high level
              mathematics research, attract promising young scientists and mathematicians
              into the area by providing training at an introductory level, and produce
              results that are interesting and important in geophysics and seismology.
              Stanford and the San Francisco Bay area provide an excellent environment for
              this project because of the unusual concentration of senior researchers that
              will be actively involved with it.    Funding for this activity will be
              provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities, and the NSF Geosciences  Directorate,
              Hydrological Sciences and Geophysics Programs.
