Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Ethnic Bases of Bargaining Power in
               Post-Soviet Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9709617

Award Number: 9709617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4912               (Estimated)
Investigator: John Sprague sprague@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This doctoral dissertation research grant  assess the question of whether or
              not the ethnic composition of a given federal region affects its ability to
              successfully bargain with federal leaders.  More specifically, does the ability
              of regional leaders in the Russian Federation to mobilize citizens  along
              ethnic lines enhance their relative bargaining power vis a vis Moscow, and does
              this increase in bargaining  power affect their ability to successfully bargain
              with the central government?  Intergovernmental bargaining is an important part
              of all federal systems.  This is especially the case in ethnic federations
              where regions have divergent interests on may dimensions.  Intergovernmental
              bargaining affects the prospects for macro-economic stability as well as the
              formal political autonomy of the federal regions.  Consequently, scholarly
              understanding of the bases of regional bargaining power, especially the ethnic
              bases, has profound implications for understanding and assessing the prospects
              for regional peace and stability in the Russian Federation, as well as in
              multi-ethnic federal states more generally.  While research has been done which
              addresses the ability of regional elites to mobilize citizens along ethnic
              lines and how intergovernmental bargaining affects everything from the
              redistribution of economic resources to the political status of regional
              governments, there has been almost no work which has attempted to examine how
              the ability to mobilize citizens increases or decreases the ability of regional
              leaders to successfully bargain with the central governments.  By making clear
              this link, this research improves our understanding of how the strategies
              employed and outcomes anticipated by regional leaders in ethnic federations
              differ from the strategies and outcomes we would expect to see in federations
              which are not based upon ethnic divisions.  Since many of the theoretical
              frameworks employed by both policy analysts and scholars to grapple with the
              problems faced by multi-ethnic federations are based upon theories of
              non-ethnic federations, an understanding of how these frameworks must be
              modified to fit multi-ethnic federations is of tremendous importance.  This
              dissertation research addresses this question through a combination of
              cross-regional statistical analysis and case study research.  Using statistical
              methods especially well-suited to deal with problems encountered in the Russian
              case (small number of cases, non-random sampling, missing data), it is shown
              that variations in bargaining power has an important effect on the distribution
              of net transfer payments to that region.  Having demonstrated the general
              importance of ethnic mobilization, interview and archival data drawn from case
              studies in Tatarstan and Nizhinii Novgorod is used to flesh out and elaborate
              the ways in which regional elites are able to mobilize citizens and how this
              bolsters the bargaining power of these elites vis a vis the central government.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
