Title       : The Behavior and Distribution of Particle-Reactive Radionuclide Tracers in
               Particulates, Colloids, and Solution in the Canada Basin of the Arctic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9709003

Award Number: 9709003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Duguay                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 15,  1997  
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Baskaran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    This proposal is to investigate the behavior of a range of elements that
              provide isotopic tracers for particle removal processes in the Canada Basin of
              the Arctic Ocean.  These will include U- and Th-series nuclides, Nd and Pu. 
              The role of partitioning between particulates, colloids, and solution will be
              emphasized.  This region is unique in having exceptionally low particle fluxes
              compared with other oceans for at least two reasons:  (i)  It is a fundamental
              characteristic of the Arctic Ocean that needs to be better understood along
              with the implications it has for the assimilation of particle-reactive
              contaminants, and (ii) a careful characterization of the processes in this
              extreme case will provide an important reference point for other studies.  This
              proposal incorporates current ideas about the role of colloid-size particles in
              the removal of trace metals by scavenging and this is an important focus of the
              proposed work.    The hypothesis to be tested is as follows:    "Due to low
              particle concentration in the Canada Basin, the colloids play a major role in
              the cycling of particle-reactive radionuclides."    Earlier studies on the
              dissolved organic carbon and suspended particle concentration (SPM) indicate
              that the concentration of colloidal material in Canada Basin is likely similar
              to other major ocean basins while the SPM concentration is about an order of
              magnitude lower than that of other ocean basins.    In order to test the
              hypothesis, the study will focus along the following lines of investigation: 
              1.  The distribution of the long-lived TH isotopes and short-lived isotopes
              between particles, colloids, and dissolved species will be measured in the
              Canada Basin water column in both continental shelf, slope and deep basin.  The
              removal rate by particulate scavenging of Pb and Po will be calculated from
              their measurement in the water column for comparison with the removal of Th. 
              2.  The distribution of Nd isotopes between particles, colloids and the
              dissolved species will be m easured.  3.  The distribution of dissolved and
              particulate PU isotopes in the water column will be measured at various sites
              and their rates of transport and removal will be investigated by comparison
              with other particle-reactive nuclides.    A key aspect of the study is the
              combining of data for the short-lived isotopes of TH with the long lived Th
              isotopes and stable Nd isotopes.
