Title       : Local Division of Labor and Factor Productivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9709545

Award Number: 9709545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Lovely melovely@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This proposal consists of two projects that extend theoretically and
              empirically the PI's previous work on increasing returns and local factor
              productivity. The research uses variants of the familiar division-of-labor
              models, which are now standard in trade, development, and growth to estimate
              the importance of external economies through increased local specialization. 
              The first project tests the effect of factor supplies on relative wages
              directly using panel data from the PSID.  The local division-of-labor model
              suggests a relationship between factor supplies and factor returns that is
              observationally distinct from alternative model specifications. New theoretical
              work shows that this relationship is observationally distinct from the
              Heckscher-Ohlin model and a model in which scale economies in education do not
              have a sectoral bias, as in Miyagiwa, 1991. Thus we test the local
              division-of-labor model against theoretical alternatives.  The second project
              is an estimation and analysis of state-level total factor productivity.  The
              theoretical model suggests that states with greater variety in intermediate
              inputs should have higher TFP. The basic model suggests a particular
              relationship between TFP and this characteristic of the local economic base.
              The first task of this project is to calculate TFP indices across industries
              and states. In doing so we follow procedures similar to those used by Harrigan
              (1996) to calculate TFP indices across countries. The second task of the
              project is to estimate the relationship of these indices to characteristics of
              the local base. Among the characteristics we consider are descriptors of the
              manufacturing base, the local service sector, and local relative supplies of
              human capital. An important aspect of this project is the development of
              additional measures of `local diversity,` estimating the correlation of these
              measures to TFP.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
