Title       : Parental Investment and Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9709212

Award Number: 9709212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig Packer packer@biosci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9709212  Packer  This project will analyze the extent to which male and  female
              lions invest in the survival of offspring.  Under most  conditions, male lions
              compete for food with the rest of their  pride, but resident males provide
              important defense against extra-  group males.  Pridemates forage apart and
              males spend  considerable effort trying to relocate the females and young. 
              Females should be most likely to reveal their whereabouts to  resident males
              when their cubs are in greatest need of protection  from infanticidal strangers
              but least helpful when feeding  competition would be most intense.  Females are
              also expected to  weigh the relative reproductive value of successive broods 
              according to the vulnerability of their younger cubs, being more  likely to
              resume exclusive investment in their older brood when  the  younger brood is
              virtually doomed.  Because male parental  investment is so important to cub
              survival, this research is  directed at  examining factors related to
              male-female cooperation and mating  behaviors, and includes a series of
              mate-choice and intruder-  simulation  experiments. Females are predicted to
              prefer to mate with males  with larger or darker manes, whereas males should
              preferentially  attack strangers with shorter or lighter manes.  The study will
               investigate whether the mane is a condition-dependent trait, and  will 
              examine a variety of nutritional and hormonal factors that are  likely to
              contribute to variability in mane size and color.  Studies will  be conducted
              in the field at the NSF Long-Term Ecological Research  site in the Gombe
              National Park, Tanzania. Results of this  research will  allow a better
              understanding of the evolutionary factors  underlying the  complex social
              behavior of lions.
