Title       : GOALI: ELECTROMIGRATION STUDIES OF ELECTROLESS CU ON SUB-QUARTER-MICRON TEST
               STRUCTURES
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1998   
File        : a9709447

Award Number: 9709447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50267              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Vanasupa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9709447  Vanasupa  The microelectronics industry is currently undergoing a
              revolution in the technology and material employed to connect individual
              devices in an integrated circuit (interconnects).  It appears that
              metallizations based on copper will likely replace the aluminum metallizations
              whose use has dominated the silicon microelectronics industry for decades. 
              Copper offers a lower resistivity as well as a higher resistance to diffusional
              transport under the influence of high current densities (electromigration).  At
              this point, many of the issues associated with converting to copper
              metallization have been addressed.  With the trend for eversmaller circuits,
              however, the microelectronics industry is likely to find themselves faced with
              the same limiting factor currently plaguing the use of aluminum-based
              metallization: electromigration.  The objective of this research is to identify
              the parameters that are important to preventing electromigration of
              copper-based metallization in integrated circuits.    The objectives will be
              accomplished by generating a matrix of test samples composed of multiple levels
              of copper interconnects using an electrochemical process to deposit the copper.
               The copper deposition parameters will serve as a variable in the experiments
              since they strongly influence microstructural features of the copper.  Samples
              will be packaged in ceramic daul in-line packages to simulate the operating
              environment of actual integrated circuits.  Electromigration tests will be
              performed at elevated temperatures until the samples fail. Technics such as
              focused ion beam microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, secondary ion mass
              spectrometry and grazing incidence x-ray diffraction will be used to
              characterize and identify the source of the electromigration failures.  ***
