Title       : Spatial, Temporal, and Phylogenetic Structure of Bacterioplankton Communities in
               Crater Lake, Oregon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9709012

Award Number: 9709012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308588             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Giovannoni giovanns@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ena Urbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9709012  Giovannoni  The focus of this study is the ecology of bacterioplankton
              in Crater Lake, Oregon. The motivation for the study originates from the
              observation of pronounced vertical structure in the distributions of uncultured
              bacterioplankton "species" in open oceans. This study will test the hypothesis
              that populations of uncultured bacterioplankton in freshwater ecosystems may be
              similarly structured along the vertical axis, and that such structure may play
              an important role in processes such as the remineralization of organic matter
              and nutrient export from the epilimnion. The proposed work will be integrated
              with the ongoing Crater Lake Long Term Monitoring program.    Crater Lake is
              the centerpiece of Crater Lake National Park. This oligotrophic caldera lake is
              one of the clearest freshwater environments ever recorded, with secchi depths
              ranging from approximately 25 to 36 m over typical annual cycles. The extreme
              clarity of the lake's surface water is attributable to low nutrient input from
              its small, highly eroded catchment, and to its extraordinary depth, which
              allows for long-term export of nutrients to abyssal regions during periods of
              seasonal stratification. During the progress of seasonal stratification, the
              chlorophyll maximum migrates to the upper hypolimnion. In many respects, Crater
              Lake is atypical of freshwater environments but closely resembles the
              intensively studies, oligotrophic open ocean systems typified by the Sargasso
              Sea.    A major component of the investigative approach will be the application
              of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) methods to identify abundant bacterioplankton species
              and to measure spatial and temporal variation in their activities and
              distributions. PCR amplification and cloning of rRNA genes in lake water,
              automated gene sequencing, the design and testing of rRNA probes, and
              hybridizations to high density pin bolts of 16S rRNA gene clones and
              environmental RNA samples will be used to identify key microbial species,
              assess their phylogenetic relationships , and determine their distributions.
              These approaches will be augmented with radiotracer studies of bacterial
              production, dissolved organic carbon measurements, direct cell counts, and
              experiments to identify bacteria that exhibit specialized preferences for
              dissolved organic carbon from different depths, to provide an integrated
              perspective on Crater Lake bacterioplankton ecology.
