Title       : Studies of the Impact of Low Inflation and Minimum Wages on Employment and
               Welfare
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9709250

Award Number: 9709250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287088             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Akerlof   (Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Dickens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brookings Institution
	      1775 Mass Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200362188    202/797-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1041,1092,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research consists of four project.  The first will analyze the impact of
              low inflation and minimum wage legislation on employment and welfare.  The
              first question that will be addressed is the benefits from lower tax
              distortions of lower inflation.  Martin Feldstein has estimated the welfare
              benefits of reducing inflation from two percent to zero as 1.01 percent of GNP.
               These calculations will be redone taking account of four factors omitted in
              the Feldstein model.  Those four factors are: behavioral responses of savings
              out of interest income to changes in after tax rates of return on savings, tax
              shelters, the distribution of benefits by income, and the fall in the rate of
              return on physical capital with increases in the capital stock.  These factors
              properly considered should result in significant changes in the evaluation of
              the welfare benefits of lower tax distortions from zero inflation, quite
              possibly leading to a loss in welfare from pursuit of such a goal.  The second
              project will be the theoretical and empirical consideration of models in which
              the way inflation enters price and wage decisions changes qualitatively as
              inflation nears zero.  Advocates of price stability have claimed that one of
              the reasons for pursuit of that goal is that inflation could then be ignored in
              many economic decisions.  If some significant fraction of decision makers
              ignore inflation in wage and price decisions at very low inflation, there will
              be a significant trade-off between inflation and unemployment if inflation is
              low enough.  Such behavior will be near rational since the losses to price and
              wage setters will vary with the square of inflation.  The model will yield an
              optimal rate of inflation which is moderate, but greater than zero.  The third
              project will consider the effects of minimum wage legislation on employment. 
              The PI's will use the same approach as in their earlier work on evaluating the
              employment impact of nominal wage rigidity at very low inflation to calculate
              the impact of changes in the real minimum wage on employment.  They will
              explore the differences between the two types of effects.  They will also
              estimate the size of the pass through of changes in minimum wages onto prices. 
              The fourth project will continue the earlier work on nominal wage rigidity. 
              The PI's will test their earlier model using international data.  They also
              will use contract data to see how people now, in times of higher than zero
              inflation, think that they might behave if inflation should actually fall to
              zero, by examining indexation provisions in contracts where inflation becomes
              negative.  The PI's will develop a general model of indexation, incorporating
              both rational and irrational elements, borrowing on the work of Shiller in
              terms of what people say about indexation and, in particular, will see whether
              contracts provide for give-backs in the event of deflation, or whether they
              specifically prohibit them.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
