Title       : Econometric Methods for Nonlinear Panel Data Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9709598

Award Number: 9709598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204522             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bo E. Honore honore@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1092,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9709598  Honore    Panel data sets play an important role in empirical work in
              almost all areas oaf economics.  In panel data, there is more than one
              observation for each cross sectional unit, and it is desirable to allow for an
              individual specific effect.  For example, in the most typical panel data
              situation, an individual is observed in a number of different time periods. 
              This project develops new econometric methods for dealing with non-linear panel
              data models.  The types of models considered include models in which the
              variable of interest is "discrete."  For example, one might be interested in
              investigating whether an individual buys a particular product in a given time
              period, or whether or not a firm is exporting.  The project also considers
              models where the variable of interest is only partially observed ("censored"). 
              For example, if one studies earnings using social security records, then the
              exact earnings are not known for individuals whose earnings are above the
              social security maximum.  The methods developed in this project will relax some
              of the assumptions that must be maintained in order to apply existing methods.
              Specifically, for models with censoring, it was previously necessary to assume
              that the distribution of the unobserved error distribution is the same in all
              time periods.  In many applications, this assumption is too restrictive.  The
              project will also relax the assumptions that are made on the explanatory
              variables.  In many applications, it is natural to allow for the possibility
              that explanatory variables in one time period are related to the value of the
              variable of interest.  For example, a woman's decision to work may depend on
              whether or not she has a small child, which, in turn, may depend on whether the
              woman worked in previous time periods.  To use existing methods, one must
              assume that such a "feedback" is not present.  The methods developed by this
              project will allow for such a feedback.        ??
