Title       : ESH - Late Quaternary Climate Change and Biotic Responses inthe Bonneville Basin
               and Vicinity, Northeastern Great Basin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9709502

Award Number: 9709502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104107             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Rhode dave@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      P.O.Box 60220
	      Reno, NV  895060220    702/673-7311

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9709502  Rhode    The Bonneville Basin of western Utah and eastern Nevada has
              one of the best known late Pleistocene paleoenvironmental records in the world,
              but our understanding of the history of terrestrial biota in the region lags
              behind our understanding of lake levels or regional paleoclimates.  Recently a
              large number of ancient packrat middens have been collected from the mountains
              surrounding the Great Salt Lake Desert, providing a rich source of fossil plant
              and animal remains dating through the last 50,000 years.  Under this proposal,
              a series of analyses of these midden samples will be undertaken.  Samples from
              these middens will be radiocarbon dated to derive a long term chronology of
              midden strata.  Plant macrofossils, pollen, insect remains, and vertebrate
              faunal elements will be identified, to reconstruct biotic distributions through
              time.  Stomatal density and concentrations of stable isotopes of hydrogen and
              carbon will be examined to determine changes in water use efficiency of certain
              plant taxa (limber pine) in response to changes in climate and atmospheric
              chemistry during the glacial-interglacial cycle.  Postulated changes in body
              size of the bushy-tailed woodrat in response to climate change during this same
              time period will be evaluated using fecal pellets as a proxy measure.  When
              these data sets are integrated together, this midden record will be used to
              identify and date major shifts in vegetation associations, the distribution of
              insect and vertebrate taxa, and changes in physiology and morphology of plant
              and animal taxa in response to dramatic changes in climate and atmospheric CO2
              concentration, within a single regional ecosystem during the last 50,000 years.
               These data will provide the basis for paleoclimatic estimates in the region to
              complement and cross-check other paleoclimatic proxy data and climate model
              results from the Bonneville Basin, contributing to one of the most detailed and
              well dated long-term terrestrial records of climate change and responses b y
              geological and biological systems available.
