Title       : Model Based Design of Central Nervous System Neural Prosthetic Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1999  
File        : a9709488

Award Number: 9709488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271512             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren M. Grill wmg@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5342,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9709488  Grill  Neural prostheses are a developing technology that use small 
              electrical currents to activate the nervous system and restore  lost function
              to individuals with neurological impairment.  Electrical activation of intact
              nerve cells, in the form of a  neural prosthesis, is presently the only method
              available to  restore function to individuals with spinal cord injury.  The 
              long-term goal of the principal investigator's research program  is to develop
              advanced neural prostheses based on electrical  stimulation of the spinal cord.
               The novel approach being pursued  is to activate electrically the intact
              neural control circuits of  the spinal cord to generate distributed commands to
              groups of  last-order neurons.  There is abundant evidence in animals, and 
              increasing evidence in humans, that the neuronal control  circuitry of the
              isolated spinal cord is capable of generating  complex movements with
              coordinated muscle activity including  reaching, locomotion, scratching, and
              micturition.  Exploiting  these intact neuronal control circuits would
              significantly  improve the function of and simplify the implementation of
              neural  prostheses.  One fundamental requirement to implement a neural 
              prosthesis using microstimulation of the spinal cord is the  ability to
              generate selective and controlled electrical  activation of specific groups of
              neurons.  The outcome of the  proposed research will be new techniques to
              effect selective  excitation of targeted neurons.  Two fundamental questions
              will  be answered using a combination of experimental measurements, 
              computer-based modeling, and engineering optimization.  First,  what neural
              elements are activated by stimulation of the spinal  cord with penetrating
              microelectrodes?  Second, how can targeted  populations of neurons be
              selectively stimulated?  The techniques  and knowledge which result from this
              research will find  application in fundamental studies in neurophysiology and
              in  design of advanced neural prostheses utilizing microstimulat ion  for
              restoration of function in individuals with neurological  impairment.  ***
