Title       : A Re-examination of the Link Between Domestic and International Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1998   
File        : a9709301

Award Number: 9709301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Huth phuth@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project develops and empirically tests a theoretical model of the
              conditions under which domestic political unrest causes political leaders to
              adopt confrontational foreign policies towards other states.  Hypotheses are
              derived from game-theoretic models which identify the set of domestic and
              international conditions which lead to a systematic relationship between
              internal and external conflict.  The theoretical premise of this project is
              that there is a tight connection between state leader's domestic and  foreign
              policy choices.  Compelling explanations of foreign policy choices require that
              the domestic policy choices of foreign policy leaders be modeled explicitly and
              carefully.  A critical weakness of prior work  is that international relations
              research often does not analyze in sufficient detail the domestic political
              environment, and therefore does not pay attention to the domestic policy
              response leaders choose to deal with the political opposition they face.  By
              ignoring this domestic policy choice, it is very difficult to explain what
              impact domestic unrest has on international conflict.  It is hypothesized that
              the decision of state leaders to either repress or accommodate the demands of
              political opposition has significant implications for whether state leaders
              pursue and aggressive foreign policy.  When state leaders repress domestic
              opposition, the incentives to initiate militarized confrontations are much
              stronger compared to situations in which leaders accommodate the demands of
              political opposition.  Empirical tests are conducted on a random sample of
              states for the years 1946-1992.  Using statistical and supporting case study
              analysis will  produce strong empirical findings that only when domestic
              repression of unrest is coupled with a favorable international
              political-military position for states, will there be a positive relationship
              between domestic unrest and international conflict.  This project will develop
              a dataset on domestic unrest and international conflict which will be utilized
              by numerous other scholars interested in the topic.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
