Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Mexican-American Survivors of Rape and Domestic
               Violence: Narrating Violence to Socio-Legal Authorities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9709938

Award Number: 9709938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11310              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Berk-Seligson seligson+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1092,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Berk-Seligson    9709938  This dissertation research will investigate
              empirically the narratives female survivors of sexual assault and of  domestic
              violence as told to institutional authorities, in order to discover how such
              narratives change over the multiple tellings required by reporting a crime. 
              More specifically, this project will examine reports made by Mexican-American
              women to police, victim-witness advocates, attorneys, and counselors.  The
              research builds upon pioneering work on gender -related vi0lence and how it is
              talked about in institutional settings and advances the literature by analyzing
              the impact of culture on speaking about these topics.  It examines the
              differences in ethnolinguistic backgrounds of interlocutors and how these
              background characteristics may aggravate the difficulties of reporting
              incidents of sexual assault and domestic violence. The research will analyze
              narratives structurally to locate changes that occur with repeated tellings. 
              In addition , linguistic forms and the use of euphemistic speech will be
              indexed so potential misunderstandings in communication can be identified.  The
              research will have an applied as well as a theoretical impact.   %%%  This
              dissertation research will investigate empirically the narratives female
              survivors of sexual assault and of  domestic violence as told to institutional
              authorities, in order to discover how such narratives change over the multiple
              tellings required by reporting a crime.  More specifically, this project will
              examine reports made by Mexican-American women to police, victim-witness
              advocates, attorneys, and counselors.  The research builds upon pioneering work
              on gender -related vi0lence and how it is talked about in institutional
              settings and advances the literature by analyzing the impact of culture on
              speaking about these topics.  It examines the differences in ethnolinguistic
              backgrounds of interlocutors and how these background characteristics may
              aggravate the difficulties of reporting incidents of s exual assault and
              domestic violence. The research will analyze narratives structurally to locate
              changes that occur with repeated tellings.  In addition , linguistic forms and
              the use of euphemistic speech will be indexed so potential misunderstandings in
              communication can be identified.  The research will have an applied as well as
              a theoretical impact.     ***
