Title       : Haptic Perceptual Instruments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9709678

Award Number: 9709678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Turvey turvey@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claudia Carello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Haptic perception refers to the perception one has of one's body, and of
              attachments to it, by means of sensors in the body.  The term incorporates what
              is commonly meant by `touch,` and more besides.  For example, without benefit
              of vision one is aware of the positions of one's limbs, and one can also
              ascertain properties of objects (e.g., weight, length)by wielding and hefting
              them.  These aspects of haptic perception, referred to as dynamic touch, have
              their basis in receptors that sense the states of muscles and tendons. Unlike
              vision and audition, whose importance to everyday activity are obvious, the
              haptic perceptual system is strikingly subtle in its contribution to our
              everyday achievements of perceiving and acting. The fact that the loss of the
              sense of touch (without concomitant paralysis) is extremely rare and profoundly
              devastating begins to illustrate the fundamental importance of this sense in
              common activities such as lifting a cup, using a pen, pointing to a word, or
              just standing upright.  Our research is directed at dynamic touch and an
              understanding of the role it plays in everyday controlled manipulations. We
              ask, What can it do?; and, How does it do it?  Research to date has implicated
              the rotational dynamics of limb movements as the major constraint on both of
              these questions, and this is pursued in the proposed research.  Formally, the
              achievements of dynamic touch are related to the inertia tensor (which
              quantifies an object's resistance to being rotated) and the attitude spinor
              (which quantifies an object's orientation relative to some reference frame such
              as the hand).  In some of the basic methodologies, participants wield an unseen
              object (whose structure has been specially contrived to produce the
              experimentally relevant inertia tensor or attitude spinor) to perceive its
              length, width, shape, weight, or orientation to the hand. In other basic
              methodologies, the participants attempt to orient a nonvisible upper limb or
              limb segment (with attached splints that systematically control the limb's
              inertia tensor and attitude spinor) to an environmental target or to another
              nonvisible limb. A major thesis is that, in perception by dynamic touch, the
              hand-related haptic subsystem behaves as a smart instrument: It capitalizes on
              physical, law-based, invariants.  Experiments are designed to examine the
              consequences of different attentional demands (and the extent to which
              different properties are perceptually independent), different force structures
              (such as those experienced underwater and in rotating space stations), and in
              different neural conditions (such as the spurious receptor states produced when
              the tendons are vibrated electromagnetically).  Understanding the principles
              governing dynamic touch should enrich the physical constraints on computational
              and neural modeling of perceptual systems and provide a source of new
              hypotheses about somatosensory disorders and about designs for prosthetic and
              robot limbs. Such understanding might also be expected to motivate more
              intensive study of the physical principles formative of biological
              perception-action systems and of the cognitive and neural constraints that
              exploit them.                                       s partly  supported by the
              NSF Major Research Instrumentation Program.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
