Title       : Data Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9709635

Award Number: 9709635
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomas Philipson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1041,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9709635  Philipson    Much of positive economic analysis relies on data that are
              obtained through surveys which record the behavior or experiences of included
              sample members or through social experiments in which treatments are assigned
              by investigators.  However, although the production of data, and the
              functioning of the market for observations in which it takes place is a concern
              universal to all fields of positive economics, greater emphasis and
              sophistication in systematic analysis has been paid by economists to the
              consumption of data, rather than its production.  This project will seek to
              remedy this unbalanced focus by studying incentives used in data production to
              facilitate identification and estimation of population parameters of economic
              interest.  In particular, this project will utilize a labor economic approach
              to data production.  In the labor market for observations, the supply of
              observations by sample members determines both the quantity and quality of data
              analyzed.  The project will develop wage discrimination schemes that may be
              used on the sample for identification of population parameters to be estimated.
               Such schemes will allow for correcting estimates for production biases due to
              poor quantity or quality of data.  The project relies on the idea that if wage
              discrimination is random within a survey, then it alters the supply behavior of
              sample members across the same types of populations.  This in turn allows for
              separating out poor supply behavior from the population parameters of ultimate
              interest.  The project seeks funds for both theoretical work and empirical
              analysis of a data set produced by the principal investigator.  These data
              include the implementation of the random wage discrimination discussed in the
              theoretical analysis as an experimental module on a national survey of US
              physicians produced by The National Opinions Research center (NORC) at the
              University of Chicago.
