Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Computational Science in Biomedical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9709754

Award Number: 9709754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $528779             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa J. Fauci ljf@math.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter K. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald P. Gaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Natalia A. Trayanova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Computational Science in Biomedical Systems (CSBS) Group at Tulane
              University consists of faculty in both the Department of Mathematics and the
              Department of Biomedical Engineering.  These faculty are leading researchers in
              scientific computing, numerical analysis, mathematical biology, fluid mechanics
              and electrophysiology. Although these two departments are in different colleges
              within the University, the scientific and educational goals of the
              co-investigators are consistent and complementary.   For example, the
              techniques of applied mathematics and numerical analysis ought to be studied in
              the context of relevant physical systems.  In addition, the technical advances
              in scientific computing, as well as traditional applied mathematics,  must be 
              tools of a successful biomedical engineer.     This Group Infrastucture Grant
              will help  to blur the lines  between these disciplines, and provide a critical
              mass of investigators, so that the research and educational activity of the
              Group may flourish.   Tulane University, although a Carnegie 1 Research
              University, is small enough so that the atmosphere is one of a small liberal
              arts college.  Undergraduates frequently engage in research projects, with both
              faculty and graduate students as mentors.  The GIG funds will enable
              undergraduates to  participate in exciting interdisciplinary research through
              summer internships, courses, and seminars.   The funds will also provide
              training for three graduate students and two postdoctoral fellows.  The
              research activities will focus upon, but not be limited to,  pulmonary fluid
              mechanics, cardiac-electrophysiology, and medical applications of biofilm
              processes. The educational activities include a weekly journal club,  a seminar
              series, as well as the coordination of curricula in both departments.   
              Funding for this activity will be provided by the Division of Mathematical
              Science,  the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities, and the Division Of
              Bioengineering and Environmental Systems.
