Title       : Models of Time Inconsistency and Self Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9709485

Award Number: 9709485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253841             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Rabin rabin@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Though economists assume that intertemporal preferences are
              time-consistent, evidence suggests that a person's relative preference for
              well-being at an earlier moment over a later moment increases as the earlier
              moment gets closer. That is, many people have a self-control problem, and
              moment-by-moment we pursue immediate gratification more than we ourselves wish
              we would. This proposa1 attempts to develop formal economic models of such
              psychologically realistic time-inconsistent preferences, building from and
              expanding on earlier models. In the simplest model, a person must engage in an
              activity exactly once during some number of periods, choosing at each moment
              whether to do it now or do it later. Results in this model depend on two
              distinctions. First, do choices involve salient costs - where the costs of an
              action are immediate but any rewards are delayed - or do they involve salient
              rewards - where the rewards of an action are immediate but any costs are
              delayed? Second, are people sophisticated - they foresee future self-control
              problems - or are they naive - they do not anticipate these self-control
              problems? Some simple results are derived. Naive people procrastinate
              activities with salient costs and preproperate - do too soon - activities with
              salient rewards.  If costs are salient, sophistication mitigates
              procrastination, and can even lead people to do the activity sooner than if
              they had no self-control problem. If rewards are salient, sophistication
              exacerbates preproperation. These behavioral results have corresponding welfare
              implications: With salient costs, mild self-control problems can severely
              damage a person only if she is naive, while with salient rewards mild
              self-control problems can severely damage a person only if she is
              sophisticated.  The investigator and his co-author apply the insights of the
              one-activity model to different economic appli cations. In one project, they
              analyze optimal incentives for naive procrastinators. The findings indicate two
              major lessons. First, incentives designed to induce efficient behavior will in
              general be `steeper` than if agents were not procrastinators - agents will be
              punished for delay in completing a task more harshly than corresponds to the
              true cost of delay. Second, when there is uncertainty about the exact
              propensity of agents to procrastinate, then even in environments where the true
              cost of delay is `stationary`, `deadline` incentive schemes may be used to max
              imize efficiency: The agent will at first be punished mildly or not at all for
              delay, but then after some date be punished severely for delay. Such incentives
              encourage those with little propensity to procrastinate to wait until it is
              efficient to do the task (i.e., not do the task right away if it turns out to
              be too costly), while assuring that those with a severe propensity to
              procrastinate do not delay too long.  The investigator's major project is the
              study of the role of self-control problems in the consumption of addictive
              goods. Some recent theoretical and empirical research by economists has been
              innovative in understanding the crux of addictive goods: While consuming goods
              (e.g., smoking cigarettes) may be harmful to a person's wellbeing, higher past
              consumption of those goods increases a person's marginal utility of consuming
              the good, so that the person may maintain or increase her consumption of the
              good over time while doing more and more harm to herself. These models,
              however, use a rational-choice framework, where people are assumed to have both
              time-consistent preferences and correct expectations about their future
              behavior. This project concerns the implications of a self-control problem and
              varied assumptions about sophistication for people with the same underlying
              preferences for addictive goods as in these rational-choice models.  Results
              pertain to the role that sophistication plays in the propensity to get addicted
              to goods. If an addiction is irreversible - every time a person takes a `hit`
              of an addictive good, she knows it will forever increase her craving for that
              good - a person who is sophisticated about her self-control problem will be
              more likely than a person who is naive to become addicted. Na?vet? makes you
              more willing to resist temptation now, because you (naively) believe that the
              consequences of indulging now will be that you will 1ive the rest of your life
              with a craving you won't fulfill. If you are sophisticated, and hence realize
              it is likely you will get addicted, you will be more likely to cave in to a
              craving - because you realize the only cost is that you will get addicted a bit
              sooner. The logic is very different for the (more realistic) case where
              refraining from an addictive activity will help a person become unhooked. The
              investigator conjectures that people who are naive about their self-control
              problem will consume a lot of an addictive product - and become and stay
              addicted - under the naive belief that they will quit tomorrow.  The
              investigator also plans to pursue many other projects that incorporate greater
              psychological realism into eco nomics.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
