Title       : A Laboratory Study of Customer Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9709874

Award Number: 9709874
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111796             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy N. Cason   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Economic theorists have focused attention on auction markets in which buyers
              and sellers care only about price and don't care about who they buy from or
              sell to.  Most of the important markets in the modern world are not auction
              markets, but rather are `customer markets` in which individual buyers form
              long-term attachments to individual sellers because it is costly to find
              satisfactory new transaction partners. Customer markets include most modern
              labor markets and many retail and wholesale markets. Recent development of
              irreversible investment theory offers new insight into customer markets.  The
              project is a systematic laboratory study of customer markets informed by
              irreversible investment theory. Human subjects will be recruited to act as
              buyers and sellers in controlled laboratory markets and will keep their
              profits, estimated to average about $15-20 per hour. Hence they have serious
              financial motivation. Buyers in the laboratory markets incur a switch cost
              whenever they decide to seek a new seller. The switch cost is set at zero, low
              and high values in different laboratory sessions.  Buyers' induced values and
              sellers' induced costs follow a random walk with the amplitude of per-period
              shocks set at zero and at a moderate value in different sessions.  In the
              initial series of laboratory sessions, sellers post prices and buyers choose
              the seller. Later sessions use other market institutions (forms of haggling and
              sealed bidding), other information conditions, and correlated shocks.  The
              laboratory data will be analyzed in light of published work  on fairness norms
              and oligopoly models as well as irreversible investment theory.  The
              significance of the project is practical as well as theoretic.  The work will
              spur more rigorous application of irreversible investment theory to customer
              markets and will improve understanding of  price dispersion and other issues in
              industrial organization (I/O). The laboratory data and I/O theory will improve
              understanding of sluggish (or `sticky`) price adjustment, a central issue in
              macroeconomics. Ultimately better monetary and fiscal policy and better
              regulatory practice will result from improved understanding of the performance
              characteristics of customer markets.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
