Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: A Team Approach to String Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9709694

Award Number: 9709694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shing-Tung Yau yau@math.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cumrun Vafa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This activity is intended to foster the interdisciplinary collaboration between
              the  research groups headed by Shing-Tung Yau in  the Harvard Mathematics
              Department and Cumrun Vafa in the Harvard Physics Department.  Vafa's group has
              furthered our understanding of the non-perturbative aspects of string theory
              along several fronts: deriving the Seiberg-Witten results as a low-energy limit
              of the moduli dependence of the prepotential in string theory; studying D-brane
              physics and relating the counting of BPS states to topological questions,
              including instantons on K3; geometrizing the SL(2,Z) invariance of the Type IIB
              string and postulating a twelve-dimensional theory (``F-theory"), which
              contains many interesting string dualities; developing a geometric
              understanding of non-abelian gauge symmetries and confinement in string theory;
              and describing the Beckenstein-Hawking entropy of black holes in terms of
              counting states via string theory and string duality. This last result is
              perhaps the most striking revelation in quantum gravity from string theory.    
              Yau's group has been instrumental in understanding several aspects of mirror
              symmetry and string dualities:  interpreting BPS state counting in terms of
              enumerative geometry; investigating the differential equations of period
              integrals on Calabi-Yau manifolds; solving the large radius limit problem in
              general, which is crucial for applying mirror symmetry to enumerative geometry;
              describing mirror manifolds as the moduli spaces of supersymmetric
              submanifolds; and classifying K3 fibrations, which are the key to
              heterotic-Type II duality.      This GIG Award will sponsor postdoctoral
              research fellows and visiting scholars in mathematics and string theory
              (physics).  String theory has undergone a revolution during the past year but
              will languish without fresh mathematical results --- for the many conjectures
              need to be justified with rigor!  The pace of mathematics needs to quicken in
              order to accommodate this recent influx of remarkable ideas.  T his is a very
              exciting time for mathematics, as well.  Hard conjectures abound, with physical
              reasoning providing guidance for serious investigation.  Likewise, the physics
              of string theory is hungry for new math. Within these two groups there is  a
              wealth of intellectual resources.  Mathematics and physics will both greatly
              benefit from full exploitation of this interdisciplinary collaboration.
