Title       : Complexity Contract and Compensation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a9709333

Award Number: 9709333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Bentley MacLeod wmacleod@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1092,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                Project Abstract  The role of classical contract law is to permit individuals
              to enter freely into obligations that can be enforced by the courts if
              necessary. Much of modern intervention by courts into the realm of private
              contract is based upon the fact that individuals do not always understand the
              implications of their contractual obligations at the time of signing a
              contract. In other cases unforeseen events, such as a contractor becoming ill
              or a worker having an accident, may not have been anticipated at the time the
              contract was signed.   While it is widely recognized that bounded rationality
              on the part of individuals may lead to mistakes in contract formation, we
              currently do not have a good understanding of the appropriate way to model
              bounded rationality that can be used to study the issue of contract formation. 
              This project consists of four parts.  First a model of bounded rationality is
              developed that can be used to better understand errors human decision making,
              particularly during contract formation.  Secondly this model is applied to the
              problem of contract formation in the employment relationship.  It is shown how
              current employment institutions, such as employment at will, are efficient
              responses to the problem of contract formation between boundedly rational
              individuals. This work provides insight into the formation of labor law.   The
              third part of the project extends these ideas to the problem of firm ownership.
              Using insights from recent work in cognitive psychology, this work formalizes
              the notion of ``judgment'' on the part of an entrepreneur. It is shown that it
              is efficient to allocate ownership rights (rather than have joint ownership) 
              to those individuals that have superior abilities in judging worker quality.  
              The fourth part of the project explores the dynamic implications of bounded
              rationality.  In particular, the project will study the ability for firms to
              adjust their contractual obligations in the face of new information and
              technical change.  An important issue is to better understand why organizations
              often fail, rather than take advantage of new and superior technologies.  In
              addition to the construction of theoretical models, the implications of the
              models are tested empirically.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
