Title       : Intergenerational Relations in Adulthood
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9709832

Award Number: 9709832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay Belsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to advance understanding of the development of
              parent-child relationships across the lifespan. The project takes advantage of
              a unique, ongoing longitudinal study of approximately 1,000 young adults at age
              26 (and their parents) in New Zealand who have been studied since age three.
              These young adults will be questioned during a 20-minute interview about their
              relationships with their parents (at the current time). The data will be used
              to learn about the emotional closeness of these relationships. The help
              received from and provided to parents will be related to data collected
              (prospectively) during early childhood (ages 3 and 5), middle childhood (ages 7
              and 9) and adolescence (ages 13 and 15) on parent-child relations and family
              climate. Parallel data on intergenerational relations during adulthood will be
              gathered by mail from the parents of the young adults to learn more about
              affectional, functional, and associational solidarity between parent and adult
              child. These data will be used in structural equation modeling designed to
              assess direct and mediated effects of childhood experience on the quality of
              intergenerational relations in adulthood. It should be possible to determine
              whether, and the extent to which, the quality of family relationships during
              children's childhoods affects the quality of relationships between middle-aged
              and aging parents and their young adult children. In general, it is expected
              that more positive relations during childhood will be related to more positive
              relationships during adulthood, although it is anticipated that the strength of
              such cross-time associations will vary as a function of both parent and child
              gender. Because there exists no such prospective studies of this topic in the
              United States (or elsewhere) originating in early childhood, this study of New
              Zealanders will break new ground in the study of the life course. Moreover,
              given long-term goals of repeating measurements of intergenerational relations
              in years to come, this study initiates what is hoped to be a long-term
              prospective study of this topic.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
