Title       : Modeling Studies of Eddies under Arctic Sea Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9709952

Award Number: 9709952
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shenn-Yu Chao chao@hpl.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Eddies play an important role in the circulation and mixing in the Arctic
              Ocean. Past observations have shown that anticyclonic eddies dominate over
              cyclonic eddies under Arctic Sea ice. Current theories of small eddies
              generated in the open ocean, in the marginal ice zone, and under sea ice give
              incoherent explanations of this phenomenon. In a recent numerical study using a
              model with high vertical resolution, the principal investigators demonstrated
              that a shallow density source of cooling or brine ejection produces
              anticyclonic eddies under sea ice, contrary to the intuition that cooling
              produces cyclones. This counterintuitive result suggests two things. First,
              high vertical resolution is needed to correctly simulate the dynamic behavior
              of small eddies. Second, the presumption that iceinduced friction will modify
              an eddy to a submerged state without altering its polarity or stability is
              highly questionable and should be intensely scrutinized. A thorough examination
              of existing theoretical ideas including the one mentioned above using qualified
              numerical models is proposed. The dynamics to be investigated under the Arctic
              environment include stability of isolated eddies, eddy-eddy interactions,
              eddy-current interactions, and shallow brine convection. A three-dimensional,
              hydrostatic, primitive-equation model will be used initially. In addition, the
              principal investigators will develop a nonhydrostatic model suitable for
              studying small-scale motions under sea ice. Hopefully, results from this
              investigation will not only answer the question why anticyclones dominate under
              sea ice but also shed light on the circulation and mixing processes in the
              Arctic Ocean.
