Title       : Reduction of Polyhalogenated Alkanes in the Environment: Verification of Model
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9709364

Award Number: 9709364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith Perlinger jperl@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9197,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Professor Judith Perlinger, Department of Chemistry, Michigan   Technological
              University, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular   Program of the
              Chemistry Division under a Research Planning Grant to   study the reduction of
              halogenated alkenes under environmental   conditions.   The goal of this
              project is to establish one-electron   reduction as the rate determining step
              in the reduction of halogenated   alkanes by naphthoquinone, mercaptojuglone
              and iron porphyrins.     Electron transfer rates of these model systems will be
              analyzed in terms   of Marcus theory to develop a more global reactivity model
              applicable to   natural systems.   Naturally occuring organic and iron-sulfur
              containing   species will be identified and their rates of reduction of  
              polyhalogenated alkanes compared to those of the model systems to assess  
              their usefulness in detoxifying polyhalogenated alkanes.   Given the   timely
              nature of the problem, a Research Planning Grant at this point in   Professor
              Perlinger's career will facilitate completion of the   preliminary studies
              needed for a competitive proposal.  The release of halogenated compounds into
              the environment creates the   need to detoxify these reagents under natural
              conditions.   Reduction to   more benign products occurs under laboratory
              conditions, but the   chemistry under environmental conditions is not known.  
              Systematic   studies of model electron transfer systems will be performed to
              identify   the rate controlling reaction step, and the data used to develop a
              more   global reactivity model.   Naturally occurring reductants will be  
              identified, and their usefulness as reductants of polyhalogenated   compounds
              under environmental conditions assessed by means of the   developed reactivity
              model.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
