Title       : Functional Analysis of the Skull in South American Capuchin Monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9709587

Award Number: 9709587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew J. Ravosa m-ravosa@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Using an in vivo analysis of bone strain during vigorous biting and chewing of
              tough foods from gages affixed to the interorbit, body, and symphysis of the
              mandible in adult black-capped capuchin monkeys, this research will directly
              evaluate the functional morphology of the area around the eye orbit and
              mandibular symphysis in higher primates as it relates to the masticatory
              complex.  Capuchins, unlike many other primates, often use the incisors as well
              as molars to process tough foods.  This study is designed to investigate the
              relative effects on symphyseal and browridge form of loading regimes during
              forceful biting with the incisors and during chewing in the same animal.   Two
              hypotheses regarding cranial form and function will be tested:  symphyseal
              fusion in higher primates is linked to stresses experienced during heavy use of
              the incisors, and browridge formation in neandertals and other hominoids is due
              to greater incisal loading.  If maximal strain levels at the symphysis are
              significantly higher during powerful incisor biting and clenching, then it will
              be possible to link vertical incisors and incisal loading to the evolution of
              symphyseal fusion in higher primates.  In assessing the relative influence of
              incisor loading on browridge formation, mandibular and interorbital strain
              levels will be compared to test for a cranial strain gradient.  For a
              circumorbital structure to be considered a functional adaptation to dissipate
              masicatory stress, no difference should be observed between interorbital and
              mandibular strain levels.  Alternatively, the presence of a strain gradient
              would suggest a secondary effect of a loading regime on browridge formation. 
              In this case, genetic and epigenetic controls of circumorbital form would be
              viewed as relatively independent of factors affecting jaw form.  This would
              also support the claim that bone along the upper face serves to protect the
              special sense organs from traumatic forces.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
