Title       : Collaborative Research: The Evolution of Conventions in Intergenerational Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9709079

Award Number: 9709079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85056              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Sopher sopher@econ.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary  This is a collaborative project with Andrew Schotter, 9709962. 
              This project consists of an experimental investigation of how social
              conventions and the information contained in them are created and passed on
              between generations of social agents.  A large literature in game theory
              examines infinitely repeated games played by a set of fixed and unchanging
              players.  In the real world, while games may go on indefinitely, the agents who
              play them have finite lives.  When these agents die or retire, their roles in
              these infinitely-lived games are taken by other agents who, perhaps in
              consultation with their predecessors, continue to play the game after them.  We
              examine the transition from one generation to another, where conventions and
              norms are either passed along, or are disrupted and new ones established.  We
              do so using an alternative evolutionary model, the Lamarckian model, in
              contrast to the more common Darwinian model, to explain the process of social
              evolution. In this Lamarckian process conventions of behavior acquired by one
              generation can be consciously passed on to the next, so that the relatively
              mechanical random matching and replicator dynamics characteristic of Darwinian
              models are no longer needed here.  We expect that the work proposed here to add
              to the growing body of literature on social institutions, as well as provide a
              realistic framework within which to study the problem of evolution in repeated
              games.  All the experiments performed have the same general structure. 
              Subjects are recruited from undergraduate populations and ordered into
              generations in which each generation plays a pre-specified game repeatedly,
              with the same opponent, for a pre-specified length of time.  During their
              participation in the game, at various times, they are asked to predict the
              actions taken by their opponent in order to obtain insight into how beliefs
              about one's opponent change over time, and to look for convergence in beliefs
              across generations as proof of the emergence of conventions.  After their
              participation in the game subjects are replaced by a next generation, who are
              able to view some history of what has transpired before them.  This history
              might either be that of their immediate predecessors in the experiment or the
              entire history of all subjects before them.  Subjects in each generation are
              able to give advice to their successors either in the form of suggesting a
              formal strategy or simply writing down a suggestion as to what to do and
              explaining why such advice is being given.  The payoffs to any subject are
              equal to the payoffs earned by that generation during their lifetime plus a
              discounted payoff which depends on the payoffs achieved by their successors. 
              Behavior in four different games using this non-overlapping-generations design
              are investigated.  The four games investigated include a coordination game (the
              Battle of the Sexes), a game where equity considerations are important (the
              Ultimatum bargaining game), a game of trust, and an individual learning task.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
