Title       : Frictional Labor Markets: Theory and Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9709881

Award Number: 9709881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111154             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Shimer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project builds a theory of frictional unemployment based on information
              imperfections.  It is assumed that it is costly for workers to observe the
              characteristics of all potential employers.  Instead, they observe a random
              subset of employers choosing optimally their sample size.  The equilibrium of
              this model exhibits frictional unemployment; some workers are unemployed, while
              some eligible employers have open vacancies.  However, the implications of this
              model are much closer to the baseline Walrasian model than to existing modals
              of frictional unemployment with less solid microfoundations.  Besides reaching
              a number of new and surprising conclusions, this theory has the added advantage
              of tractability.  Preliminary research shows the possibility of using this
              model to examine the implications of risk-aversion and imperfect labor-income
              insurance markets for frictional unemployment.  As unemployed risk-averse
              workers consume their assets, they become increasingly willing to look for low
              wage, low productivity jobs where queues are shorter and employment chances are
              higher.  Thus, optimal job search behavior implies that the expected wage of a
              worker who has been unemployed for only a short period of time, is much higher
              than the expected wage of the long-term unemployed who grow extremely
              risk-averse.  This model can also be used to study how heterogeneous workers
              search for heterogeneous jobs.  Previous research, which focused on the
              matching process and not on the search process, showed that the conclusions of
              frictionless matching or assignment models do not carry over to a frictional
              environment without additional assumptions.  However, by carefully modeling the
              information imperfections behind frictional unemployment, this theory
              establishes that frictionless results generalize to a frictional setting.  At
              any point in time, over 5% of the U.S. labor force suffer from frictional
              unemployment, and for that reason alone it is important to understand whether
              the level is optimal.  But understanding frictional unemployment is important
              for other reasons: does a market economy give optimal incentives for an
              unemployed worker to take a job, or do people search inefficiently, accept
              inappropriate jobs, or reject appropriate ones?  How does frictional
              unemployment affect the incentives to create new jobs, or to invest in human
              and physical capita1?  This project addresses all these issues and preliminary
              research leads to substantially different conclusions than the existing
              literature suggests                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
