Title       : Optimal R&D Procurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9709204

Award Number: 9709204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61346              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne A. Scotchmer scotch@garnet.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9278,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract  The usual justification for patents is that R&D decisions
              should be delegated to agents who are informed, namely, to firms that know the
              costs and benefits of their research programs better than the government does.
              Though compelling, this is hardly a conclusive defense of patents. Patents are
              a crude form of decentralization with many defects. They lead to monopoly
              pricing, encourage inefficient patent races (and perhaps efficient ones),
              permit duplication of research efforts, and do not encourage firms to share
              their private information on whether a particular research line is promising.
              Further, patents do not give firms an incentive to delegate research to the
              most efficient firms.  Alternative funding mechanisms that researchers have
              discussed include grants funded out of general revenue, prizes for specific
              accomplishments, and direct reimbursement of costs ex post. Like patents, all
              these solutions have defects, mostly arising from asymmetries of information
              and from the divergence between private and social incentives.  Most
              investigations of R&D incentives take the basic features of patent law as
              given. In particular they take as given that patents will be the primary
              incentive mechanism. The research described here starts from the other end of
              the problem. It takes seriously that firms have better information on the costs
              and benefits of R&D than the government has, but does not concede that patents
              are the obvious incentive instrument.  Following techniques in the now
              voluminous literature on mechanism design, the investigator develops a
              mechanism which (i) supports R&D if and only if it is efficient conditional on
              all the private information possessed by the firms, (ii) avoids patents, (iii)
              delegates research to the least-cost firm(s), and (iv) extracts all the surplus
              from the firms except that which is necessary to induce them to reveal their
              costs. The last point means that although some profit is lost because firms
              must be induced to reveal their costs, no additional profit is lost because
              firms must also reveal their private information on the value of the R&D
              project.  However the investigator also conjectures that there is a more
              limited role for patents in ensuring that the efficient mechanism has a unique
              equilibrium. Patents that serve this role can be arbitrarily short.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
