Title       : Economic Organization in a Halaf Village: Excavations at Kazane, Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9709096

Award Number: 9709096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93852              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reinhard Bernbeck   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan M. Pollock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bryn Mawr College
	      
	      Bryn Mawr, PA  19010    215/645-5000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Reinhard Bernbeck and Susan
              Pollock will conduct three seasons of archaeological fieldwork at the site of
              Kazane located in Southeastern Turkey. Occupied over a 4,000 year span, the
              earliest levels of the site date to the Halaf period, ca. 6th millennium B.C.
              and these lowest horizons will provide the focus for Dr. Bernbeck's and
              Pollock's research. Their goal is to delineate household groupings to determine
              the extent to which status differences among them are evident and to accomplish
              this they will conduct three seasons of field excavation. They will expose a
              relatively large horizontal area of Halaf occupation and map distributions of
              artifacts, features and architecture. This will provide evidence on the
              distribution of economic activities and thereby identify households. To examine
              changes over time in the distribution of activities they will open deeper
              stratigraphic soundings. Systematic recovery of artifacts, faunal and floral
              remains will be ensured through a rigorous program of screening sediments and
              floating them to obtain light seeds and other organic remains. The measurement
              of volumes of all excavated deposits will permit calculation of densities  and
              this will allow comparison of activities in different contexts. Preliminary
              work by the investigators in 1996 has indicated that significant variation
              across units does exist.  The Halaf period is important because it was during
              this time that the first indications of Near Eastern civilization become
              apparent. The period is best known for its elaborately painted and technically
              sophisticated pottery which suggest craft specialization. However
              interpretations of level of social organization vary widely. Traditional
              interpretations characterize the Halaf period as a fully sedentary, village
              based society which relied on the cultivation of crops and the raising of
              animals. The presence of some large sites has been interpreted as an indication
              of an emerging social and political hierarchy. However other evidence has
              pointed in the opposite direction suggesting that many sites were occupied for
              brief periods of time and that an egalitarian form of organization prevailed.
              By examining synchronic variation between  households it is possible to address
              this question directly.  This research is important because it will provide
              important information on the development of civilization in the Near East. It
              will yield data of interest to many archaeologists.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
