Title       : Microelectrode Studies of Aqueous Marine Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9709897

Award Number: 9709897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia G. Zoski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 9197,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This Research Planning Grant is supported by the Analytical and  Surface
              Chemistry Program.  Professor Zoski is spending a  sabbatical initiating a
              collaboration with Professor Dana R. Kester  of the Graduate School of
              Oceanography at the Narragansett Bay  Campus of the University of Rhode Island.
               During this time she is  learning the special requirements of doing analytical
              chemistry in  a marine environment together with her students.  This project
              will  focus on fabricating microelectrodes and microsensors and  characterizing
              their function under real marine environmental  conditions.  These electrodes
              will be compared with commercially  available sensors for analytes such as
              oxygen that employ membranes  to protect against fouling.  The behavior of bare
              metal  microelectrodes in marine samples will be characterized using a 
              sequence of applied potential pulses designed to clean and activate  the metal
              surface and then analyze for specific analytes.  The  course of this applied
              work will be guided by fundamental  theoretical work, the PI's area of
              expertise, throughout this  project.     This work focusses on the development
              of microelectrodes and  microsensors that can be used in the complex matrices
              found in  marine aquatic samples.  Theoretical and experimental work will be 
              used together to characterize the analytical responses of these 
              electroanalytical probes so that robust, real-time systems can be  developed
              and used for marine chemical analysis.  Professor Zoski  and her students at
              the University of Rhode Island will begin a  collaboration with Professor
              Kester at the university's Graduate  School of Oceanography that will result in
              more reliable analytical  information about the chemistry of marine
              environments.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
