Title       : Electromechanical Wave Propagation in Large Electric Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9709253

Award Number: 9709253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Thorp thorp@ee.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Seyler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9709253  Thorp     One of the results of deregulation and the creation of
              large independent system operators (ISO) is that the physical size of the
              system to be operated will be greatly increased.  Systems will be larger both
              in terms of square miles and in electrical dimension.  It is our premise that
              there are effects in such large systems that are not easily understood using
              existing models and that valuable understanding can be obtained by taking a
              macroscopic view of the system.  As the number of buses reach tens of thousands
              and system dimensions are measured in thousands of miles, it is useful to
              imagine a distributed system with a contimuun of transmission, generation, and
              load.   The phenomenon of electromechanical oscillations of generator rotors
              caused by faults and equipment outages is one of the most vexing problems
              facing the interconnected network operators .  If the protection and control
              systems do not function as  they are designed to do in the face of a
              disturbance, the disturbance can propagate over the network, and expose
              individual generators, or groups of generators to the danger of going 
              'out-of-step' with the rest of the network.  If a sufficient number of
              generators lose synchronism in this fashion, a system black-out results, and
              very expensive, disruptive, and time-consuming restoration procedures have to
              be followed.  These phenomena -familiarly knows as  'transient stability'
              studies-are the subject of the most important investigations in power system
              planning.  The normal techniques for studying electromechanical transient
              phenomena are time-consuming and lead to voluminous outputs, and very often it
              is difficult to grasp the sense of the ensuing phenomena on a global scale.  
              The proposal is to study the problem of electromechanical oscillations of
              generator rotors from an entirely different point of view .  The power system
              with its transmission lines, generators, and loads is considered to be a
              continuum .  When the power system spans entire continents, thi s is certainly
              a reasonable extrapolation.  In doing so, we give up the detail associated with
              the motion of each machine rotor.  In return , we gain and insight into the
              mechanisms by which the disturbances initiated by faults  and other random
              events propagate in the continuum.  When the problem is cast in this fashion,
              we find that very powerful techniques developed in others fields (wave
              propagation phenomena in plasma) can be brought to provide important insights
              and useful results.   Power system engineers have long recognized that
              electromechanical disturbances propagate over the power network with finite
              speed, and exhibit dispersion phenomena.  It is only in recent years that
              simultaneous measurement of  rotor angles (through synchronized phasor
              measurements) has been made possible with the help of the GPS satellite system.
               Using these measurements over long  distances, we expect to observe the
              traveling wave phenomena in actual power systems.  The preliminary
              investigations confirm the presence of electromechanical traveling waves on the
              network treated as continuum.  The research proposal identifies several
              important areas in which this work needs to be extended in order to produce
              results which could be used in designing next generation monitoring, protection
              and control systems on power networks.
