Title       : Mobility, Inequality, and Growth in a Changing Technological Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9709941

Award Number: 9709941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145895             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oded Galor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This  project will analyze the relationship between technological progress,
              earnings inequality, the transmission of inequality across generations, and
              economic growth.  The research will assert that the interplay between
              technological progress and several components that determine individual
              earnings - specific and general human capital and individual ability - governs
              the evolutionary pattern of wage inequality, intergenerational earnings
              mobility, the pace of technological progress, and economic growth  The research
              will demonstrate that in periods of major technological inventions individual
              ability is the dominating factor and earnings inequality rises.  The decline in
              the relative importance of acquired initial conditions (i.e., the driving force
              behind the persistence of inequality) enhances mobility and generates a larger
              concentration of individuals with high levels of ability and human capital in
              technologically advanced sectors, stimulating further technological progress
              and future economic growth.  Once existing technologies become more accessible,
              the specific human capital is the dominating factor, mobility is diminished and
              inequality declines but becomes more persistent.  The reduction in the
              concentration of human capital in technologically advanced sectors diminishes
              the likelihood of major technological breakthroughs and slows down future
              economic growth.  User friendliness, therefore, becomes unfriendly to future
              economic growth.  The research will explore an unexamined relationship between
              technological progress and earnings inequality.  It will suggest that the life
              cycle of technology governs the evolution of earnings inequality. Initially,
              inventions increase the return to skills, but as technology becomes more
              accessible the return to skills declines.  In addition, the research will
              contribute to the literature on income distribution and growth, and
              technological progress and economic growth.  It will explore a novel
              technological link in the relationship between inequality and economic growth,
              demonstrating the role of inequality in the determination of output growth via
              its effect on mobility, the allocation of talents across occupations, and the
              frequency of technological breakthroughs.  Furthermore, the research will
              examine the role of technological progress in allocating high-ability
              individuals into technologically advanced sectors in which growth-enhancing
              technologies are developed.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
