Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: New Multidisciplinary Directions in Applied
               Mathematics Reserach & Teaching at MIT (Group Infrastructure Grant)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9709607

Award Number: 9709607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan S. Edelman EDELMAN@MATH.MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel H. Rothman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Brenner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice van Putten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Rodolfo Rosales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT SUMMARY        This award will proved seed money to build infrastructure
              to promote interdisciplinary collaborations and train students in the applied
              mathematical sciences at MIT.  The theme of the activity is to set up
              mechanisms for substantive, direct collaborations between faculty members from
              different departments (Applied Mathematics and Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary
              Sciences) on research topics of common interest.  The plan is to create a
              research environment where important interdisciplinary problems can be
              addressed through a blend of analysis, numerical simulations and physical
              experiments.  The infrastructure includes the creation of special student
              seminars, computer equipment designed to increase visualization and educational
              capabilities, support for postdoctoral fellows and students, and funding to
              strengthen connections of the mathematical modelling of complex systems to
              physical experiments.    The seminar series includes an informal workshop,
              allowing students and group members to share ideas on current projects, as well
              as a series focusing on developing areas of research. The planned scientific
              areas extend current areas of individual faculty research to collaborations
              between many faculty members.  Specific research topics include the dynamics of
              interfaces, sedimentation and pattern formation in geophysical processes, and
              singularity formation in general relativity. Collaborations will be facilitated
              and sustained by joint postdocs and students supported partially through the
              infrastructure grant.  The diverse talents brought together in the group create
              the potential for a special environment for collaborative research and
              interdisciplinary education in mathematics and the physical sciences.   
              Funding for this activity will be provided by the Division of Mathematical
              Sciences and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.
