Title       : ESH - Evidence from the Nebraska Sand Hills for Persistent Late Holocene
               Droughts on the Great Plains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9709742

Award Number: 9709742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145501             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Loope dloope1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James B. Swinehart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9709742  Loope    The Nebraska Sand Hills, constituting the largest sand sea in
              the western hemisphere, are presently stabilized by prairie vegetation.  There
              are several lines of evidence that the dune field has been active many times
              during the Holocene, but it has been difficult to differentiate climatic from
              non-climatic "triggers", and a high-resolution record of dune activity has not
              been previously located.  In the central Sand Hills, peat-accumulating wetlands
              fed almost exclusively by ground-water are present between elongate dunes that
              reach over 100 m in height.  The basal peat, which typically lies at a depth of
              5 to 6 m and contains abundant spruce pollen, is about 12,000 years old.  Peat
              apparently began to accumulate after major eolian activity caused dunes to
              block pre-existing fluvial systems.  Structureless sand beds about 10 to 60 cm
              thick are interbedded with the peat.  Because the region is blanketed in dune
              sand, rivers do not flood.  For this and several other reasons a fluvial origin
              for the sand beds can be ruled out.  Our observations strongly favor an eolian
              origin for the sand beds.  One of our lines of evidence involves the connection
              of the sand beds to convex-up sand ridges that are present near the center of
              some of the interdune valleys.  The ridges lie parallel to the axes of the
              valleys and some are not yet completely buried by peat.  We interpret the sand
              beds as eolian sand sheets and the sand ridges as sand drifts produced along
              the upwind margins of shrunken wetlands by the baffling action of dense
              vegetation.  Saltating sand cannot penetrate dense vegetation, therefore
              delivery of eolian sand across the surfaces of interdune peatlands would
              require a major ecological change, presumably the result of a significant
              decline in the regional water table.    Preliminary work indicates that the
              thin sand beds in the upper 2 m of the peat are laterally extensive and less
              than 2000 years old.  These shallow sands are present in at least 27 interdune
              valleys.  The a bsence of Dust Bowl sand sheets on the surface of these
              wetlands indicates that droughts of greater persistence and severity than any
              in recorded history would be required to drop water table levels for
              emplacement of the late Holocene sand sheets.    Paleoclimatological studies of
              Minnesota lakes have recently revealed strong evidence for a series of droughts
              ending just prior to 1200 AD.  These drought intervals have been hypothesized
              to correlate with western US droughts that were revealed by studies of tree
              rings and lake fluctuations.  Synchronous drought across such an area would
              require a persistent upper-level blocking ridge of tremendous size.  Because of
              the central location of the Sand Hills and the abundance of datable material,
              the peatlands described here provide an excellent opportunity to test this
              idea.    We are eager to compare the paleoclimatic record of the peatlands with
              the record based on buried paleosols exposed in blowouts high in the adjacent
              dunes.  With the limited data we have from the buried upland soils, we are
              unsure whether they record regional climatic fluctuations or more local
              environmental changes.
