Title       : Dissertation Research: An Inter-Capital Settlement Perspective on Political
               Control and Organization in the Northern Maya Lowlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9709989

Award Number: 9709989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11804              (Estimated)
Investigator: Olivier De Montmollin olly@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Olivier de Montmollin, Mr. J. Gregory Smith will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological
              excavation and survey at the Mayan site of Ichmul which is located in the
              northern Peten region of Mexico. While large enough to include a closed plaza
              surrounded by vaulted architecture and a substantial pyramid nearly 18 meters
              in height, based on size, Ichmul is a `minor` center. It lies between two
              larger political capitals, Chichen Itza and Ek Balam and is particularly
              interesting because, in its architecture, ceramic assemblages and stone
              iconography it shows relations to both. The goal of the research is to examine
              the degree of independence which Ichmul exercised and the nature of its
              interactions with its neighbors. Mr. Smith delineates three possible
              relationships: autonomy, indirect control and direct control; the survey and
              excavation to be conducted will, hopefully, permit identification of the
              correct model. The project includes five goals: mapping of the domestic
              settlement adjacent to the civic architecture; test excavations in a wide-range
              of settlement contexts; examination of previously located sites in the transect
              area between Chichen Itza and Ek Balam to map and surface collect ceramics and
              other cultural materials; test excavations at a sample of these transect sites;
              mapping and test-pitting a sample of non-site cleared fields in the transect to
              better understand these rural hinterlands.  Archaeologists recognize that
              individual Mayan sites were integrated into larger political networks and that
              by discovering the extent of each and tracing how they changed over time it is
              possible to understand the principles which underlie such political
              organization. While much work has focused on major centers, relatively little
              is known about rural hinterlands and how centers exerted - or did not exert -
              control over these regions. Mr. Smith's research will directly address this
              important question. It will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
