Title       : The Impact of Legal and Regulatory Policy on Patient and Provider Decision
               Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9709612

Award Number: 9709612
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346415             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Kessler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark B. McClellan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Kessler    9709612  This research will investigate empirically the impact of
              legal an regulatory policy and physician decision making and the consequences
              of law-induced changes in health care decision for health care costs and
              patient health care outcomes.  To date, none of the methods used the in the
              published literature have been based on datasets that would allow direct
              measurement of all of the key variables hypothesized to have causal relations
              among the law, physician and patient treatment decisions, health care costs,
              and health outcomes.  Three studies will remedy this problem.  The first
              project estimates the impact of medical malpractice liability law reforms on
              defensive medicine.  It explores the why and how doctors practice defensive
              medicine.  The second estimates the impact of living wills on medical
              treatment, costs, and outcomes at the end of life.  The third estimates the
              impact of hospital competition on the cost and quality of medical care.  Three
              types of data will be used.  Medicare Part A and Part B claims forms and
              matching Social Security death date records have been linked in analytic files.
               Information regarding covered services, discharge information, and demographic
              informant are included.  In addition, an ongoing project on Treatment Intensity
              and Outcomes of major illness data set guides the living will subproject.  The
              longitudinal files span 1984-1993 and are updated regularly.  The analyses will
              use data from 100 percent of Medicare beneficiaries who have ever had a
              particular illness will use 20% random sample of other beneficiaries as a
              comparison group. Medstat data will provide information on claims records for
              over 4 million nonelderly employees, dependents, and retirees with firm medical
              plans.  National hospital information datasets will be used as well.   %%% 
              This research will investigate empirically the impact of legal an regulatory
              policy and physician decision making and the consequences of law-induced
              changes in health care decision for health  care costs and patient health care
              outcomes.  To date, none of the methods used the in the published literature
              have been based on datasets that would allow direct measurement of all of the
              key variables hypothesized to have causal relations among the law, physician
              and patient treatment decisions, health care costs, and health outcomes.  Three
              studies will remedy this problem.  The first project estimates the impact of
              medical malpractice liability law reforms on defensive medicine.  It explores
              the why and how doctors practice defensive medicine.  The second estimates the
              impact of living wills on medical treatment, costs, and outcomes at the end of
              life.  The third estimates the impact of hospital competition on the cost and
              quality of medical care.  Three types of data will be used.  Medicare Part A
              and Part B claims forms and matching Social Security death date records have
              been linked in analytic files.  Information regarding covered services,
              discharge information, and demographic informant are included.  In addition, an
              ongoing project on Treatment Intensity and Outcomes of major illness data set
              guides the living will subproject.  The longitudinal files span 1984-1993 and
              are updated regularly.  The analyses will use data from 100 percent of Medicare
              beneficiaries who have ever had a particular illness will use 20% random sample
              of other beneficiaries as a comparison group. Medstat data will provide
              information on claims records for over 4 million nonelderly employees,
              dependents, and retirees with firm medical plans.  National hospital
              information datasets will be used as well.     ***
