Title       : Theories of the Welfare State and the Formative Years of U.S. Social Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9709618

Award Number: 9709618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin Amenta amenta@socgate.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of the development of social policy in the United States.  It
              will focus on the formative years of modern, national social policy, in the
              1930s and 1940s, when  the Social Security Act and related legislation and
              programs were enacted, and it will analyze the determinants of social policy
              during this period.      The analyses will be based on three theoretical models
              that are prominent in the cross-national literature on social policy: social
              and economic, state-centered or institutional, and political theories. A
              synthesis of some political and institutional theories, the institutional
              politics theory, holds that institutional circumstances set boundaries to
              politics which constrains the effectiveness of political actors. To appraise
              these theoretical models, a number of comparative and quantitative strategies
              will be employed. Several episodes of social policy-making at the national
              level will be compared across the two decades. Other comparisons will examine
              the varying fates of social programs, votes at the national level for social
              spending, and state-level social policy outcomes. Among the analyses will be
              pooled cross-sections and time-series from 1936 through 1950. In addition,
              qualitative comparative analyses will be employed to test the combinational or
              interactional claims of the institutional politics theory. Finally, four
              carefully chosen cases will be examined across the entire period.      This
              study will not only increase our substantive understanding of the social
              policies and programs that have endured as the legacy of this period, but it
              will test general theories of how social policy is developed that will also
              apply to current debates.  This knowledge will improve the scientific basis for
              making the correct social policy decisions in future.
