Title       : Photoinduced Electron Transfer Mechanisms in Covalently Labeled DNA Oligomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9709318

Award Number: 9709318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Netzel tnetzel@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, Professor Thomas L.   Netzel,
              of the Department of Chemistry at Georgia State University, and   Professor
              Bruce E. Eaton, of the Department of Chemistry at Washington   State
              University, explore photoinduced electron transfer mechanisms in   covalently
              labeled DNA oligomers.  Through the synthesis and study of   short, covalently
              modified DNA oligonucleotides, Professors Netzel and   Eaton explore the rates
              of electron transfer among various DNA bases and   representative organic
              electron donor and acceptor molecules, probing   such issues as the rate at
              which an initially formed hole or excess   electron within DNA will travel to
              its final trapping site and the nature   of such trapping sites.  These studies
              provide the information needed to   design and interpret electron transfer in
              covalently modified DNA   duplexes, wherein the skewed pi-stacking of bases
              suggests the   possibility of enhanced electronic coupling between donors and
              acceptors   embedded within or attached to such a pi stack.  The uses of
              charge-separating supramolecules spans fields as diverse as   artificial
              photosynthesis, photocopying, and optical information storage   and processing,
              leading to great interest in developing spatially   well-defined molecular
              assemblies designed to effect efficient charge   separation through the
              harnessing of the energy of light.  Professor   Thomas L. Netzel, of the
              Department of Chemistry at Georgia State   University, and Professor Bruce E.
              Eaton, of the Department of Chemistry   at Washington State University, with
              the support of the Organic Dynamics   Program, prepare and study short pieces
              of DNA bearing chemically   attached molecules designed to probe the
              fundamental aspects of the   charge separation process.  These studies provide
              an initial framework   for the systematic design of DNA molecules which
              geometrically position   molecules at desired positions relative to one another
              for controlled   light-induced charge separation.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
