Title       : ESH - Late-Quaternary Temperature History of the Great Basin Based on Amino Acid
               Paleothermometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1997    
File        : a9709576

Award Number: 9709576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49629              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell S. Kaufman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9709576  Kaufman    Proxy climate indicators that record purely temperature or
              precipitation are rare but are critical for separating the two signals to
              compare with the output from climate models and for resolving the relative
              contribution of each to the hydrologic budget of Pleistocene lakes.  This study
              follows previous research that has demonstrated the utility of biomolecules
              preserved in fossils as paleothermometers.  I propose to use the extent to
              which chemical reactions, particularly amino acid racemization, have progressed
              in fossil molluscan shells from extensive late Quaternary lake deposits in the
              Great Basin, Western United States, as a measure of paleotemperature.   The
              extent of amino acid racemization in a fossil is proportional to the length of
              time elapsed since the organism lived and to the ambient postdepostional
              temperature.  Coupled with independent age control though AMS 14C,
              luminescence, and tephrochronology, the amino acid data can be used to assess
              the timing and magnitude of paleotemperature changes.  By using shells of
              different ages, the temperature of successive time intervals bracketed by the
              shells can be calculated.  Because protein diagenesis is an integrative measure
              of the entire postdepositional temperature history, it reflects long-term
              temperature changes that complement the geologically instantaneous
              paleoenvironmental evidence contained within the deposits themselves.   During
              the past four years, the Amino Acid Geochronology Laboratory at Utah State
              University has gained considerable experience analyzing fossil snail shells
              from across the northern Great Basin.  Preliminary results indicate that the
              effective diagenetic temperature (EDT) in the Bonneville basin for the period
              25-15 ka (calibrated yr) was 1.5(2.0 (C, which is about 9 (C lower than the
              present mean annual air temperature (MAAT).  The uncertainty in the temperature
              estimate could be reduced through additional laboratory heating experiments and
              analysis of 14C dated Holocene snails that wi ll serve to refine the kinetic
              equation.  The technique will also benefit from a newly developed analytical
              procedure and instrumentation that resolves multiple amino acids including some
              that react at higher rates than the single amino acid (isoleucine) that was
              used previously.  In addition, because the sample-size requirements are nearly
              an order of magnitude less for the new analyzer, and because reducing
              uncertainties imposed by analytical and inter-shell variability.   The
              questions addressed in this study focus on calculating temperature differences
              (thermal gradients and temperature changes between time intervals), which are
              inherently more precise than absolute-temperature estimates.  The aim is to
              attain precision better than ( 0.5( C, which is more than sufficient to assess
              regional-scale characteristics of past temperatures and to compare with
              fundamental features of GCM-and regional-model-simulated climate, such as: (1)
              full-glacial, MAAT anomalies that increase about 2-3( C northward and are
              lowered by 3-5( C relative to the present; (2) full-glacial, mean annual
              water-to-air temperature difference of about 3-4( C; and (3) postglacial
              warming that progresses northward during the period 15-12 ka (14C yr).    
              Preliminary amino acid data on 14.7 ( 0.3 ka (calibrated yr) snails from the
              Franklin basin (40( 10( N) and the Chewaucan basin (42( 40( N) suggest that the
              average late Quaternary temperature anomalies increase northwestward by 3( C,
              whereas the present MAATs at these sites differ by < 1( C.  To evaluate whether
              the steeper paleotemperature gradient reflects either greater early/middle
              Holocene warmth in the north or greater late Pleistocene cooling in the south
              will require partitioning the EDT estimates of the late Quaternary into shorter
              time intervals using shells of bracketing ages, such as those that have been
              previously dated at numerous sites across the Great Basin.  In addition, new
              tephra (A. Sarna-Wojcicki, USGS, Denver), luminescence (S. Forman, University
              of Chica go), and AMS 14C analyses will be conducted as part of this study. 
              The shorezone deposits rimming the basins provide an ideal datum for collection
              because they contain similar-age shells and because they occur at similar
              elevations, thereby avoiding differences in thermal histories resulting from
              different submergence durations.  On the other hand, contemporaneous shells
              from nearby localities but from different elevations afford a means of
              assessing the difference between past water and air temperatures, a major
              control on evaporation rate.  Similarly, shells from a restricted area but of a
              range of ages can be used to date climate transitions, such as the last
              glacial-to-interglacial warming.  On the inter-basinal scale, widely
              distributed tephras previously reported in Pleistocene lake deposits provide
              ideal stratigraphic markers that, in conjunction with amino acid analyses, can
              be used to calculate paleotemperature gradients across the area of the eruptive
              plume.
