Title       : Collaborative Research: The Chemical Basis of Ethological Isolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9709355

Award Number: 9709355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Feldhoff rick.feldhoff@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9709355   Feldhoff      Understanding the genetic mechanisms underlying the
              process of speciation is a long-sought goal in evolutionary biology.  For
              example, it has long been thought that genetic mutations resulting in slight
              differences in chemicals used in communication during the reproductive process
              (pheromones) might promote isolation of populations, and ultimately the
              emergence of new species.  This research project addresses this question using
              a well-studied group of amphibians.  Terrestrial "lungless" salamanders have
              evolved a biochemical communication system in which courting males administer a
              pheromone to females during courtship which increases female receptivity.  The
              pheromone is produced by a gland on the male's chin, and extracts from this
              gland contain proteins, which have been partially purified and characterized,
              and used in behavioral experiments.  These proteins contain multiple isoforms,
              the amounts and types of which vary between species and among populations
              within a single species.  Whether the prevalence of any single isoform offers
              reproductive advantages or promotes isolation between evolving populations is
              unknown.  In the present study, the biochemical characteristics of these
              proteins and their role in promoting behavioral isolation among salamander
              populations will be investigated.  The research is a collaboration between
              scientists at two institutions and has two directions: 1) biochemical
              characterization of the major protein components of gland extracts (relative
              concentrations, molecular mass, amino acid composition, and N-terminal
              sequence); and 2) behavioral bioassays to determine the biological activity of
              the various isoforms in eliciting receptivity in female salamanders from
              different populations, and/or fostering isolation.  Taken together, these
              studies will allow insights into the biochemical basis of the process of
              speciation.
