Title       : Adaptive Sampling with a Bayesian Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9709481

Award Number: 9709481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mosuk Chow MCHOW@STAT.PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                       Project Abstract          Adaptive sampling is a
              sampling design in which the selection  of units in the sample may depend on
              the values of the variable  of interest observed during the survey. The
              sampling intensity  may be increased in the vicinity of high observed abundance
              with  an adaptive sampling method. The method provides an efficient way  of
              sampling when the population has a clustered structure and is  also applicable
              to clumped or aggregated distributionsas as are  often found in sampling
              plants, animals pollution sites and  certain problems in epidemiology.       
              Without making specific assumptions about the distribution of  the population,
              various estimators had been proposed for adaptive  cluster sampling. (In
              adaptive cluster sampling, an initial  sample of units is selected and whenever
              the value of the  variable of interest satisfies a specified condition, the 
              neighbouring units are added to the sample.) These estimators are  unbiased and
              can be used in very general settings. However, in  those cases where we do have
              existing prior information about the  population of interest, it may be
              possible to derive more  efficient estimators using a Bayesian analysis.       
              Also, a Bayesian analysis yields one distribution (the  posterior distribution)
              for the unknown parameters, and from this  distribution a large number of
              questions can be answered  simultaneously. For instance, one can obtain
              accuracy measures  for the estimates with little extra effort.  In this
              project, we  are going to use a Bayesian approach for estimating the 
              population total, which is an important practical problem.
