Title       : GOALI: Exploring Product and Process Tradeoff in Engine Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9709942

Award Number: 9709942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45333              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kemper E. Lewis kelewis@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1464,1504,9148,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  This grant provides funding for the development and implementation of formal
              mathematical constructs to model tradeoff issues in the design of turbine
              engines in a collaborative effort with Allison Engine Company.  These
              developments will focus on measuring and investigating the relationship between
              the effectiveness of an engine and the efficiency of the processes required to
              design an engine.  The developments will be based on game theoretical
              principles where the various design and production teams are players in the
              game.  By modeling the relationships among these teams, their decisions, and
              their functional subsystems, various engine configurations can be found and
              tradeoff scenarios can be investigated in order to meet the strategic
              objectives of the individual design groups and the company as a whole.  Notions
              from game theory, nonlinear optimization, robust design, and decision-based
              design will be integrated to model and describe existing products and processes
              at the company and then to prescribe potential improvements in product design
              and/or process communication and collaboration.      If successful, the
              research will lead to more effective turbine engines and more efficient design
              and production processes by providing the capability to strategically determine
              the communication and interface protocols among various groups.  The research
              will provide the foundation for computer-based decision support tools to
              rapidly explore tradeoff scenarios in the design of new turbine engines. 
              Companies must communicate and collaborate with many different organizations
              located throughout the world.  Providing the foundations for making and
              coordinating a number of decisions would allow a company to perform their
              design/make activities more efficiently.  Providing the mathematical
              foundations for organizational cooperation could increase the efficacy of
              engine designs.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
