Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Applications of Mathematics to Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a9709608

Award Number: 9709608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Reed reed@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob J. Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold E. Layton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The three principal investigators, Michael Reed and Harold Layton of the Duke
              Mathematics Department and Jacob Blum of the Duke Department of Cell Biology
              are continuing their research programs  which apply mathematical analysis and
              machine computation to specific biological problems. Blum and Reed investigate
              partial differential equations that arise in cellular transport processes and
              study  information processing in nuclei of the auditory brainstem. Layton 
              studies the physiological functions and regulatory mechanisms of the kidney.
              Several new research projects are underway with colleagues at other
              institutions including: new models for cell signaling; new applications of
              computational fluid dynamics to anguilliform swimming and microvascular flows;
              and the mathematical analysis of large time delays in ordinary and partial
              differential equations.    The purpose of this project is to increase the
              mathematical expertise that is available for the solution of biological and
              biomedical problems.  This is accomplished by training undergraduates, graduate
              students, and post-doctoral  associates in the mathematical methods and
              modelling techniques which can give valuable information about biological
              systems. Strong efforts are made to develop research collaborations between
              mathematicians, these trainees, and biological researchers in industry, at
              medical centers, and in government laboratories.    Funding for this activity
              will be provided by the Division of Mathematical Science,  the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities, and the Division Of Bioengineering and
              Environmental Systems.
