Title       : Choosing Democracy: The Transition in South Africa-Trade, Contest, and Sanctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9709943

Award Number: 9709943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: B P. Rosendorff bpeter@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, we have witnessed governments enjoying the loyalty and support
              of their armies and police forces while their bureaucracies choose to terminate
              their rule and initiate a transition to democracy.  This study will argue that
              the decision to democratize is neither surprising nor inevitable; it is an
              action of deliberate political and economic choice.  The project will develop a
              series formal models that capture the incentives facing the leadership of these
              autocratic regimes and the decision problems faced by competing and contesting
              groups in pursuit of benefits that may accrue under a transition.  The models
              will focus on the interaction of agents in economies where there is both
              resource dissipating conflict (property rights are not perfectly secure
              generating `contest`) and market driven production and trade.  The decision to
              transit between regimes is determined in equilibrium, and the conditions under
              which a regime shift will occur are to be established.  The project will (1)
              identify a number of crucial economic and political variables as important
              determinants of the decision taken by a ruling elite to transit between
              regimes; (2) develop analytical methods and models for understanding
              institutional changes and regime transitions; (3) study the South African
              transition in detail not merely as an attempt to understand the forces driving
              that society towards democracy, but to provide some insights as to how
              conflicts world wide that are driven by identity politics can be directed
              towards democratic solutions; Finally, (4) the predicted equilibrium outcomes
              are to be tested against data from the South African experience.  This project
              will contribute to an understanding of institutional change, democratization,
              and the economic forces operating in ethnically divided societies.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
