Title       : Sociolinguistic Variation in American Sign Language, Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a9709522

Award Number: 9709522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ceil Lucas clucas@galluadet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gallaudet University
	      800 Florida Avenue N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200023600    202/651-5005

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sociolinguistic Variation in American Sign Language, Phase II  The project is a
              continuation of NSF Grant #93110116.  Sociolinguistic variation in American
              Sign Language (ASL) will be  analyzed based on videotapes of conversational ASL
              produced by  deaf ASL signers from seven sites in the U.S. (Staunton, Va., 
              Frederick,MD., Boston, New Orleans, Kansas City,Mo., Fremont,  Ca., and
              Bellingham, Wash.), in three different age groups, and  of middle-class and
              working-class socio-economic status. African  American and Caucasian signers
              are represented equally.  Sociolinguistic variation is variation that shows a
              correlation  between linguistic items (sounds, handshapes, words, grammatical 
              constructions) and social factors such as age, ethnicity, gender,  region, and
              socioeconomic class. Studies of sociolinguistic  variation are important
              because they inform our understanding of  the fundamental nature of language
              and of how languages change.  This project will focus on variation in a signed
              language and  hence will allow us to begin to see what kinds of variation 
              characterize all kinds of human languages and what kinds of  variation are
              modality-specific, i.e. characteristic exclusively  of spoken languages or
              signed languages. The focus will be on  target variables including 1-handshape
              signs, signs produced on  the side of the forehead, and variable pronouns. All
              of these  variables occur in large enough numbers to allow for the same  kind
              of statistical analyses that have been used for spoken  language variation.
              Lexical variation in the data will also be  analyzed. The result will be a
              comprehensive description of  sociolinguistic variation in ASL, along with a
              quantitative  analysis of specific variables. A corollary goal of the project 
              is the preparation of a videotape and manual about  sociolinguistic variation
              for use by the deaf community at large:  for children, teachers, parents, and
              community members.
