Title       : Effects of Prosody and Lexical Familiarity on Perceptual and Accoustic Measures
               of Young Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9709774

Award Number: 9709774
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317287             (Estimated)
Investigator: LouAnn Gerken gerken@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                       The most frequent source of data used to understand the  nature of both
              normal and disordered language development is  children s productions. The
              properties of child utterances  that deviate from adult forms are of particular
              interest,  since they appear to reflect parts of the adult system that  the
              child has not yet mastered. One of the most common types  of deviation from
              adult forms seen in normally developing  children between the ages of 24 and 30
              months, as well as in  older children with language disorders, is omissions, 
              including omissions of mono-syllabic grammatical morphemes  (e.g.,  the ) and
              unstressed mono-morphemic syllables (e.g.,  the first syllable of  giraffe ).  
              Data from numerous  researchers suggest that such omitted syllables are not 
              simply missing from children s representations of language.  The proposed
              research continues in this framework, but  begins to move beyond the question
              of whether normally  developing children have some representation of syllables 
              they omit to a question of why they omit these syllables. In  keeping with this
              expanded focus, the proposal begins to  draw more heavily on studies of adult
              language production as  a framework for understanding child production.        
                The proposed experiments are divided into three sets.  Exps. 1-4 are based on
              observations of the role of prosody  (i.e., rhythm and intonation) in children
              s omissions, along  with an observed bias for children to produce final 
              syllables. The goal of these experiments is to compare two  prosodic accounts
              of children s omissions, one proposed  previously and a new account derived
              from current linguistic  theories of prosody as well as studies of adult
              language  production. If the new account is supported, it would  provide a
              unified account of English-speaking children s  weak syllable omissions and a
              framework for viewing the  relation of immature and mature language systems. 
              Exps. 5-8  are based on the observation that children are more likely  to omit
              weak sylla bles from sentences containing an  unfamiliar word. These
              experiments promise to shed light on   how utterance complexity affects child
              productions and how  prosody fits within the larger language production system.
               Two of the experiments in this section also use work on  adult language
              production to make predictions about child  production. Exps. 9-10 are based on
              a pilot study that  suggests children maintain a slot for weak syllables that 
              they appear to omit. These experiments have the potential to  confirm the
              notion that children have some representation of  elements that they do not
              produce in an adult-like way. They  also have the potential to relate child
              omissions to studies  of adult production.             Taken together, the
              experiments will reveal  considerable information about normally developing 
              children s growing knowledge of language and how this  knowledge is implemented
              by their changing language  production system.
