Title       : The Influence of First Language Processing Mechanisms and Working Memory
               Constraints on Second Language Parsing in Adults
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9709152

Award Number: 9709152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91447              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Juffs juffs@verb.linguist.piyy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Influence of First Language Processing Mechanisms and Working Memory
              Constraints on Second Language Parsing in Adults.  The reasons for the low
              success rate among adults who try to learn  a second language (L2) are still
              poorly understood. This lack of understanding stems in part from our lack of
              knowledge about the  relationship between the learner's first language (L1),
              what the learner  hears and understands from input in the L2, and the
              development of second  language competence. An urgent need exists for research
              on how second  language learners actually process the L2 as they read and
              listen. Therefore, the major goal of the proposed research will be: (1) to
              develop techniques for investigating sentence processing in speakers of English
              as a Second Language (ESL); (2) to establish to what extent parsing in the
              second language is influenced by the first language (L1) in low to high 
              intermediate learners of English as a Second or Foreign language in the  domain
              of the lexicon and syntax; and (3) to assess the extent to which  individual
              differences in working memory capacity affect second language  parsing.  This
              research will have implications in at least three sub-fields.  First, it will
              contribute to the understanding of the influence of L1 in  on-line second
              language sentence processing in the intermediate stages  of acquisition; it
              will be relevant to current debates on the role of the  L1 in L2 acquisition,
              and will contribute to an understanding of individual variation in L2
              acquisition. Second, if it can be shown that L2 parsing is influenced by L1
              syntax and working memory the results will provide an additional source of data
              for central questions in human sentence processing in general. Third, the
              results will have implications for instructional techniques in foreign and
              second language classrooms. The results will be particularly relevant to those
              researchers and teachers who advocate a focus on listening comprehension tasks
              that force learners to process difficult structures.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
