Title       : A Proposal to Evaluate the Labor Market Consequences of an Extension of the San
               Francisco Bay Area's Commuter Rail System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9709197

Award Number: 9709197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126373             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Raphael sraphael@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1041,1064,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project uses an extension of the San Francisco Bay Area's rapid transit
              system as a natural experiment for testing several competing hypotheses
              concerning the underlying mechanisms of spatial mismatch in urban labor
              markets.  In April of 1997, the area's commuter rail system extended services
              to a rapidly growing suburban community along the eastern ring of the Oakland
              Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area.  The service extension provides a direct
              public transit link between the predominantly white city of Dublin and the
              large black, Hispanic, and Asian communities of Hayward, San Leandro and
              Oakland where a link did not exist previously.  Most importantly, the service
              extension will connect the portion of the metropolitan area with the highest
              unemployment rate and lowest earnings to a region with employment rates and
              earnings that are substantially above the metropolitan area average. 
              Interviews of employers within and around the Dublin area will be conducted
              immediately before and a year following the opening of the new Dublin Station. 
              Through questions concerning the racial composition and area of residence of
              recent applicants and new hires, as well as questions concerning skill
              requirements, screening, employer search behavior, and other firm
              characteristics, the firm-based surveys will be used to analyze several of the
              underlying mechanisms that are often offered as explanation of spatially
              segmented labor markets.  Specifically, application rate data will be used to
              test for supply side responses on the part of inner-city minority workers that
              result from the extension of public transit services.  Questions concerning
              employer hiring and search practices will be used to analyze the firm
              responsiveness to and determinant of supply-side changes induced by the
              transportation extension.  Two sets of treatment and control groups will be
              constructed.  In the first set, changes in the responses of employers located
              in the city of Dublin will be compared to changes in the responses of employers
              located in neighboring suburban communities. In the second set, treatment will
              be defined continuously in terms of physical distance to the new commuter rail
              station.  This project will provide direct information concerning the ability
              of public transportation policy to alleviate inner-city joblessness. Given
              recent changes in federal welfare policy and the disproportionate concentration
              of welfare recipients in U.S. central cities, information is needed concerning
              policy that can better integrate urban and suburban labor markets.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
