Title       : Fluorescent DNA Base Analogs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9709965

Award Number: 9709965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debbie Tahmassebi debbiet@acusd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of San Diego
	      5998 Alcala Park M210
	      San Diego, CA  921102492    619/260-4600

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9184,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Deborah Tahmassebi, Department of Chemistry, University of San Diego   is
              supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Program of the Chemistry   Division
              under a Research Planning Grant to explore the synthesis of new   pyrene-based
              fluorescent DNA base analogues.   Commercially available,   fluorescent pyrene
              based aromatics will be halogenated, converted to the   corresponding Grignard
              reagent, and reacted with cadmium chloride to   afford the organocadmium
              derivative.     1(alpha)-chloro-2-deoxy-D-ribofuranosyl bis(p-toluate) will be 
               synthesized from commercially available 2-deoxy-d-ribose and reacted with  
              the organocadmium derivative to achieve the desired fluorescent   nucleoside.  
              By eliminating the flexible hydrocarbon link to the   lumiphore, this
              methodology removes the ambiguity inherent in currently   available probes.  
              The spectroscopic properties of the fluorescent   nucleoside will be
              established and compared to those of the nucleoside   incorporated into DNA to
              probe the micro-structure and -environment of    the nucleic acid in solution. 
               Given the interest in determining the   solution phase structure of DNA, a
              Research Planning Grant at this point   in Dr. Tahmassebi's career will provide
              the basis for a competitive NSF   proposal.  Molecular structure is a
              significant determinant of the properties of a   molecule. Large biopolymers,
              such as DNA, possess flexible structures   that assume different
              configurations, and hence different properties in   fluid solution.   The
              synthetic methodology developed here will afford a   series of fluorescent
              nucleosides that can be incorporated into DNA.     The fluorescence of the
              incorporated molecules is then used as a   spectroscopic probe of the dynamics
              of duplex DNA formation and the   structure of the biopolymer in fluid
              solution.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
