Title       : Atomic Level Control and Probing of Chemical Reactions at Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9709837

Award Number: 9709837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Koel koel@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Atomic level studies of structure and reactivity of bimetallic  surfaces are
              carried out in this research project supported by  the Analytical and Surface
              Chemistry Program and the Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities.  Professor
              Koel and his coworkers  at the University of Southern California have developed
              ultra  high vacuum scanning tunneling microscope instrumentation which  allows
              the identification of adsorption sites and molecular  adsorbates on metallic
              surfaces.  Correlations between reactivity  of model bimetallic surfaces and
              the atomic level structure and  occupation of step and defect sites on these
              surfaces will be  made.  Pt-Sn alloy surfaces, and Pd thin films on refractory 
              metal substrates are being examined, and various hydrocarbon  reactions on
              these surfaces, including acetylene trimerization to  form benzene, are being
              probed.  Insights gained from these  studies will be valuable in developing our
              understanding of  important catalytic processes.    Correlations between atomic
              level structure of bimetallic  surfaces and the reaction chemistry of these
              surfaces are being  made in this research project.  Hydrocarbon reactions
              relevant to  heterogeneous catalysis are examined on well characterized Pt-Sn 
              and Pd-Mo substrates, in order to probe the effect of metal atom  ensembles and
              defect sites on these surfaces.  Atomic level  characterization using scanning
              probe microscopy forms the basis  of these studies which will provide insight
              into the operation of  important catalytic systems.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
