Title       : Topics in Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9709757

Award Number: 9709757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30030              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger A. Wiegand rwiegand@math.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David B. Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Marley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sylvia M. Wiegand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Harbourne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judy L. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              WIEGAND, DMS-9709757        ABSTRACT    Topics in Commutative Algebra and
              Algebraic Geometry        This project will be undertaken by the research group
              in    commutative algebra and algebraic geometry at the University of   
              Nebraska--Lincoln.  Roger Wiegand and Sylvia Wiegand will study    local rings
              of finite Cohen-Macaulay type.  R. Wiegand and Tom    Marley will consider
              homological questions in the theory of local    rings.  S. Wiegand will study
              prime ideal structure in Noetherian    rings and intermediate rings between a
              local ring and its    completion.  Brian Harbourne will investigate resolutions
              of ideals    corresponding to finite sets of points (with multiplicities) in   
              projective space.  David Jaffe will study binary linear codes and    their
              connections with the geometry of projective space.  Judy    Walker will work on
              coding theory, particularly over commutative    Artinian rings.  Mark Walker
              will investigate connections between    algebraic  I-theory and motivic
              cohomology.    These investigations concern central problems in commutative   
              algebra and algebraic geometry, and many of them are continuations    of
              successful collaborations with researchers at other institutions.     This
              project will allow the research group to continue its active    involvement in
              collaborative research and to maintain its position    as a leading research
              group in commutative algebra and algebraic    geometry.
