Title       : Mathematical Sciences/GIG: Graduate & Postdoctoral Education in
               Cross-Disciplinary Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1997   
File        : a9709696

Award Number: 9709696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $586033             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter McCullagh pmcc@galton.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Through graduate and postdoctoral education, the Department of Statistics
              seeks to increase the number of research workers who are capable of working at
              the interface between statistics and specific areas in the natural and social
              sciences. The target areas of application are genetics and pedigree analysis,
              medical image analysis, atmospheric physics and geophysical sciences,
              astrophysics, and finance.  The availability of genetic data on extensive human
              pedigrees has increased at an explosive rate over the past few years, and the
              pace is almost certain to increase in the next decade.  Inferential and
              computational problems associated with linkage analysis for complex genetic
              diseases using multiple markers are non-standard, so the demand for
              statisticians knowledgeable in quantitative statistical genetics is very high. 
                Groups active at Chicago include Graeme Bell on diabetes, and Carole Ober on
              asthma, both of whom have long-standing collaborations with Augustine Kong and
              Mary Sara McPeek from Statistics. Yali Amit's work with Chin-Tu Chen from
              Radiology deals with model registration and image matching for various types of
              medical images.  The techniques used include deformable templates, and dynamic
              programming on decomposable graphs.  Shape and image recognition is a challenge
              for future work.    The plan calls for postdocs and graduate students supported
              by this project to be trained in statistical genetics, image analysis,
              spatio-temporal modelling of atmospheric or astronomical phenomena, or other
              topics relevant to the area of application. In the case of geophysical
              sciences, issues such as stratospheric ozone depletion are tackled by adapting
              statistical methods derived from time-series and spatial processes.  The
              personnel involved in this project include John Frederick from Geophysical
              Sciences, George Tiao from the Graduate School of Business, Barry Lesht from
              Argonne, and Michael Stein and Xiao-Li Meng from Statistics.    The Department
              aims to increase the number of research wo rkers trained in statistics who are
              capable of collaborative research in a number of areas of the natural and
              social sciences.  The plan is to recruit doctorates in statistics or in the
              relevant discipline and to provide them with the necessary training to bridge
              the gap between statistics and science.  The targeted areas of application
              include quantitative genetics, medical image analysis, atmospheric physics and
              geophysical sciences, astrophysics and finance. These are areas that meet three
              criteria crucial to success: a critical need for more extensive collaboration,
              faculty in the Department of Statistics active in these areas, and scientists
              at the University or at Argonne willing to serve as mentors. The availability
              of genetic data on extensive human pedigrees has increased at an explosive rate
              over the past few years, as research workers have realized the potential
              benefits from identifying disease-susceptibility genes.    With the progress of
              the human genome project, the pace will increase in the next decade, so the
              demand for statisticians knowledgeable in quantitative statistical genetics is
              certain to increase. In the case of geophysical sciences, issues such as
              stratospheric ozone depletion are tackled by adapting statistical methods
              derived from time-series and spatial processes.  The personnel involved in this
              project include John Frederick from Geophysical Sciences, George Tiao from the
              Graduate School of Business, Barry Lesht from Argonne, and Michael Stein and
              Xiao-Li Meng from Statistics.    Funding for this activity will be provided by
              the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities.
