Title       : Science and Technology for the Environment; Environmental Literacy and Decision
               Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9709682

Award Number: 9709682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65039              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon A. Jones Sharon.A.Jones@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The general objective of this curriculum development project is to prepare a
              handbook of exercises and teaching tools that can be used to teach
              environmental issues to a wide range of undergraduate engineering and science
              students. The curriculum will include a) modules that can be incorporated into
              individual disciplinary courses, and b) a complete curriculum for a
              self-contained course. The material will be prepared jointly by Rose-Hulman
              Institute of Technology (Rose-Hulman) and Carnegie Mellon University.
              Preparation of the materials includes initial preparation, implementation,
              evaluation, and revision. The specific components of the project are as
              follows:    Develop teaching tools and exercises using a problem-based approach
              to teaching environmental awareness among undergraduate students. The material
              will be developed so it can be used in either courses devoted to environmental
              issues, or as independent modules in existing disciplinary courses e.g.
              thermodynamics, materials and energy balances, and so on. The material will be
              developed jointly with Carnegie Mellon University to enhance the variety of
              exercises developed, and the number of courses in which they may be used.   
              Evaluate these teaching tools as part of courses currently taught at Carnegie
              Mellon University and Rose-Hulman. At Rose-Hulman, the materials will be used
              in a required class for junior civil engineering students. Using the materials
              at the two institutions will allow us to reach different groups of students. An
              important component of this project is to use the evaluations from these
              diverse disciplines (including engineering, social science, humanities, and
              natural science majors) to ensure that the material benefits a wide range of
              students. The evaluations will focus on a) did the students gain knowledge of
              environmental issues during the course, and b) did the course content affect
              students' careers in the short term.    Prepare a handbook of the teaching
              tools and exercises that can be widely disseminated. Th e handbook will include
              the materials described above after revising them based on the evaluations.
