Title       : Inverse Problems for Hyperbolic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9709637

Award Number: 9709637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lizabeth V. Rachele   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns two inverse problems for hyperbolic  equations.  The
              first problem involves the wave operator P for  the Laplace-Beltrami operator
              for a smooth, Riemannian metric on  a bounded n-dimensional domain.  The
              inverse problem is to  describe material properties (represented by the
              coefficients of  P) of an object (represented by the n-dimensional domain)
              given  only measurements made at the surface of the object (modeled by a 
              boundary operator, the Dirichlet-to-Neumann map).    We consider the continuous
              dependence of the metric on the  Dirichlet-to-Neumann map for P.  For this
              inverse problem (and  inverse problems in oil prospection and seismology, for
              example)  it is known, though, that the material properties of the object  are
              not uniquely determined by surface measurements, in general.  In particular, a
              metric is not uniquely determined by the  Dirichlet-to-Neumann map for P since
              the pullback of a metric by  a diffeomorphism that fixes the boundary has the
              same associated  Dirichlet-to-Neumann map as the original metric.  Sylvester
              and  Uhlmann have shown that unique determination does hold at the  boundary,
              though,and in the case that surface measurements are  available for all time,
              it follows from Belishev and Kurylev that  uniqueness holds in the interior, up
              to the pull-back by a  diffeomorphism that fixes the boundary.    To study the
              dependence, then, of material properties of the  object on surface
              measurements, for this inverse problem for  which uniqueness does not hold, we
              propose showing that the  metric depends continuously on the
              Dirichlet-to-Neumann map, up  to the pull-back by a diffeomorphism that fixes
              the boundary.    Having shown that continuous dependence holds, one can expect 
              that material properties of the interior of the object  (represented by the
              coefficients of the differential equation)  can, in principle, be reconstructed
              arbitrarily accurately from  measurements made only at the surface (that is,
              from the  Dirichlet-to-Neumann map).    In t he second problem we consider an
              inverse problem for  the system of operators P for elastodynamics with residual
               stress.  The linearly elastic, nonhomogeneous, isotropic object  being studied
              is represented by a bounded, 3-dimensional region  with smooth boundary.  The
              behavior of the object is described in  terms of solutions of the system of
              equations for elastodynamics.   Coefficients of these equations represent
              material properties of  the object, and surface measurements are modeled by the
               associated Dirichlet-to-Neumann map.  It is assumed there are no  body forces
              acting on the object after time zero but that events  in the past have built up
              a residual stress in the object, which  is modeled by a smooth, symmetric,
              second-rank tensor that is  divergence-free and has zero traction on the
              boundary.    The central question we pose here is to what extent the 
              Dirichlet-to-Neumann map associated with P uniquely determines  the density,
              coefficients of elasticity, and residual stress at  the boundary.
