Title       : ESH - Climate Variability and Ecologic Change in Mesoamerica During the Late
               Holocene: Implications for Maya Cultural Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9709314

Award Number: 9709314
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320619             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hodell hodell@nersp.nerdc.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Brenner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan B. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1577      GLOBAL CHANGE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9709314  Hodell    The Department of Peten in northern Guatemala represents the
              central area where ancient Maya civilization arose more than 3000 years ago,
              flourished during the so-called Classic Period, and mysteriously collapsed
              around 800 - 900 AD.  The cause of the Collapse has been debated by
              archaeologists for over a century.  Climate change has been suggested as a
              contributing factor, but this hypothesis has not been tested rigorously.  Our
              previous work, funded by NOAA-Paleoclimatology, sought to understand the role
              that climate change may have played in the collapse of Maya civilization.  We
              discovered compelling paleoclimatic evidence from two lakes in central and
              northern Yucatan for a protracted drought between ~800 and 1000 AD that
              coincided with the Classic Maya Collapse (Hodell et al., 1995; Curtis et al.,
              1996).  Correlation of arid events in paleoclimate records between Yucatan
              lakes and the Peruvian Quelccaya ice core suggests that aridity was widespread
              in Central and South America over the last 1500 years, and may have been
              related to large-scale departures in atmospheric and oceanic fields.  Here we
              propose to test if the droughts documented in Yucatan affected the southern
              Maya lowlands of Peten, Guatemala, where Maya population densities were highest
              and the Collapse was most profound.  We propose to collect geochemical,
              palynological, and sedimentologic data from sediment cores taken in the Peten
              Lake District to reconstruct climatic and ecologic changes in sufficient detail
              to reveal decadal to centennial fluctuations over the past 5,000 years. 
              Specifically, we will measure oxygen isotopic ratios in microfossil shells
              (ostracods and gastropods) from cores taken in close-basin lakes and
              reconstruct changes in the ratio of evaporation to precipitation (E/P) over the
              catchment.  We will also document stratigraphic changes in pollen spectra from
              the same cores to reconstruct regional vegetation changes that may have been
              influenced by climatic factors and/or human impact.   The proposed study will
              elucidate the spatial and temporal pattern of changes in E/P and vegetation in
              the Maya lowlands during the late Holocene.  Paleoenvironmental records from
              Peten will contribute to our understanding of: 1.) the full range of natural
              hydrometeorologic variability during the Holocene in the lowland Neotropics;
              2.) teleconnective linkages with climatic records (marine, lacustrine, and ice
              core records) from other regions; and 3.) the response of Classic Maya social
              and economic systems to climate and ecologic change.
