Title       : RUI: Development and Maturation of Olfactory Centers in theLobster: Influences
               of Serotonin and Adult Neurogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9709514

Award Number: 9709514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214027             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara S. Beltz bbeltz@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9709514  BELTZ Dr. Beltz will investigate two related issues of neuronal
              development and plasticity in the lobster brain.  One area of this research
              builds on recent studies in a variety of organisms that point to the potential
              contibution of proliferating cells that generate new neurons in the adult
              brain.  The birth of new neurons in the mature olfactory pathway of the lobster
              has been demonstrated both in the receptor population and in interneurons that
              are involved in olfactory processing and transmission of information to higher
              centers.  Integration of new cells into existing circuits may provide a means
              of modifying olfactory learning or integration in the mature brain.  The
              proposed studies will examine the possible regulation of neurogenesis by
              steroid hormones and other factors, such as damage to the antennules in the
              olfactory periphery.  The possible contribution of neuronal death ("apoptosis")
              to the refinement of the mature olfactory system also will be addressed.  The
              second set of studies will examine the role of the neurotransmitter serotonin
              in brain development.  In contrast to the apparent gradual changes in cellular
              components of the olfactory pathway, the serotonergic input to the olfactory
              system appears to be very stable in lobsters.  Identified serotonergic
              interneurons innervating the olfactory lobes appear early in embryogenesis and
              persist throughout larval and adult life.  Serotonin depletion during the
              embryonic period results in a dramatic slowing of growth in olfactory target
              regions.  This implies that serotonin normally promotes the growth of these
              regions.  In future studies the cellular bases of this growth retardation will
              be investigated by comparing the development of specific groups of olfactory
              interneurons exposed to reduced, normal and increased levels of serotonin.    
              These studies are relevant to developmental mechanisms in higher organisms
              because there are many parallels between the organization of olfactory pathways
              and processing even in phylogen etically distant species.  In addition, these
              studies will explore basic mechanisms involved in the development and
              maintenance of neural circuits which may be applicable in a spectrum of other
              organisms.
