Title       : Partial Support of the Core Activities of the Committee on National Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a9709489

Award Number: 9709489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1469246            (Estimated)
Investigator: Miron L. Straf  (Principal Investigator former)
              Andrew A. White awhite@nas.edu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award continues NSF support for the core activities of the Committee on
              National Statistics (CNSTAT), a standing committee of the National Academy of
              Sciences-National Research Council (NAS-NRC).  The Committee was established in
              1972 at the recommendation of the President's Commission on Federal Statistics.
               It fills a critical gap as a integrative force for a highly decentralized
              federal statistical system, in which research interests often have lower
              priority than other concerns.  The Committee works to improve, over the long
              term, the statistical methods and information on which public policy decisions
              are based.  It strengthens, directly and indirectly, the development of data
              for social, behavioral, and economic science research, makes such data more
              accessible for research, and furthers the development of methods for
              measurement, collection, and analysis for research and other purposes.  On its
              own initiative, or at the request of NSF or another agency, the Committee
              identifies problem areas in which statistical questions are important to public
              policy and carries out studies within these areas by itself or by convening
              panels of other experts.  Most of the Committee's studies fall under three
              major themes:  improving and furthering the development of data on social and
              economic conditions, including health, social welfare, and the environment;
              improving statistical methods and their applications; and integrating and
              coordinating national statistics.  The Committee provides leadership over
              interdisciplinary areas by bringing methodologically oriented statisticians and
              quantitatively oriented social scientists together with federal agency staff to
              work on problems important to public policy.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
