Title       : San Lucas Quiavini Zapotec: Dictionary, Grammar and Texts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9709415

Award Number: 9709415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190259             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Munro munro@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project supports study of the Zapotec language spoken  in San Lucas
              Quiavin, Oaxaca, Mexico (and by immigrants to  the Los Angeles area), a
              language that is gradually losing  speakers and thus threatened with eventual
              extinction. The  project will produce the most extensive dictionary of any 
              Zapotec language, along with a text collection and  theoretical accounts of the
              language's syntax, morphology,  phonology, and phonetics. Like other Zapotec
              languages, San  Lucas Quiavin Zapotec (SLQZ) has an unusual phonological 
              structure, with fortis/lenis consonant contrasts and a  complex syllable
              template. Up to three vowels, individually  specified as breathy, creaky,
              checked (glottal), or plain  (modal), may occur in the "vowel complex" of a
              single  syllable; contrasting tone patterns appear to be predictable  from the
              sequence of vowel types in a vowel complex. SLQZ  verbs display considerable
              paradigmatic complexity: for  example, there are six basic verbal aspects,
              which may be  inflected for eighteen different combinations of person,  number,
              and formality features. The language has verb-  subject-object word order. Data
              will be collected from  speakers both in Los Angeles and in Oaxaca. The first
              year  of the project will focus on SLQZ morphophonology and  syntax, especially
              verb structure. The second year will  address the phonetics of SLQZ, developing
              rules for the  realization of surface tone. Work on the dictionary and text 
              collection will continue throughout the project.   Publications resulting from
              the grant will provide an  important resource for general linguistic theory,
              for the  study of the relationships among the different Zapotecan  languages,
              and for the SLQZ people. Results will be produced  in as accessible a format as
              possible, to provide resources  for the development of literacy materials for
              users at all  levels.
