Title       : RPG: Detection of Other Minds in Infancy: A Domain-Specific Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9709527

Award Number: 9709527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan C. Johnson susanj@vms.cis.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This planning grant will support preliminary studies concerning infants' beliefs
              about what kinds of things in the world have mental states such as intentions
              and perceptions.  Previous research has focused largely on determining when
              infants first conceive of people as entities with minds, on the assumption that
              infants attribute mentality only to humans.  This project proceeds from the
              view that infants may attribute mental states to a broader range of entities. 
              From this perspective, a central question is, On what grounds do infants make
              mental state attributions?  My previous research has shown that 12-month-old
              infants will follow the `gaze` of an animated object that bears no physical
              resemblance to a person, as long as it has other properties characteristic of
              creatures with minds, such as goal-directed behavior or facial features. 
              Gaze-following refers to the familiar behavior in which one person, the
              `follower,` turns to see what another person is looking at, and is thought to
              reflect the follower's belief that the gazer has mental states such as
              attention, perception, and goal-directedness.  The proposed research explores
              the nature and development of the knowledge that underlies gaze-following
              behavior in infancy.  This goal will be pursued by exploring 1) the
              characteristics that elicit gaze-following in infancy, 2) developmental changes
              in these characteristics between the ages of 9 and 18 months, and 3) the
              relationship between object characteristics that elicit gaze-following
              behaviors and those that elicit attributions of intentionality as revealed by
              other behaviors such as the imitation of perceived goals.  The findings of this
              work will further our understanding of how infants come to reason about a
              social and mental world that includes not only people but also other kinds of
              objects.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
