Title       : Counteracting Potential Contamination of Young Children's Eyewitness Reports
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9709111

Award Number: 9709111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83971              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra A. Poole debra.a.poole@cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D. Stephen Lindsay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Poole  9709111    There is a pressing need to develop interviewing
              procedures that enhance children's ability to discriminate, in their eyewitness
              reports, between events they remember experiencing versus events they remember
              hearing other people describe.  This research builds on earlier work by these
              investigators that demonstrated that misinformation from parents often
              infiltrates the autobiographical reports of 3- to 8-year-old children, that
              errors appear even during the  free-narrative portion of interviews, that
              asking explicit source-monitoring questions improves older children's ability
              to distinguish between events that  actually occurred versus misinformation. 
              The current project develops and tests interviewing techniques designed to help
              young witnesses escape the contaminating influence of prior exposure to
              misleading suggestions.  In the first phase 1160 children play individually
              with an unfamiliar man (Mr. Science) and subsequently participate in an
              interview about the Mr. Science experience.  Three months later, parents read a
              story to their children and the children are interviewed in three conditions: 
              source-monitoring training (SMT) before or after the interview or no training
              control.  Data analyses assess the efficacy of SMT for reducing false reports
              in free-narrative response without reducing  accurate reports, the effects of
              SMT on accuracy of answers to leading questions, developmental trends in
              performance during SMT and the interview, and relations between individual
              difference variables and accuracy of testimony.  This research answers basic
              questions about children's suggestibility and source-monitoring ability and
              practical issues of significance for  forensic interviewing.     %%%    There
              is a pressing need to develop interviewing procedures that enhance children's
              ability to discriminate, in their eyewitness reports, between events they
              remember experiencing versus events they remember hearing other people
              describe.  This research builds on earlier  work by these investigators that
              demonstrated that misinformation from parents often infiltrates the
              autobiographical reports of 3- to 8-year-old children, that errors appear even
              during the  free-narrative portion of interviews, that asking explicit
              source-monitoring questions improves older children's ability to distinguish
              between events that  actually occurred versus misinformation.  The current
              project develops and tests interviewing techniques designed to help young
              witnesses escape the contaminating influence of prior exposure to misleading
              suggestions.  In the first phase 1160 children play individually with an
              unfamiliar man (Mr. Science) and subsequently participate in an interview about
              the Mr. Science experience.  Three months later, parents read a story to their
              children and the children are interviewed in three conditions: 
              source-monitoring training (SMT) before or after the interview or no training
              control.  Data analyses assess the efficacy of SMT for reducing false reports
              in free-narrative response without reducing  accurate reports, the effects of
              SMT on accuracy of answers to leading questions, developmental trends in
              performance during SMT and the interview, and relations between individual
              difference variables and accuracy of testimony.  This research answers basic
              questions about children's suggestibility and source-monitoring ability and
              practical issues of significance for  forensic interviewing.     ***
