Title       : Risk, Robustness and Volatility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9709876

Award Number: 9709876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229489             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lars P. Hansen l-hansen@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaohong Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9709876  Hansen    This project contributes to our understanding of risk,
              robustness and volatility.  There are three distinct parts:  1. Risk
              Sensitivity and Robustness in Decentralized Economies.  Models of dynamic
              economies are built in which consumers/investors can make decisions based in
              part upon robustness consideration.  The investigation draws upon ideas from
              recursive utility theory, robust control theory and decentralization under
              Knightian uncertainty.  Of particular interest is how a preference for
              robustness becomes reflected in equilibrium prices including the market price
              of risk.   2. Empirical Foundations of Calibration.  Alternative ways of
              integrating estimates from micro data sets into dynamic stochastic general
              equilibrium models are studied.  The project assesses and extends current
              microeconometric methods to account for agent heterogeneity and credit
              constraints.   It obtains new estimates of the uncertainty surround
              microeconomic decision making.  It investigates the general equilibrium
              implications of the new microeconometric inputs.  3. Flexible Estimation of
              Diffusion Models.  Diffusion models as models of nonlinear time series are
              attractive because of the simple manner in which they encode information such
              as hitting time probabilities and long run stationary distributions. 
              Particular attention is devoted to characterizing the manner in which the
              diffusion coefficient or local variance depends on the Markov state.  In
              nonlinear diffusion models, this dependence alone can be sufficient to pull the
              process back to the center of its distribution.  Time series versions of sieve
              methods are employed to provide the volatility characterization of interest.   
                      ??
