Title       : GOALI: Evaluation of System Integration Solutions for Computer-Aided Assembly
               Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9709533

Award Number: 9709533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15782              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nong Ye   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9102,9148,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the evaluation of system integration   solutions
              to computer-aided assembly planning. Three solutions of system   integration
              are considered. First, an assembly design viewer and a process   specification
              system are included in system integration. Second, an assembly   modeling
              system is added and integrated with an assembly design viewer and a   process
              specification system. Third, functions of assembly design viewing,   process
              specification and production simulation are integrated in a virtual   reality
              system. Production engineers from the manufacturing industry will   participate
              in an experiment. The three solutions together with three   packages of
              application software will be presented to production engineers.   For each
              solution, subjects will be asked to use the corresponding package   of
              application software to perform assembly planning. Subject performance   will
              be measured. Subjects will also be given a questionnaire to obtain   their
              subjective evaluation of the three solutions. Both objective data from   the
              experiment and subjective data from the questionnaire will be analyzed.   Based
              on the results, a system integration solution for computer-aided   assembly
              planning will be recommended. The proposed work will be performed   in
              collaboration with researchers at the National Institute of Standards and  
              Technology (NIST).  The results of this research will reveal the advantages and
              disadvantages   of various system integration solutions for computer-aided
              assembly   planning. The recommended solution of system integration will lead
              to the   future research and development of knowledge, technology and
              commercial   software products towards an effective system integration for  
              computer-aided assembly planning. The proposed work will directly   contribute
              to the NIST System Integration for Manufacturing Applications   Program. The
              exchange of knowledge, experience and technology with NIST   researchers will
              spin off new collaborative relationships and projects.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
