Title       : The Value of Information in Strategic Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9709601

Award Number: 9709601
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52401              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Morris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9139,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract  Information is a key input into production in today's economy.
               Some believe that the world's economy is undergoing an information revolution
              that will have as large an impact as the industrial revolution of two hundred
              years ago.  A basic research area for economists in the information age is to
              understand why and how information is valuable.    There is a well developed
              theory (dating back to the 1950's) of the value of information in single person
              decision problems under uncertainty. It was shown that information is valuable
              in every decision problem exactly if it is more informative in a natural
              statistical sense. In single person decision problems, more information is
              always better.  But the economy is strategic.  We cannot analyze each decision
              maker in isolation.  Rather, we need to understand how each participant in the
              economy will behave, taking into account how he or she thinks others will
              behave.  The value of information in strategic settings is a much more
              complicated problem.  More information can sometimes make everyone worse off. 
              For example, insurance markets make profits for insurance companies and make
              consumers better off by reducing risk.  If the consumers had access to more
              information, the insurance markets would shut down and everyone would be worse
              off.    The purpose of this project is to develop a theory of the value of
              information in strategic settings.  Four sets of questions will be addressed. 
              The first three are more technical but provide the framework to think about
              these issues.  First, what is a necessary and sufficient condition for one
              information system to be more valuable than another in all strategic settings?
              The condition will be extremely strong, but provides an important benchmark.
              Second, what is a necessary and sufficient condition for two information
              systems to be almost as valuable as each other in all strategic settings.
              Third, for exactly which classes of strategic situations do more informative
              information systems make every agent better off? And for which classes of
              strategic situations do more informative information systems make every agent
              worse off?  The fourth component is more applied.  An important type of
              strategic problem is a coordination game: a group of firms would like to
              coordinate their actions, but they may disagree on which action they should
              coordinate.  An example would be software companies choosing standardized
              protocols.  This project develops a theory of the value of information for
              coordination games.  Existing work shows the importance of common knowledge in
              achieving co-ordination.  It is important not only what each firm knows, but
              also what they know about what other firms know, and so on. Thus the ability of
              an information system to generate approximate common knowledge will be a key
              determinant of the value of information.  This is an important observation
              because highly distributed information systems, such as the internet, are
              especially poor at generating approximate common knowledge.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
