Title       : Affect and Processing of Negative Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9709677

Award Number: 9709677
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa G. Aspinwall la28@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the relation of positive and negative mood states to
              people's ability and willingness to attend to and process negative information
              about themselves. Most current theories of mood and cognition predict that
              positive mood, relative to negative mood, makes people less likely to attend to
              and process negative information. For example, many theories predict that
              people are motivated to maintain good moods and so should avoid any information
              that might jeopardize their good mood. If this is the case, the psychological
              implications of positive mood are striking: what makes people feel good, also
              makes them less likely to pay attention to potentially useful but negative
              information. Failing to attend to negative information and to use it in related
              judgments can have serious costs in contexts such as education, health, work,
              and interpersonal relations. In contrast to recent findings, however, the PI
              has found that positive mood and beliefs can increase one's attention to and
              more effortful processing of negative information when the information is
              self-relevant or important. This suggests that positive moods and beliefs may
              bolster people's ability to attend to negative information, but little is
              understood about this  process. The current research includes nine experiments
              to test the processes through which positive mood may facilitate attention to
              and use of specific kinds of negative information in judgments. The goal of the
              research is to increase understanding of the factors that affect people's
              willingness and ability to confront negative information and to highlight the
              role of positive feelings and beliefs in the management of negative events and
              information.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
