Title       : Basic Reading Processes: Comparisons Across Writing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9616519

Award Number: 9616519
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Perfetti perfetti+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9616519  PERFETTI    This project will seek to increase understanding of the 
              mechanisms of reading by means of comparisons of writing systems.   Focusing on
              Chinese and English, it will build on the progress  made in recent years in
              research on reading English and other  alphabetic writing systems.  Chinese, as
              a writing system based  on characters, rather than letters, offers a maximal
              contrast to  alphabetic systems.  In Chinese, each character typically 
              symbolizes a word, in contrast to English, where the basic unit  (a letter)
              corresponds to a meaningless speech sound (phoneme).   Thus, Chinese is a
              system in which the basic units can connect  more directly to meaning than is
              the case in an alphabetic  system.  Nonetheless, although reading Chinese
              logically allows  meaning to be accessed directly without contact with the
              sound  system of the language (phonology), actual reading may involve 
              phonology in both writing systems.  Recent research suggests that  both Chinese
              and English may be read by implicitly converting the  written form into a
              spoken language form.  These studies will use  a variety of experimental tasks
              in both languages.  On the  English side, experiments will secure the
              interpretation of  brief-exposure procedures that have produced evidence for 
              automatic implicit phonology in word reading.  On the Chinese  side, the
              experiments will examine the time course of meaning and  phonological events
              and provide for the development of  computational models of the reading
              process.  The outcome will be  conclusions regarding both differences and
              similarities in  reading English and Chinese.  This will be an important step
              in  unraveling which aspects of reading are dependent on the  particular
              writing system of the language being read and which  are universal and not
              dependent on the language's writing system.    ***
