Title       : The Impact of Peroxyacyl Nitrates on the Isolation and Transport of NOx in the
               Rural Midwest Troposphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a9616438

Award Number: 9616438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven B. Bertman steven.bertman@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1309,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9616438  Bertman     Peroxyacyl nitrates (PANs) are a major component of total
              oxidized nitrogen in the atmosphere. More effort is needed to understand their
              formation, loss and distribution, as well as their impact on local, regional,
              and global atmospheric chemistry. Measurements of PANs can be sensitive probes
              of regional influence and of global issues related to pollutant transport.   
              In this project, a dedicated and automated analytical instrument system for
              measurement of tropospheric PAN and its analogs will be constructed, installed,
              and operated at the University of Michigan Biological Station (UMBS) located
              near Pellston, Michigan. PANs will be measured using automated gas
              chromatography with electron capture detection.  The UMBS site allows
              investigating many questions regarding atmospheric ozone chemistry in the
              Midwest. Air masses reaching this site are transported either from rural areas
              or from the industrial/metropolitan areas in the south.    The project will
              have a strong collaborative component since it will be co-located with
              measurements of ozone, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, organic nitrates,
              isoprene, carbonyls, meteorological parameters, etc., performed by other
              scientists. These comprehensive measurements will also allow detailed
              speciation of reactive nitrogen. The PAN measurements will contribute towards a
              better understanding of the seasonal fluctuations of nitrate photoproducts, the
              mechanism of isoprene photochemistry during different seasons, and the
              photochemical and transport mechanisms that result in the observed species
              distributions.
