Title       : Law and Domestic Homicide in Nineteenth-Century England
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9616494

Award Number: 9616494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81365              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Wiener wiener@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Wiener  9616494  This research studies spousal homicide in nineteenth-century
              England and its treatment by the general public and the courts.  It will
              construct the first comprehensive database of such homicides and their legal
              disposition.  It will use a variety of under-exploited sources including
              newspaper accounts and confidential Home Office files to explore particularly
              revealing cases in depth.  The goal is to explain the increased prominence,
              during the course of that century, of domestic homicide.  Of particular concern
              will be the increase in husbands killing wives.  Explanatory hypotheses to be
              tested focus on changes in national social development that increased the
              frequency of homicide and a decrease in public tolerance for such behavior. 
              The use of qualitative and quantitative methods to evaluate changes in violence
              during that period promises to provide the missing historical perspective that
              can inform explanations of the contemporary increase in spousal homicide.   
              ***   This research studies spousal homicide in nineteenth-century England and
              its treatment by the general public and the courts.  It will construct the
              first comprehensive database of such homicides and their legal disposition.  It
              will use a variety of under-exploited sources including newspaper accounts and
              confidential Home Office files to explore particularly revealing cases in
              depth.  The goal is to explain the increased prominence, during the course of
              that century, of domestic homicide.  Of particular concern will be the increase
              in husbands killing wives.  Explanatory hypotheses to be tested focus on
              changes in national social development that increased the frequency of homicide
              and a decrease in public tolerance for such behavior.  The use of qualitative
              and quantitative methods to evaluate changes in violence during that period
              promises to provide the missing historical perspective that can inform
              explanations of the contemporary increase in spousal homicide.    ***
