Title       : Emergency Curation of the Endangered University of Miami Ichthyological
               Collection at the Florida Museum of Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9616312

Award Number: 9616312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118650             (Estimated)
Investigator: George H. Burgess   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carter R. Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 1355,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9616312  Burgess & Gilbert    The collection of fishes from the Tropical
              Atlantic Biological Laboratory was divided in 1972 between the collections of
              the Florida Museum of Natural History and the University of Miami, the latter
              institution chose to divest itself of the collection and the Florida Museum
              chose to adopt it, thus reuniting the Tropical Atlantic Biological Laboratory
              collection.  This award provides supplies and personnel to emergency-curate
              these specimens to ensure their longevity.  Overall, the process of adoption of
              this orphaned collection has been funded by a partnership of institutions and
              agencies.  The divesting institution (University of Miami) provided support for
              the transport of the collection from Miami to Gainesville, the National
              Biological Service (now the Biological Resources Division of the USGS) and the
              State of Florida provided funding for computer cataloging of the collection,
              and the Florida Museum of Natural History has provided funds for leasing
              storage space for the collection while new collections space in the Museum
              itself is being constructed and renovated.  In addition, the Museum has put in
              place a plan to replace the current curator of fishes upon his retirement, as
              well as to hire a collection manager for the fish collection not only for the
              duration of this project, but permanently.  The NSF investment in this
              multi-partnered, leveraged project is for of student assistance, and in
              curatorial equipment and supplies.  The objectives of this project are to with
              newly printed labels that have a Florida Museum accession number, and
              completely computer catalog the adopted collection to a standard equivalent to
              the existing Florida Museum collections. This work will be carried out by the
              student workers and the new collection manager, who will be supervised by the
              PI.  At the end of the project, the Florida Museum fish collection, which is
              currently ranked as the second most important National Center for ichthyology,
              may well have achieved International Ce nter status.
