Title       : Transition Metal Oxide-Adsorbate Interactions by HREELS, TDSand Photoelectron
               Spectroscopies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9616690

Award Number: 9616690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie A. Langell mlangell@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program,
              focusses on the preparation of a series of mixed  transition metal oxide (TMO)
              surfaces and the characterization of  their composition, redox states, and
              their gas absorption  properties.  TMOs are ubiquitous in nature and their gas
              adsorption  properties are relevant to a range of heterogeneous catalytic 
              reactions.  During this three year continuing grant, Professor  Marjorie A.
              Langell and her students at the University of Nebraska  will prepare TMOs on
              well characterized single crystal substrates  and crystalline epitaxies of
              rocksalt, spinel and corundum.   Substrate-gas interactions will be studied by
              high resolution  electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS), x-ray
              photoemission  spectroscopy (XPS), low energy electron diffraction (LEEDS), 
              thermal desorption mass spectrometry (TDMS), and Auger electron  spectroscopy. 
              This work will contribute to the understanding of  important acid-base
              dependent catalytic processes that occur at TMO  surfaces.  Adsorbed gas
              molecules undergo catalytic reactions at the surfaces  of transition metal
              oxides.  These reactions are ubiquitous in  nature.  Professor Marjorie A.
              Langell and her students at the  University of Nebraska will study these
              reactions under controlled  conditions to better understand these important
              chemical reactions.   The chemical focus of this work will be on the reactions
              of  alcohols and organic acids on these catalytic surfaces and a broad  range
              of surface sensitive instrumental methods will be used in  this work.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
