Title       : Electronic Coupling and Adiabaticity in Heterogeneous Electrode Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9616370

Award Number: 9616370
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Creager screage@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adolph L. Beyerlein  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program,
              focusses on the study of the role of electronic  conjugation in promoting
              long-range electron transfer between a  metal electrode and redox site located
              at a known distance from the  electrode surface.  Key to this work will be the
              use of alkyl  thiols with pendant ferrocene groups to form self assembled 
              monolayers on metal electrode surfaces.  Phenylene and naphthalene  moieties
              will be substituted at various known positions along the  alkyl chain to vary
              the position of electronic conjugation.  During  this three year continuing
              grant Professor Creager and his research  students at Clemson University will
              synthesize these compounds,  characterize their structure upon formation of
              self assembled  monolayers, and study their electron transfer properties using 
              ellipsometry, reflection-absorption infrared spectroscopy,  potential step
              chronoamperometry, fast-scan cyclic voltammetry, and  fast electrochemical
              impedance spectroscopy.  This project will  contribute to the understanding of
              the function of biological  electron transfer reactions, test the theory and
              experimental  probes of fast electron transfer reactions that occur over long 
              distances, and determine the relative contributions of electronic  coupling and
              nuclear dynamics in controlling the kinetics of these  processes.  Many
              biological processes, electronic materials, and nanoscale  catalytic structures
              require electron transfer reactions that occur  in short periods of time over
              long distances.  The trapping,  conversion, and subsequent efficient use of
              energy can become  practical when long range electron transfer processes are
              fast.   This project will involve research students at Clemson University  in
              the determination of the molecular level requirements for fast  electron
              transfer reactions.  Very fast electrochemical and  spectroscopic measurements
              will be used to test and further develop  modern theories on the dependence of
              electron transfer rates on  distance.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
