Title       : Computational Center for Macromolecular Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1998    
File        : a9616115

Award Number: 9616115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn F. Ten Eyck lteneyck@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The challenge in biology is increasingly not the  availability of data or even
              of computational power, but  rather the ability to interpret results and
              effectively  apply computer hardware advances to critical scientific  problems.
              In particular, the explosion of sequence and three-  dimensional structural
              information is fundamentally changing  biology by extending our understanding
              of many basic  biological processes to the atomic level. The fields of 
              biology, mathematics, physics, and chemistry find common  ground in exploring
              biological structure-function  relationships. To fully exploit this paradigm
              shift,  analytical software aimed at this juncture between fields  must be made
              accessible to the scientific community. Even in  the field of structural
              biology, where advances have  previously paralleled the increased speed and
              affordability  of computers, the software to perform essential tasks 
              consistently runs behind this rapid hardware development,  and many aspects of
              high-end and parallel computing are  dramatically under-utilized. Yet,
              scientists developing new  computational methods for use in their own specific
              fields  and projects are hard-pressed to develop and support  generally usable
              software that takes full advantage of new  hardware.    The Computational
              Center for Macromolecular Structure  (CCMS), is a three-institution project
              that unites  researchers at The Scripps Research Institute, the  University of
              California at San Diego, and the San Diego  Supercomputer Center to meet this
              challenge. As a  collaborative structural biology effort between scientists, 
              applied mathematicians, and software engineers, CCMS is a  productive way to
              develop and disseminate new techniques for  determining and analyzing
              macromolecular structures and to  bring high-end computing power to the user's
              workstation via  the network. This Group Proposal seeks continuing support  for
              CCMS to develop, distribute, and support innovative  software for advancing
              research on biological macromolecules  at  the interface of biology, applied
              mathematics, computer  science, and chemistry.
