Title       : Travel Support for U.S. Scientists in Activities of the International Union of
               Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG) and the International Union of Geological
               Sciences (IUGS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2001    
File        : a9616520

Award Number: 9616520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Louis B. Brown                          
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188550             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene W. Bierly ebierly@agu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 0000      UNASSIGNED
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As scientific efforts continue to become more global in character, it is
              increasingly important that U.S. scientists at early stages of their
              professional careers be given the opportunity to participate in and contribute
              to major international cooperative activities.  For similar reasons, U.S.
              scientists should be assisted when they assume leadership positions in the
              organizations that facilitate such activities.  This award will provide support
              to assist early-career scientists to participate in assemblies of six unions of
              the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG), and it will support
              the work of a U.S. scientists serving as a senior official in the International
              Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS).  The six IUGG-related meeting for which
              support will provided to assist in the participation of early-career U.S.
              scientists are:  a Scientific Assembly of the International Association of
              Geodesy (IAG); the 8th Scientific Assembly of the International Association of
              Geomagnetism and Aeronomy (IAGA); the 5th Scientific Assembly of the
              International Association of Hydrological Sciences (IAHS); a Joint Assembly of
              the International Association of Meteorology and Atmospheric Sciences (IAMAS)
              and the International Association for the Physical Sciences of the Ocean
              (IAPSO); the 29th General Assembly of the International Association of
              Seismology and Physics of the Earth's Interior (IASPEI); and a General Assembly
              of the International Association of Volcanology and Chemistry of the Earth's
              Interior (IAVCEI).  Thoughtful scientific agendas have been developed for all
              six of these assemblies, and a selection process has been developed that should
              permit an open competition among eligible early-career scientists as well as
              fair and timely selection of funding recipients.  Through their participation
              in these meetings, U.S. scientists will have the opportunity to more
              effectively link themselves and their institutions in major international
              collaborative activities.  Furthermore, U.S. leadership in IUGS activities will
              be maintained through the provision of support for some IUGS-related
              international travel for Dr. Robin Brett, a senior official of that important
              international organization.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                   
