Title       : Investigation of Field-Activation in Combustion Synthesis: The Use of Field as a
               Processing Parameter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9616768

Award Number: 9616768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338352             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zuhair A. Munir zamunir@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5920,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9616768    This study is an investigation of the use of electric
              fields in self - propagating high-temperature (combustion) synthesis (SHS).  It
              builds on previous work to develop an understanding of the interactions between
              electromagnetic fields and self-sustaining combustion waves.  The focus is on
              the macrokinetics of wave propagation in the presence of a field and on
              microstructural developments within the combustion zone.  Models and
              experiments are used to study field activation as a function of thermophysical
              properties of reactants and products.  Relationships of interest include the
              effects of the field on the velocity and temperature of the combustion wave, on
              phase transformation, and on modal change (steady/nonsteady state) in wave
              propagation.  The effect of the field on the mechanism of combustion is
              investigated using the Boddington-Laye analysis of temperature profiles and
              compared to experimental observations on profiles in the combustion zone.  The
              results are extended to determine the effect of the field on compositional
              distribution in functionally-graded materials.      Incorporated into this
              study are collaborations with two Italian research groups.  Dr. Umberto
              Anselmi-Tamburini of Pavia will participate in the study of field effects on
              the kinetics and mechanisms of the combustion process.  Dr. Giacomo Cao of
              Cagliari will be involved in studies of formation of intermetallic compounds by
              SHS.    Understanding the interactions between electric fields and
              self-propagating combustion systems will enable  the use of the field as a
              processing parameter in the synthesis and consolidation materials.  ***
