Title       : The Composition of Verb Meanings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1998  
File        : a9616453

Award Number: 9616453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162856             (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth Levin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal outlines a new stage in an ongoing research program being carried
              out jointly by the PI and  Professor Malka Rappaport Hovav (Bar Ilan
              University, Israel).  Its long-term aim is the development of a  theory of what
              speakers of a language know about the verbs of their language that allows them
              to be used and  understood properly.  The PI's previous research, much of it
              NSF-supported, revealed that this  knowledge is highly structured and that
              general principles could allow speakers to determine a verb's  grammatical
              behavior from its meaning. This earlier research also led to the identification
              of  grammatically-relevant elements of verb meaning, thus laying the groundwork
              for the development of a theory  of the composition of verb meanings -- the
              goal of the proposed research.  Such a theory must make  explicit the exact
              components of verb meanings, the principles which govern the combination of
              these  components into formal representations of verb meanings, and the
              principles that associate these  representations with the appropriate syntactic
              structures.    This project investigates the composition of verb meaning by
              combining previous research results with  insights derived from new empirical
              studies of the syntax-semantics interface: explorations of regular  verbal
              polysemy.  In English certain verbs show a range of meanings (e.g.,  sweep  can
              describe an activity  as in   Terry swept the floor , removing as in  Terry
              swept the leaves off the walk , or putting as in   Terry swept the leaves into
              the gutter ); this phenomenon is regular in that entire semantic classes of 
              verbs show identical patterns of polysemy (e.g., the surface contact verbs  rub
               and  wipe  pattern like   sweep ).  Regular verbal polysemy has been chosen as
              the research domain because preliminary studies show  it to be a rich source of
              insights into verb meaning, yet extensive, systematic documentation of  this
              phenomenon is still lacking.  This project will fill this gap through several
              detailed corpus-bas ed  case studies of verbal polysemy. These case studies
              will require documenting attested types of variations  in verb meaning,
              uncovering regular patterns of verbal polysemy, and identifying constraints on
              possible  verbal polysemy.  The findings will then be used in the formulation
              of an explicit theory of the composition  of verb meanings that can predict the
              range of meanings that a given verb can exhibit.    The proposed investigations
              into verbal polysemy will provide a deeper understanding of the nature of verb 
              meaning.  This study is especially timely since in the recent linguistics
              literature verbal polysemy,  although not well-understood, has repeatedly been
              argued to bear on the choice between two competing  theoretical models of verb
              meaning; the proposed research, by illuminating the nature of the phonomenon 
              itself, should contribute to the resolution of this controversy.  Since
              polysemy has proved a vexing problem  to lexicographers, computational
              linguists, psycholinguists, and researchers in child language acquisition,  
              the results of this research should also prove valuable to researchers outside
              the theoretical linguistics  community.
