Title       : Dissertation Research: Models for Primate Origins: An Evolutionary Study of the
               Postcranial Morphology of Tree Shrews (Mammalis, Tupaiidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1997     
File        : a9616194

Award Number: 9616194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick S. Szalay fszalay@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Asiatic tree shrews (Tupaiidae, Scandentia) are not true shrews but
              according to all indications they are the most recent living relatives of
              Primates, the order to which humans belong. The family is represented by up to
              16 living species which pursue distinctive and highly specific lifestyles. 
              Their feeding habits range from omnivory to insectivory.  This study is the
              first modern undertaking that will attempt to find causal relationships between
              species specific postcranial traits and the ecology of these animals.  It will
              serve as a foundation for an extensive comparative study of skeletal variation
              in these earliest primates.  The project will aim for a detailed explanation
              for the specific adaptive origins and multiplication of the various primate
              stem lineages that lead to the modern families.  The project focuses on a
              number of rare species such as Ptilocercus lowei (pen-tailed tree shrew) and
              Tupaia minor, two species that are completely arboreal. These are very poorly
              known species compared to the terrestrial tree shrews.  The two species will be
              trapped and closely observed under captive conditions.  A potentially
              significant aspect of this study is the planned establishment of a captive
              colony of Ptilocercus in the Department of Zoology at the Smithsonian
              Institute.  These animals then would become available for a continued study by
              a variety of specialists in animal biology.  Using tupaiids as models for the
              early primate radiation will allow a more complete understanding of the order
              Primates, a paramount concern of this undertaking.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
