Title       : RPG: Effects of Attention on Implicit Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9616323

Award Number: 9616323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail Musen gm30@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9616323  MUSEN  When people tell friends about what they have learned, they
              refer  to facts and tasks that they are "aware" of learning.  However,  there
              is evidence that one acquires information in the absence of  awareness.  This
              research will help determine the conditions  under which people can acquire
              multiple pieces of information  independently of awareness, as well as how much
              attention needs  to be allocated to each task in order for the information to
              be  transferred to a more permanent memory store.  By understanding  under
              which situations people best acquire such information, it  should be possible
              to determine how to present information to  maximize human learning.  An
              example of learning without  awareness comes from research with amnesic
              patients.  Although  amnesic patients cannot remember an earlier presentation
              of a  word, they use a word more often to complete a sentence when it  was in
              fact presented recently than when it had not been  presented recently.  This
              and related findings provide evidence  for priming, a form of implicit memory. 
              Implicit memory is often  contrasted with explicit memory.  Explicit tests of
              memory  include recall and recognition, and tap memory for facts and  events
              that are available as conscious recollections.  An  important contrast between
              implicit and explicit memory is that  they appear to be affected differently by
              the allocation of  attention.  If attention is divided between two or more
              tasks,  explicit memory suffers.  For example, if one watches the news on 
              television while talking on the phone, one will remember fewer of  today's news
              events than if one watched the news without  attempting to carry out another
              task simultaneously.  In  contrast, implicit memory has traditionally been
              thought to be  less dependent on attention.  One can carry out a familiar motor
               task while at the same time carrying out a competing task that  requires a
              different set of mental activities.  For example, a  skilled typist can type
              while reading a familiar  passage.   Recently, it has been demonstrated that
              focussed attention is  needed for some tasks that tap implicit memory. 
              Specifically,  focussed attention is not necessary for learning single pieces
              of  information but is required for learning multiple items  simultaneously,
              such as that "red" and "triangle" go together.   In this situation, the person
              must attend fully to both of these  attributes and attempt to bind them in
              memory as a single object,  like a "red triangle."  In such cases, cognitive
              resources cannot  always be shared with another task.  Under these and similar 
              circumstances in which separate items must be integrated and  stored in memory,
              cognitive resources from limited-capacity  short-term memory are required.  If
              cognitive resources are  overtaxed, learning will not occur.  The properties of
              the  information to be learned, such as its familiarity, affect the  ability to
              learn more than one thing at a time.  This research  will help determine the
              conditions under which multiple tasks can  be learned implicitly without
              hurting performance.  ***
