Title       : Quantum Phenomena in Complex Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9616749

Award Number: 9616749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anupam K. Garg agarg@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9616749  Garg  This grant consists of a theoretical study of quantum  phenomena
              in complex systems.  The specific projects include  (1) macroscopic quantum
              tunneling or resonance in ferro and  antiferromagnetic particles of size 50-75
              A, domain walls in  magnetic wires and in SQUIDs (Superconducting Quantum 
              Interference Devices) and (2) decoherence effects in quantum  computers.  The
              PI has earlier proposed that nuclear spin  dissipation is critical to
              understanding both the coherence  effects as well as tunneling in magnetic
              particles.  This  grant continues further exploration of possible dissipation 
              sources and their consequences in the experiments.  Quantum  computers are
              devices which aim to exploit the linearity of  the superposition principle to
              achieve computational  parallelism.  The operation of these computers, however,
               requires strict coherence between all their elements.  Using  the techniques
              developed in the first project, it may be  possible to analyze whether an
              interaction with environment  is too deleterious for the desirable properties
              of a quantum  computer.  %%%  This is a mid career PI who has emerged as an
              acknowledged  expert on applications of quantum mechanics to complex  systems,
              in particular on the effect of environment on  quantum phenomena.  The proposed
              research has both  fundamental and somewhat more applied aspects. In the first 
              category, he is proposing to study quantum phenomena that  are commonly seen at
              the microscopic level, but rarely at  the macroscopic level, because they are
              masked by  environmental noise. Specifically, he is proposing to study  these
              quantum effects in small magnetic particles and narrow  wires, where the
              chances for experimental observation are  believed to be highest. In the second
              category he proposes  to consider the limitations of recently proposed quantum 
              computers as they are influenced by the environment. This  influence is widely
              accepted as being detrimental to the  operation of quantum computers, but the
              current  under standing in the field is largely qualitative. The PI  proposes
              to make quantitative assessments of its severity  using methods developed in
              the course of studying  macroscopic quantum phenomena.
