Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Organic Reaction Rates and
               Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9616772

Award Number: 9616772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $579600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kendall N. Houk houk@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Kendall N. Houk, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of  
              California, Los Angeles, is supported by the Organic Dynamics Program to  
              carry out experimental and theoretical investigations of organic reaction  
              rates and mechanisms.  Using several levels of theory, but with   particular
              focus on density functional theory (DFT), Dr. Houk will   examine a number of
              problems of chemical and biological importance,   including the femtosecond
              dynamics of pericyclic reactions, the   stereoselectivity and isotope effects
              in vinylcyclopropane-cyclopentene   rearrangements, the dynamics and anomalous
              activation parameters of   carbene rearrangements, and aromaticity and bond
              localization in   cyclocarbons and novel non-alternant polycyclic aromatics and
                anti-aromatics.  Studies of the origins of stereoselectivity in biradical  
              reactions and of the use of DFT to probe biradical surfaces will also be  
              carried out.  Explorations of biological catalysis and transition   structures
              in enzyme- and antibody-catalyzed reactions will lead to the   development of
              synthetic enzyme mimics.  Theory and experiment play symbiotic roles in
              chemistry - experiments   lead to new observations, theoretical work is often
              required in order to   develop an understanding of these observations, and the
              resulting   theories then often lead to proposals for additional
              experimentation in   order to test their validity.  Professor Houk and his
              collaborators will   direct theoretical and experimental studies toward the
              elucidation of a   number of central reaction processes in organic and
              biological chemistry,   including the complex issue of how enzymes effect
              chemical   transformations.  These studies will lead not only to a fundamental
              level   of understanding of these important processes, but also to the
              discovery   of new reaction chemistry predicated on the theoretical findings. 
              The   studies of biological systems, for example, will lead to the development 
               of synthetic enzyme equivalents, compounds designed and synthesized to  
              effect chosen molecular transformations in a highly selective manner.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
