Title       : Dissertation Research: Pluralism in South Indian Medical Treatments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1997   
File        : a9616067

Award Number: 9616067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3431               (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent B. Crapanzano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/541-0434

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
              the City University of New York.  The student will investigate the treatment of
              mental illness in south India by three different forms of therapy: Hindu temple
              healing, ayurvedic medicine, and biomedical psychiatry.  Using structured as
              well as unstructured interviews with an experimental group of patients who
              change treatment and a control grou pof patients who use only one treatment, as
              well as observation of healing sessions, the project will compare the
              experience of patients who try one form of therapy to treat their illness to
              the experience of patients who try several forms.  The hypothesis is that the
              multiple therapy approach will empower patients to develop their own prognosis
              which facilitates their recovery.   This research is important because it will
              advance our understanding of how cultural and social factors shape the illness
              experience.  Recent research has demonstrated that the recovery rate for
              schizophrenia in developing counties is better than the rate in the developed
              world.  The knowledge to be gained from this project will help towards
              understanding the specific factors in the illness experience which facilitate
              healing, and this knowledge should be valuable in designing healing programs in
              our own country.  In addition the project will advance our expertise about this
              important area of the world.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                            
