Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Effective Visual Presentation of Computer
               Generated Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1997   
File        : a9616969

Award Number: 9616969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gruia C. Roman roman@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Subhash Suri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen T. Kraemer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip M. Hubbard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                96-16969  Roman, Gruia-Catalin   Hubbard, P. M.  Washington University in St.
              Louis     CISE Research Instrumentation: Effective Visual Presentation of
              Computer Generated Information     The instrumentation grant  will fund four
              SGI graphics workstations connected to a high speed communication network to
              provide a testbed configuration supporting four projects whose common goal is
              to enhance the computer's ability to communicate information in visual form for
              human consumption. Query -Based Visualization of Distributed Computations-
              Visualization for Network Management- Practical Computational Geometry- Time
              Critical Graphics Operations. Query-based visualization is a technique that
              allows one to explore an executing distributed computation in a totally visual
              environment. A graphical vocabulary is used to formulate questions about and
              construct answers regarding the state of the computation. This will lead to a
              novel perspective on visual debugging and monitoring of distributed software.  
               The network visualization, management, and control project seeks to explore
              the use of visualization and interactive steering in an environment
              characterized by high-speed, high-volume data production and a demand for rapid
              response. The techniques developed in this work will be applicable to a wide
              range of complex applications that can benefit from human-directed, dynamic
              adjustment of parameters. Practical computational geometry project deals with
              the issues of simplicity and robustness in geometric algorithms, seeking a
              theoretical understanding of fundamental problems in computer graphics,
              computational biology, and visualization. Finally, time-critical computer
              graphics is a research effort to develop graphical operations such as rendering
              and collision detection that adapt to resource limitations with minimal impact
              on human performance.
