Title       : Effects of Selection on Offspring Viabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1998     
File        : a9616204

Award Number: 9616204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72074              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee C. Drickamer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT    PI:  Gowaty  PROPOSAL NUMBERS  9631801    
                 The hypothesis that the research is designed to test is that  female choice
              of mates for traits that affect the  viabilities of females  offspring affects
              females   preferences for particular mates even in social systems in  which
              females seem unable to chose or in which females   options are ecologically or
              socially modified.  Social  behavior that can interfere with a female s ability
              to  achieve mating \s with her preferred partners include male-  male-
              interactions female-female s interactions, and  interactions between the female
              and those males that attempt  to manipulate or modify her choice via forced
              copulation,  aggressive conditioning, affiliative conditioning, or  brokering
              of food resources in exchange for matings.  The  research is specifically
              designed to test the generality of  this hypothesis and will include
              comparisons of outcomes  from nearly identical experimental protocols on six
              well-  known and frequently studied species representing  phylongenetically
              diverse taxa.  This research is  collaborative and cooperative.  It will
              include experiments  on laboratory populations of Drosophila pseudoobscura, 
              Drosophilia hydei at the university of Georgia, guppies,  Poecilea reticulata,
              at Trondheim University Cockroaches,  Nauphoeta cinerea, at the University of
              Kentucky, mallards,  Anas platyrhynchos at the Delta Waterfowl and Wetlands 
              Research Station, and wild house mice, Mus musculus, at the  University of
              Southern Illinois at Carbondale.  The research  protocol involves exposing
              females to sets of males, which  researchers will pick at random with respect
              to phenotypic  variation of individuals from populations consisting of  virgin
              males from diverse sources.  Test females will  demonstrate preferences in
              choice arenas.  After  Establishing her preferred mate, half of the test
              females  will be placed in breeding chambers with preferred males and  half
              with non preferred.  The viability (surv ival to  adulthood or independence) of
              offspring from several types  of control manipulations including those from an
              identical  series of male choice trials.  The significance of this  research
              lies in the rarity of studies of the effects of  freely expressed mate choice
              by females or males on  offspring viability or quality.  It will be the first
              to  evaluate 1) the theoretical assumption that the effects of  female choice
              outweigh the effects of male choice for  species with typical
              post-fertilization investments in  offspring:  2. the prediction that for a
              species (D. hydei)  with relatively equal post-fertilization investments that 
              male and female choice are equally important to offspring  viability; 3. how
              viabilities of offspring vary under freely-  expressed mate choice (By females
              and males) compared to non  preferred matings; and 4. differences in offspring
              viability  as a function of whether matings are managed or represent  choices
              made by freely-acting individuals.
