Title       : Phase Transitions in Disordered Polymers and Gels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  2000   
File        : a9616791

Award Number: 9616791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toyoichi Tanaka Bfox@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                    w:\decs\decs97\0formdec.doc  Tanaka 
              9616791    This experimental and theoretical project is devoted to study  of 
              the  phases and phase transitions of various disordered  polymers  and  
              heteropolymer  gels.  Disorder  in  this  context  includes  disorder   of  
              sequences  (when  several  monomer  species   are  polymerized together, with
              the sequence of monomers bearing  some  useful   information),  disorder  of 
              branches,  and  topological  disorder  that is related to knots, links, and
              entanglements.  In  experiment,   it  is  intended to explore the  phases  and 
              phase  transitions of various disordered polymers as controlled by  both 
              parameters such as temperature, choice of solvent, etc, and  also  by  the 
              preparation  conditions, which  control  the  degree  of  disorder. It is
              intended also to examine from the point  of  view  of  design:  (i)  other
              types of disordered  polymers,  including  branched  polymers,  knots,  and  ; 
              (ii)  realistic  degrees  of  compactness,  when density fluctuations are
              coupled  to  freezing  and  to design, providing for flower- or micelle-type
              structures;  (iii)  realistic  types  of  interactions,  including  long-range 
              Coulomb  interactions; and  (iv) states of  partial  equilibrium,  important 
              for folding kinetics. In work on gels, the first  goal  is  to observe the
              freezing phase transition in a polymer gel.  A  second goal in this area is to
              experimentally realize the idea of  sequence  design,  to allow the production 
              of  gels  capable  of  freezing into a state which exhibits at least certain
              elements of  the   desired   conformation.  This  combined   theoretical   and 
              experimental  study will shed light on basic physical  principles  behind 
              phase  transitions of disordered polymers and  gels,  and  will  be  of great
              potential importance for the physics of  these  fascinating  materials,  as 
              well as for  their  applications  in  biology, medicine, and technology.  %%% 
              This experimental and theor etical project is devoted to study  of  a  class of
              materials known as polymers, which are extremely long  molecules composed of
              repeating chemical units. The questions  of  interest relate to the degree of
              randomness or disorder in masses  of  such  material, and the conditions under
              which such material,  originally  in  a  liquid  state, can freeze  and  become
               rigid.  Polymers  in  some  cases  can be thought  of  as  long  flexible 
              molecular  strings, which, when dissolved in  a  liquid  solvent,  resemble 
              cooked spaghetti in water. This work will include  many  other types of
              polymers, including those in which branches occur,  for  example.  One of the
              central questions in this  work  is  to  clarify  the  conditions, for example,
              temperature, the  type  of  solvent,  and  the type of polymer molecules, 
              which  lead  to  a  transition  from a liquid to a rigid solid.  A somewhat 
              similar,  but  irreversible,  freezing transition for example  occurs  when 
              epoxy glue hardens, but the phenomenon is to be examined in  this  project  in 
              a  very  fundamental and broad  manner,  leading  to  results  which  will be
              of predictive value for a wide  range  of  polymers and conditions. The utility
              of the results of this  work  may  include situations in biology and medicine,
              as  well  as  in  technology.  ***
