Title       : Mechanistic Diagnosis for Redox Switching of Electroactive Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9616641

Award Number: 9616641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Bruckenstein chemstan@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Stanley Bruckenstein, professor of chemistry at SUNY-Buffalo,  is   supported by
              this renewal grant from the Analytical and Surface Chemistry   Program for
              theoretical and experimental studies of electroactive polymer   thin-films. 
              Electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM)   experiments and dynamic
              impedance measurements will be used in   conjunction with theoretical
              considerations based on a scheme of cubes   which will yield the rates of the
              elementary kinetic steps that occur   during a redox switching process in the
              polymer films.  The approach will   permit the identification and separation of
              processes involving   counterion transfer, co-ion transfer, neutral species
              transfer and   polymer configuration changes.   Polyvinylferrocene is included
              among the   redox polymers to be studied and  polypyrrole is among the
              conducting   polymers to be used.  The investigations will produce
              structure-function   correlations within and among various classes of 
              polymers.   Such   relationships permit rational design of polymers for
              specific purposes.  A fundamental understanding of the nature and processes
              occuring in   electroactive  polymers continues to be a major objective of
              studies on   these materials because of their importance in technological areas
              such   as batteries and membranes.  This research provides a theoretical  
              framework upon which to design experiments to examine these processes.    From
              the experiments, information is obtained which will allow   technological
              development of  polymers for well-defined purposes.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
