Title       : Collaborative Research: A Magnetotelluric Instrumentation Facility for
               Electromagnetic Study of the Continents (EMSOC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a9616450

Award Number: 9616450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253590             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip E. Wannamaker pewanna@egi.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Stodt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9616450  Wannamaker    This award provides partial support for the upgrade of a
              portable  magnetometer system and the acquisition of associated field 
              equipment by the University of Utah that will become part of a  centrally
              managed pool of equipment and made available to US  researchers for field
              deployment in projects using the  magnetotelluric (MT) technique to image the
              Earth's deep interior  structure. The University of Utah is committed to
              providing the  remaining funds necessary to acquire the equipment.    Remote
              sensing  of the Earth's crust and upper mantle using MT  methods recently has
              made significant progress in producing images  of internal structures with good
              spatial resolution and with  content (electrical conductivity) that is distinct
              from seismic  images (seismic velocities). The MT method makes use of the 
              time-dependent natural electromagnetic fields (EM) induced inside  the Earth by
              the variations of the Earth's external geomagnetic  field. The induced electric
              (telluric) currents diffuse into the  Earth and are scattered back from
              heterogeneities in the electrical  resistivity structure. The complex,
              frequency dependent,  relationship between the horizontal magnetic and electric
              fields at  the surface is called the MT impedance and can be inverted to solve 
              for the resistivity (or conductivity) structure of the interior.  Conductivity
              properties of the interior are of considerable  interest because they depend
              strongly on the presence of conducting  ionic fluids or melts which are
              difficult or impossible to detect  with other remote sensing techniques.  ***
