Title       : Symposium on Emergentism, Pittsburgh, PA, May 29-31, 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1997     
File        : a9616386

Award Number: 9616386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17703              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. MacWhinney macw@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              If you spend some time watching the checkout lines at a  supermarket, you
              quickly find that the number of people queued up  in each line is roughly the
              same. At peak times, you may find  five or six people in a line waiting to
              check out.  At slower  times, lines have only two or three waiting.  There is
              no fixed  rule governing this pattern.  Instead, the "structure" emerges  from
              other basic facts about the goals and behavior of shoppers  and supermarket
              managers. This simple idea of emergence through  constraint satisfaction is
              currently being invoked as a central  explanatory mechanism in many areas of
              cognitive science and  neuroscience. The current proposal focuses on an
              exploration of  the use of this concept in the study of language learning and 
              language processing.    Emergentist accounts have been formulated for a wide
              variety of  linguistic phenomena, ranging from segmental inventories, stress 
              patterns, phonotactic constraints, morphophonological  alternations, lexical
              structures, pidginization, second language  learning, historical change,
              on-line phrase attachment, and  rhetorical structures.  Formalisms that have
              been used to analyze  the emergent nature of these forms include connectionist 
              networks, dynamic systems theory, neuronal competition models,  classifier
              systems, production-system architectures, Bayesian  models, Optimality Theory,
              principles-and-parameters theory,  corpora studies, and discourse-contextual
              analysis. It is  remarkable that approaches as apparently divergent as 
              functionalist linguistics and principles-and-parameters theory  seem to
              nonetheless share some common ground in terms of a mutual  interest in
              emergentist accounts of both learning and processing.    The specific aim of
              this proposal is to advance our understanding  of these pivotal issues by
              hosting a symposium in which  researchers from these various perspectives come
              together to  share their findings, ideas, aspirations, and concerns.  In 
              particular, the symposium is designed to:  1. draw att ention to the notion of
              "emergence" as a theme  underlying some of the most exciting new work in
              linguistics and  psycholinguistics,  2.   explore more fully the ways in which
              emergentist views  provide truly new answers to old questions, as opposed to 
              repackagings of old answers,  3. consider ways in which isolated emergentist
              accounts can be  linked into a larger emergentist conceptual framework, and  4.
              examine ways in which an emergentist framework may serve to  overcome or
              neutralize certain unresolved issues remaining from  earlier periods in the
              development of linguistic and  psycholinguistic theory.
