Title       : The Effects of Low Energy Laser and Broadband White Light Irradiation on
               Articular Cartilage Metabolism and Matrix Synthesis In Vitro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1996 
File        : a9616738

Award Number: 9616738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17532              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia Roberts roberts.8@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan S. Litsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alicia L. Bertone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9616738  Roberts  Articular cartilage lesions often heal slowly and incompletely
               due to the poor ability of this tissue to proliferate following  injury. 
              Controlled upregulation of chondrocyte metabolism and  matrix synthesis may
              potentially enhance the healing outcome.  Single Nd:YAG laser (1064 nm)
              treatments of in vitro bovine and  canine articular cartilage explants have
              been reported to produce  significant increases in the matrix content of
              glycosaminoglycans  (GAG), proteoglycans (PG), collagen, and noncollagen
              protein 3-7  days post-irradiation.  Use of the 1064 nm wavelength for this 
              purpose is non-ideal, however, due to the low photon energy and  poor
              absorption characteristics of this wavelength in articular  cartilage. 
              Furthermore, the YAG laser is expensive, non-  portable, and requires
              complicated water cooling during  operation.         The purpose of this
              proposal is to determine if equine articular  cartilage matrix synthesis can be
              nonthermally modulated in vitro  via irradiation with a helium neon (HeNe, 633
              nm) laser, a diode  laser (810 nm), or a broadband light source.  It is
              hypothesized  that 633 and 810 nm laser irradiation will be successful in 
              modulating cartilage metabolism due to the higher photon energy,  more
              favorable absorption characteristics, and reported success  in other low energy
              laser applications using these wavelengths.         In Phase 1 of this
              proposal, PG synthesis will be assayed in  cartilage explants following
              irradiation under a variety of light  delivery protocols in order to determine
              the effective range of  parameters necessary to consistently upregulate PG
              matrix  synthesis with these light sources.  In Phase 2, irradiation-  induced
              temperature increases in cartilage explants as a function  of energy delivery
              protocol, depth in the explant, and light  source will be recorded.  Data from
              Phases 1 and 2 will be used  to select appropriate light delivery protocols for
              Phase 3  experiments and verify the nonthermal nature of the light  inte
              raction with the tissue.  In Phase 3, cultured equine  articular cartilage
              explants will be irradiated with one of the  three light sources using energy
              delivery protocols found to be  effective in Phase 1.  Light-induced changes in
              matrix PG, GAG,  total protein, and cell viability will be compared to non- 
              irradiated control explants.         It is anticipated that this
              interdisciplinary project will  develop the preliminary data required for a
              full NSF funding  proposal.  Future work will extend this investigation into in
               vitro human tissue or in vivo animal experiments and investigate  the
              mechanism of action of light in articular cartilage.  Ultimately, clinical
              treatments may be possible in which an  appropriate dose of light is delivered
              to cartilage lesions  through arthroscopy or used to enhance cell growth in
              culture for  autologous chondrocyte implantation.  ***
