Title       : Atomic and Molecular Doped Quantum Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9616615

Award Number: 9616615
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342193             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Birgitta Whaley whaley@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting Prof.  
              B.Whaley at the University of California, Berkeley.  The research, to be  
              carried out over the next three years will be a a continuation of ongoing  
              theoretical studies of foreign species in quantum clusters of helium and  
              hydrogen.  This research program has a two-fold design.  First, to   establish
              general methods of dealing with structure, dynamics and   spectroscopy of
              complex quantum systems when nuclear delocalization and   exchange effects are
              important.  The approach is based on Quantum Monte   Carlo methods, both zero
              and finite temperature, which have been shown to   be powerful tools for
              analyzing the properties of quantum clusters.  A   significant algorithmic
              development here is the calculation of imaginary   time correlation functions,
              which allows the calculation of dopant   spectra directly.  The second goal is
              to answer some open questions about   the interaction of probe molecules with
              their quantum environment which   have been raised by recent experiments on
              doped quantum clusters.  Thus   in the applications during this grant cycle,
              Prof Whaley will focus on   the study of the spectroscopy of these clusters. 
              This includes infra-red   spectra of dopant molecules, electronic spectra and
              the nature of   electronic energy transfer in pure and atomic-doped
              quantumclusters.  Quantum clusters of helium and hydrogen possess unusual low
              temperature   behavior which is of interest to both chemistry and physics
              communities.    While conceptually of importance because of the unique
              opportunity they   present for study of finite size effects in strongly quantum
              systems,   theyalso have significant practical use as gentle quantum matrices
              which   may be utilized to study spectroscopy of weakly bound systems and  
              chemical reactions at low temperatures.  The utility of this quantum  
              micro-environment has recently been dramatically demonstrated with the  
              production of small metal clusters inside a helium droplet.  This opens a   new
              controlled route to study of the reactivity of metal particles.  The   aim of
              this theoretical and computational investigation is to develop the  
              understanding necessary to interpret spectral signatures of such doped  
              quantum clusters, and to provide predictive power for using them to   control
              elementary reaction dynamics in a novel ultra-cold nanoscale   quantum matrix. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
