Title       : Roughening of Pristine Silica Glass Surface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9616313

Award Number: 9616313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Minoru Tomozawa tomozm@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Toh-Ming Lu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9616313  Tomozawa    The most popular explanation of mechanical fatigue in 
              glasses is the slow growth of a surface crack promoted by  the stress corrosion
              reaction of glass with water or water  vapor.  It has been reported, however,
              that silica glass  optical fibers can be made flaw-free and that these pristine
               glasses can also exhibit mechanical fatigue.  Recent  observations by atomic
              force microscopy (AFM) of glass fiber  surfaces showed that the initial
              strength degradation of  optical fibers is due to surface roughening rather
              than  crack propagation.  Thus it is necessary to understand the  mechanism and
              kinetics of surface roughening of pristine  glass surface in order to predict
              the fatigue life time of  optical fiber correctly.  The initial stage of the
              surface  roughening kinetics of silica glass with or without stress  will be
              investigated using an atomic force microscope and  will be compared with the
              theory for the surface roughness  development such as the noise-induced
              roughening theory and  the stress-induced roughening theory.  %%%  The long
              term mechanical stability of silica glass optical  fiber is an important
              concern in optical communications.  Life time prediction of optical fibers
              requires the  understanding of the mechanism of mechanical fatigue. In  spite
              of extensive investigations, the mechanism remains  unclear.  Recent
              observations by atomic force microscopy  (AFM) of glass fiber surfaces showed
              that the initial  strength degradation of optical fibers is due to surface 
              roughening rather than crack propagation.  Thus it is  necessary to understand
              the mechanism and kinetics of  surface roughening of pristine glass surface in
              order to  predict the fatigue life time of optical fiber correctly.  The
              initial stage of the surface roughening kinetics of  silica glass will be
              investigated and will be compared with  the theory for the surface roughness
              development.  ***
