Title       : Collaborative Fifty State Supreme Court Data Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a9616891

Award Number: 9616891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251455             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Brace pbrace@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Brace  9616891  This project will create a 50 state supreme court data base. 
              These data will facilitate theoretically focused empirical studies that are
              essential to the progress of comparative judicial scholarship generally and
              state court research specifically.  The data will combine state supreme court
              judge votes, case outcomes and case characte4ristics with judge attributes,
              institutional procedures and selected state contextual variables.  Judicial
              scholarship heretofore has examined single states or 50 state studies at very
              high levels of aggregation.  The result has been a compartmentalization of
              findings and a disjunction between micro and macro level explanations of
              judicial behavior and outcomes.  This project will provide the systematic data
              that will hasten the development of theory that connects the law and judges
              with their institutional, political, and social contexts.  These data will
              promote diverse theoretical efforts and rigorous methodological debates.  Data
              will be archived at the ICPSR and a web page will be constructed to publicize
              the data and to facilitate the exchange of useful information among users.  %%%
               This project will create a 50 state supreme court data base.  These data will
              facilitate theoretically focused empirical studies that are essential to the
              progress of comparative judicial scholarship generally and state court research
              specifically.  The data will combine state supreme court judge votes, case
              outcomes and case characte4ristics with judge attributes, institutional
              procedures and selected state contextual variables.  Judicial scholarship
              heretofore has examined single states or 50 state studies at very high levels
              of aggregation.  The result has been a compartmentalization of findings and a
              disjunction between micro and macro level explanations of judicial behavior and
              outcomes.  This project will provide the systematic data that will hasten the
              development of theory that connects the law and judges with their
              institutional, political, and social c ontexts.  These data will promote
              diverse theoretical efforts and rigorous methodological debates.  Data will be
              archived at the ICPSR and a web page will be constructed to publicize the data
              and to ***
