Title       : RPG: Identity Processes Within Close Relationship Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9616361

Award Number: 9616361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Kerpelman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Description. The proposed research will examine the active influence of
              close relationship contexts on identity development processes. Identity control
              theory provides a useful framework for examining identity microprocesses that
              influence the maintenance and change of identity. Inputs to the identity
              control system that shape individual identities include self-perceptions and
              personal identity standards, as well as the responses of others to the
              individual's behavior. Both laboratory and field settings will be used to
              consider the measures used to assess identity standards and the other central
              components of the identity control system. Research procedures that can best
              capture the dynamic nature of identity processes will also be designed. A
              laboratory procedure will be used to assess mutual identity shaping processes
              occurring within a range of close relationship contexts. Specifically, planned
              identity disruptions (i.e., challenges to currently held identity beliefs) will
              be used as a means for initiating the identity control processes to be
              examined. This examination will promote knowledge about how people contribute
              to the stability and change of both their own identities and the identities of
              their close relationship partners. A field setting will be used to assess
              identity development as individuals and their relationship partners experience
              transitions, such as the transition to work/college or the transition to
              marriage. Identity processes will be examined at multiple points in time to
              note linkages between identified identity processes and the subsequent identity
              changes that occur as social role identities are formed and modified. The study
              of identity processes in both laboratory and field settings will increase
              knowledge about identity development, highlighting the important role that
              parents and peers play in the facilitation of an individual's construction of
              identity.  %%%  Project Justification.   The proposed research examines how
              close relationship partners, such as family members and friends, influence a
              person's identity development. The findings from previous research indicate
              that identity is formed through interpersonal relationships, and that parents
              and peers tend to support individuals' self-conceptions -- both positive and
              negative. Laboratory and field settings will be used to consider how identity
              shaping processes occur in close relationships, and to determine what outcomes
              result from these processes. A laboratory procedure will be used to assess
              identity shaping processes occurring within a range of close relationship
              contexts (such as parent-adolescent, dating partners, newly married spouses). A
              field setting will be used to develop an approach that will make it possible to
              assess identity development over time. People will be assessed at multiple
              points in time to learn how interactions with others are linked to changes in
              identity that occur as people acquire new social roles, such as paid work or
              marriage. The study of identity processes in both laboratory and field settings
              will increase knowledge about identity development, highlighting the important
              role that parents and peers play in the facilitation of a person's construction
              of  identity. This research will also promote understanding of problems in
              identity development processes and may have implications for how interactions
              within close relationships can be improved to promote healthy identity
              development.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
