Title       : Defeat Frames and Social Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1998  
File        : a9616765

Award Number: 9616765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim Voss kimvoss@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of social movements.  It is designed to advance our theoretical
              and empirical understanding of development and decline by systematically
              assessing the impact of cultural elements on collective action. This research
              will investigate the impact of one important aspect of movement culture, the
              "frame" used to interpret setbacks and defeat. It asks whether the explanations
              and interpretations activists give for social movement defeats help to preserve
              the commitment, organization, and solidarity of participants.   %%%   These
              issues are explored by examining the British "new union" movement of the late
              nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This movement, which began in the
              late 1880s, attempted to build a broad-based and politically progressive labor
              movement. There were two waves of militancy, one which occurred in the late
              1880s and early 1890s, and the other which occurred in the years preceding
              World War I. In the first wave, a period of explosive growth and heightened
              strike activity was followed by setbacks and defeat. In the second wave, a new
              burst of organizing and strike activity culminated in permanent organizational
              and political gains.   %%%   These two waves will be examined to determine
              whether or not the "lessons" or narratives that activists constructed to
              explain strike failures in the first wave had any effects on the longevity of
              local unions or workers' actions in the second wave. Both qualitative and
              quantitative analysis will be employed. First, using newspaper accounts and
              union records, failing strikes will be examined to find out whether activists
              interpreted strike defeats, and if so, what interpretations were used. Second,
              using event history methods, data on union longevity will be analyzed to assess
              whether the use of defeat frames increased the probability of local union
              survival. Third, using strike statistics for the second wave of the new
              unionism, an analysis of strike participation rates will be done in order to
              investigate the effects of defe at frames on later strike militancy. Fourth, a
              few communities will be chosen for more intensive qualitative examination.  
              %%%   This research is one of the first systematic efforts to empirically
              evaluate the impact of a cultural product --defeat frames-- on the development
              of social movements. It is also one of the few studies to focus on the
              development and decline of social movements, rather than on their emergence.
