Title       : Gender, Learning Curves, and Intellectual Functioning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9616526

Award Number: 9616526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203918             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Josephs josephs@psy.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There are few things as vital to a young person's ability to succeed in modern
              U.S. society as academic success. It is common knowledge that poor grades
              and/or poor standardized test scores effectively seal off vast portions of
              potential opportunity. Unfortunately, poor academic performance is not evenly
              distributed among individuals. With respect to math and science performance,
              for example, the scores of academically stigmatized persons (e.g., female and
              African-American students) on standardized tests are typically lower than their
              non-stigmatized counterparts (males and whites, respectively). Recently,
              several investigators have suggested a social psychological explanation for
              these differences: academic situations (e.g., exam situations) are especially
              threatening to women and African-Americans due to the potential these
              situations are perceived to have in confirming the negative stereotype of low
              ability associated with these individuals. As difficulty is experienced in
              these situations, the threat of confirming the negative stereotype presumably
              evokes anxiety and self-doubt, thus interfering with intellectual functioning,
              which in turn leads to poor performance. Based on this logic, the proposed
              research will test the theoretical proposition that a stigmatized person's
              awareness of the improvement and mastery experienced on a set of study problems
              -- a pattern of performance described by the typical learning curve -- prior to
              taking an exam will improve the person's performance on the exam. Awareness of
              improvement and mastery is hypothesized to reduce the anxiety and self-doubt
              that is believed to impair the intellectual performance of stigmatized
              individuals (specifically, women and African Americans) in standardized and
              classroom testing situations in two ways. First, such awareness acts to provide
              a proximal and vivid example of one-s success in dealing effectively with
              difficult exam situations. Second, improvement as a result of practice tells
              the student that performance on the real exam is the result of a malleable
              skill, as opposed to a fixed ability. Thus, poor performance may be attributed
              to lack of sufficient practice, rather than poor native ability. The ultimate
              goal of this program of research is to provide scientists, educators, and
              students with a practical understanding of the relationship between preparation
              and academic performance in academically stigmatized (and possibly, math
              anxious) populations. Armed with such an understanding, academic performance
              among traditionally low-achieving groups can be markedly improved.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
