Title       : Collaborative Industrial/Academic Research on Alternate Phosgene Chemistry for
               Environmentally Benign Chemical Synthesis and Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9616601

Award Number: 9616601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Jones jones@chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9146,9187,EGCH,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Under the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaisons with Industry (GOALI)  
              initiative, the Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of   Multidisciplinary
              Activities of the Directorate for Mathematical and   Physical Sciences support
              the studies of Professor William Jones of the   Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Rochester.  Professor Jones,   in collaboration with Eastman
              Kodak Company, develops environmentally   more benign synthesis and processing
              chemistry for photographic chemicals   production through the replacement of
              phosgene as an acyl source in the   synthesis of thiocarbamate, urea, and
              isocyanate intermediates and   through the replacement of acyl chlorides in
              amide syntheses.    Replacement of phosgene with carbon monoxide is permitted
              by   newly-discovered transition-metal based catalysts which activate carbon  
              monoxide toward the sequential addition of nucleophiles, allowing the  
              formation of thiocarbamates and related functional groups from simple and  
              comparatively safe precursors.  Mechanistic studies of the catalytic   systems
              offer insights into improved catalyst design and will lead to the   extension
              of the scope of the catalysis to permit the coupling of other   hetero- and
              carbon-based nucleophiles.  Phosgene is an essential reagent in the synthetic
              chemicals industry, but   the hazards of this highly toxic gas to both human
              life and to the   environment are significant.  With support under the Grant
              Opportunities   for Academic Liaisons with Industry (GOALI) initiative,
              Professor Jones   explores the use of carbon monoxide as a comparatively safe
              substitute   for phosgene.  Although rather unreactive by itself, carbon
              monoxide may   be enticed through the use of metal-containing catalysts to form
              the same   products as are otherwise prepared from phosgene.  These studies may
              lead   to significant reductions in the use of phosgene in the large-scale  
              production of photographic chemicals at Eastman Kodak Company, a  
              coparticipant in this collaborative GOALI research program, and the  
              long-range implications of the studies go well beyond the photographic  
              chemicals arena.  Students and postdoctoral scholars involved in the   project
              will spend significant periods of time learning about and working   on process
              development chemistry in Kodak's laboratories, thereby   bringing this breadth
              of experience, not ordinarily encountered in the   academic environment, back
              to the University of Rochester.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
