Title       : Figure - Ground Segmentation and Shape Description
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9616555

Award Number: 9616555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon C. Baylis gordon@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie C. Baylis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9616555  BAYLIS  Though we all take for granted our amazing ability to see, the 
              process of vision is a very complex one.  In order to understand  vision it is
              necessary to subdivide it into a number of stages.   This project will
              investigate the first of these stages, in which  visual information is sorted
              or parsed initially.  The result of  visual parsing is that as we look at the
              world, we immediately  and without effort get an impression of a world that is
              comprised  of things within a scene.  This research derives from a theory of 
              visual parsing, due to Baylis and Driver, that says that deciding  which parts
              of a visual scene are objects and determining the  shapes of those objects are
              intermeshed processes.  The  experiments will test this theory.    Imagine that
              one is looking at a cup on a table.  Recognizing  that it is a cup requires
              knowledge that there is a "cup-shaped"  object lying on the table.  This in
              turn requires that we  appreciate that the outline of the cup "belongs" to the
              cup;  otherwise we might think there is a strange "cup-shaped" hole in  the
              table!  Baylis and Driver's theory holds that deciding that  the cup-shaped
              outline "belongs" to the cup, not the table, is a  largely automatic process;
              from this premise, the theory makes  specific predictions about which
              perceptual acts will be easy and  which will be hard.  The experiments will ask
              people to make  judgments about what they see and measure the speed and
              accuracy  of their judgments; it will thus test the theory of visual  parsing. 
                The fact that visual parsing in people is very fast, efficient,  and
              effortless belies the importance of this system.  It is not  possible to
              understand the processes of vision and visual  recognition without a clear
              understanding of the initial  processes of visual parsing.  There are many
              potential  applications of a better understanding of vision, including the 
              creation of automated vision systems for use in industry and  medicine.  Many
              attempts at machine vision have faile d primarily  because of inadequate visual
              parsing.  For example, an automated  system for detecting cancerous cells in a
              blood sample needs to  be able to "find" which regions of a slide are the cells
              and  which regions are the spaces between.  Similarly, it is easy to  see how
              catastrophic even a partial breakdown of visual parsing  would be to a person's
              ability to make sense of the visual world.   Many neuropsychological disorders
              in patients with brain damage  caused by strokes include impaired visual
              parsing.  Thus, a  better understanding of visual parsing and how it relates to
               other processes in vision will not only lead to a clearer  theoretical
              conception of how it takes place, but can also  ultimately lead to a better
              understanding of how visual parsing  breaks down in patients with brain damage,
              improve the  rehabilitation of patients with these problems, and help in the 
              design of machine vision systems.  ***
