Title       : RUI: Observations of Circumnuclear Rings in Starburst Spiral Galaxies and
               Supernovae Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1997      
File        : a9616824

Award Number: 9616824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71629              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra M. Elmegreen elmegreen@vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick R. Chromey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1217,9178,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT   D. ELMEGREEN    This Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI)
              award is for support  of two distinct but logistically and scientifically
              related projects in  observational astronomy.    The first project concerns
              starbursts in circumnuclear rings. Spiral  galaxies with starburst activity are
              often barred with nuclear rings  located near the inner Lindblad resonances
              (ILR's). The theory of gas  flow indicates that an ILR tends to trap gas that
              is flowing in because  of bar torques. The collected gas forms stars if a
              critical density is  exceeded. The project will compare bar properties (bar
              luminosity  fraction, radial profile, arm/interarm contrast) in bursting and
              non-  bursting galaxies. The star-forming properties of nuclear rings will 
              also be studied by monitoring 45 barred galaxies for ILR ring variation  due to
              supernovae or other events. Spectacular star formation rates in  ILR ring
              bursts suggest at least 0.5 ILR supernova per year in the  sample of 45
              galaxies. For various reasons, previous ILR supernovae are  likely to have been
              missed by existing search programs.    Data for the project will consist of
              data from our existing Kitt Peak  National Observatory (KPNO) 2.1m observations
              of several starburst  galaxies with high angular resolution in J and K bands,
              which reveal  ring structure that is described in published carbon monoxide
              (CO),  Hydrogen-alpha and Hubble Space Telescope (HST) observations. The 
              results from the analysis of the photometry of these rings will enable  one to
              estimate ages and stellar densities for comparison with  theoretical stability
              thresholds.   Existing and planned observations  on the Burrell-Schmidt 0.6
              meter telescope in the B and I band will  supplement planned BVRI 0.8 meter
              Vassar Observatory observations to  assess the bar properties of each galaxy,
              and 0.8 meter observations  will be used for the variability search.    The
              second project is to monitor extragalactic supernovae discovered by  others.
              Broadband (BVRI) light curves are a n important component in  understanding the
              nature of supernova explosions, serving as a  constraint on explosion and
              precursor models, a test of the homogeneity  of spectroscopic classification, a
              possible basis for the calibration  of type Ia distance indicators, a
              classification criterion for some  type II events, as well as important data
              for the determination of some  astrophysical parameters (such as distance, age
              at time of discovery,  explosion energy) for individual events. Unlike
              spectroscopic studies,  light curve monitoring requires a modest aperture, but
              a sizable time  commitment.    Searches typically find at least a half-dozen
              outbursts that will  remain within the photometric reach of the 0.8 meter
              telescope for  weeks or months each year. This project, which would build upon
              our  present collaboration with our colleagues in the Keck Northeast  Astronomy
              Consortium, would monitor each light curve on every clear  night until reaching
              signal-to-noise limits.    The new 0.8m telescope and CCD camera at the Vassar
              College Observatory  is expected to achieve first light in March 1997. This
              telescope will  be dedicated to the light curve project as well as to
              appropriate  segments of the barred spiral project, especially the search for 
              variability. Both projects will also make use of facilities at the  national
              astronomy observatories, and will involve undergraduate  students at every
              stage.
