Title       : Development of an Integrated Intelligent Structural Monitoring System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9616720

Award Number: 9616720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219559             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry T. Yang susan.cochran@chancellor.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project will carry out research toward development of monitoring systems
              for civil structures such as buildings, bridges and dams with uncertain
              structural properties and which are subject to seismic hazard.  Such a
              Intelligent Structural Monitoring System will be developed as an integrated
              unit consisting of three principal software modules, which will be interfaced
              with the physical civil structure:  a Decision Support Subsystem (an expert
              system), an Identification Subsystem, and a Robust Control Subsystem.  These
              modules will interact with each other in real-time.  The Decision Support
              Subsystem will employ advanced damage assessment technology to determine
              whether corrective control action is necessary.  The Identification Subsystem
              will ensure that the (mathematical) models of the structure and control devices
              are updated at appropriate acceptable time intervals.  The Robust Control
              Subsystem will actually synthesize the controller  based on the updated
              structural model and chosen performance objectives.  These objectives will be
              achieved by appropriate use of advanced control devices such as active tendons,
              active variable stiffness systems, active mass dampers, active base isolators,
              and others, or combinations of these.  The main objectives of this proposal
              are:  (1) develop a state-of-the-art expert system capable of inferring the
              existence, location and extent of structural damage, with remote data
              sensoring. (2) build system identification software tools capable of reliably
              building and updating structural models in presence of parameter uncertainties
              in real-time; (3) study and incorporate robust control techniques capable of
              meeting performance objectives in presence of incomplete information erroneous
              data, or control device failures; (4) to integrate the expert, identification
              and robust control subsystems into a single intelligent monitoring system; and
              (5) investigate the performance and the reliability of operation of such a
              system through simulation studies, and to make recommendations for its
              practical on-site deployment.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
