Title       : Robust Fuzzy Logic Control Strategies for Enhancing Power System Damping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9616631

Award Number: 9616631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267469             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Hashem Nehrir hnehrir@ece.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Pierre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammed Jamshidi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9616631  Nehrir    In order to fully utilize the transmission capacity of
              transmission lines, significant advances need to be achieved in power system
              control as applied to the damping of low frequency electromechanical
              oscillations.  Power system stability characteristics generally restrict the
              maximum allowable power transfers on transmission lines to be significantly
              below power transfers at thermal limits of the lines.  The stability
              characteristics of power systems depend on damping devices and damping control
              strategies employed.  While there are many devices that can be used in power
              systems to achieve damping, the strategies that are currently used to control
              these devices generally do not provide enough stability enhancement to enable
              operation of transmission lines near their thermal limits.  The development of
              better damping control strategies for large power systems is the focus of this
              research.    The characterization of large power systems in real time is
              difficult because of random load changes and time-varying operating conditions.
               One avenue to controlling systems that are not precisely characterized is
              fuzzy logic control (FLC).  FLC is a branch of intelligent control that
              currently is receiving considerable attention.  In the power systems area,
              several studies have been conducted recently on the use of FLC in small power
              systems.    In this research, we propose to explore ways in which FLC can be
              configured with power system control devices such as power system stabilizers
              and static VAR compensators to dampen low-frequency oscillations in large-scale
              power systems.  The first phase of the research will consist of a fundamental
              study to determine how FLC's can be structured in multiple-device nonlinear
              dynamic systems to increase damping and to enhance stability robustness.  Some
              preliminary design considerations in this regard are described in this
              proposal.  In the second phase of the research, methods of FLC design will be
              developed for use in conjunction with power  system control devices for robust
              damping of low-frequency local and interarea oscillations in large-scale power
              systems.  Alternative design strategies such as supplementary FLC and FLC with
              supervisory control and adaptive versions of fuzzy controllers suitable for
              application to large-scale power systems will be developed to account for wide
              variations in the system operating conditions.  Methods of tuning fuzzy
              controller parameters will be explored using advanced signal analysis and
              identification algorithms.    Several simulation models will be used. 
              Initially, controller design methodologies and performance will be evaluated on
              a basic three-machine, nine-bus power system.  This will be followed by a
              fundamental study and evaluation of their use on more complex systems,
              including a reduced-order (17-machine, 46-bus) model of the western North
              American power system.    The proposed research is a collaborative effort
              between the Department of Electrical Engineering at Montana State University
              (MSU) and that at the University of New Mexico (LTNM).  The lead institution
              will be MSU with primary expertise in power systems and control.  The
              University of New Mexico will participate in the work (20% of the effort), with
              primary expertise in fuzzy systems, and will explore conditions under which
              fuzzy logic control can guarantee stability of large-scale nonlinear dynamic
              systems with multiple oscillatory modes.  The work will foster collaborative
              efforts between faculty and graduate students at the two universities.  The
              research should advance the state of the art both in power system damping and
              FLC.  It will also have a big impact on graduate and undergraduate education;
              direct student involvement at both graduate and undergraduate levels has been
              planned.  One of the research tasks will involve participation of undergraduate
              students in the implementation of FLC controllers on laboratory-scale power
              systems.  Results of the research will be presented at appropriate conferences
              and will be pu blished in technical journals.
