Title       : Tailored Interfaces with Amphiphilic Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a9616797

Award Number: 9616797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew V. Tirrell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1773,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT  CTS-9616797    This proposal aims to explore the structure and
              Properties of adsorbed layers of block copolymers in which one block is a
              nonadsorbing polyelectrolyte and the other block is an adsorbing hydrophobic
              block.  the objective is to learn how to create layers of polymers on
              substrates in aqueous environments that confer useful properties on the solid
              interfaces.  Properties of interest might include adhesion, friction, particle
              and cellular deposition, surface charge, swelling, hydration and hardness.  The
              technological areas that this work will influence range from aqueous
              dispersions of particles, as in printing and coating, to biointerfaces, arising
              in biomaterials, drug delivery and biotechnology.  The proposed work will be
              based on the synthesis of several series of hydrophobically modified
              polyelectrolytes corresponding to the above description.  The synthesis will be
              controlled to produce systematic variations of well-defined molecular weights
              in each of the blocks, and with a variety of chemical species enabling
              controlled changes in segment hydrophilicity, linear charge density,
              populations of quenched vs. annealed charge sites, molecular architecture and
              chain flexibility to be explored.  Careful investigation of the solution
              preparation methods and properties is an essential feature of this work, since
              we anticipate that the properties of the surface layers can be strongly
              affected by the nature and history of the solutions from which they are
              prepared.  Adsorption of these molecules will be conducted under varying
              solution conditions and will be followed in real time by in situ ellipsometry,
              supported by exploratory studies of the layers by neutron reflection and
              related methods.  Properties of these layers, and additional structural
              information will be obtained by direct measurement of forces of interaction
              between the layers using the surface forces apparatus.  Frictional forces
              between the layers will be studied via a lateral force measurement attachment t
              o the surface forces instrument.  At the conclusion of this proposed work, we
              will have developed a body of data enabling the predictive design of aqueous
              interfaces decorated with polymeric amphiphiles.  We will determine how the
              adsorption of these polymers depends on molecular structure and solution
              properties, and, how an adsorbed layer of a certain molecular weight and chain
              density behaves with respect to normal and frictional force interactions.  The
              understanding of these properties will require an improved knowledge of
              polyelectrolyte physics, to which this work will contribute, as well as
              providing a body of data useful to engineers involved in the development and
              processing of soft materials and complex fluids.
