Title       : Mobile Doppler Radar Observations of Tornados
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9616730

Award Number: 9616730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Calvin T. Swift klemyk@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. McIntosh  (Principal Investigator former)
              Andrew L. Pazmany  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9616730  McIntosh        While much has been learned about the structure of
              tornadic storms over the  last few years, some problems still remain unsolved. 
              For example, progress has  been made over the last decade in understanding the
              structure of tornadic  thunderstorms and the general environment they create
              that is conducive for tornado  development.  Still unresolved, however, are
              details of how and why tornadoes are  triggered in some storms, but not in
              others and the knowledge of the detailed  structure of the tornado itself.     
                  Scientists from the University of Oklahoma and the University of 
              Massachusetts propose to continue a productive cooperative effort to study the
              near  environment and detailed structure of tornadoes.  In the first year of
              this project,  substantial improvements will be made to a mobile,
              high-resolution, ground-based,  3-mm wavelength, pulsed Doppler radar from the
              University of Massachusetts.  The  radar upgrades will allow collection of data
              with improved resolution in both time  and space.          In the second and
              third years, the improved mobile radar will be deployed in  a collaborative
              effort between the University of Massachusetts and scientists from  the
              University of Oklahoma.  The objective is to map the Doppler velocity and 
              reflectivity fields in and adjacent to tornadoes and their parent circulations.
               The  purpose of the experiment is to learn how and why tornadoes form, and to
              determine  their internal structure.          If successful the researchers
              will obtain the highest-resolution measurements  ever made of the structure of
              a tornado and its near environment.  This may lead to  better understanding of
              the process of tornado genesis and improved forecasts.   ***
