Title       : Workshop on Events as Grammatical Objects, Ithaca, N.Y., Summer 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9616591

Award Number: 9616591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17670              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol L. Tenny   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research in lexical semantics,  logical semantics, and syntax has converged on a
              growing recognition that the  grammars of natural languages structure and refer
              to events in particular ways. Lexical semanticists who have  studied how verb
              meanings are organized across languages, have observed recurrent patterns in
              how verbs encode  time, causation, stativity, and other characteristics of
              events. Logical semanticists who  have studied the truth-conditional properties
              of sentence meaning, have also found it necessary to refer to  elements of
              meaning related to the semantics of events, such as causation and temporal
              properties.  Syntacticians, studying the general structure of sentences of
              human languages, have discovered a growing body  of phenomena in which the
              semantics of events can be seen to interact with syntactic structures. These
              three  disciplines are concerned with different tools, approaches, and
              questions, but there is now enough convergence  on the idea of events as
              grammatical objects in both syntax and semantics, that dialogue and cooperative
               research across these disciplines is possible.     This is a workshop on
              Events as Grammatical Objects, from the combined perspectives of syntax,
              lexical  semantics, and logical semantics. This workshop brings together
              eminent researchers from these three areas  specifically to address this issue.
               A workshop is an excellent way to spark this interaction, that otherwise 
              would occur only sporadically if at all. This kind of meeting has not been
              attempted before. This workshop is  exceedingly cost-effective for a number of
              reasons. The workshop will be held at the Linguistic Society of  America's 1997
              Summer Institute at Cornell University, where some of the participants in the
              workshop will be  teaching courses, reducing travel expenditures. A number of
              courses relating to topics on the syntax or  semantics of events are planned
              for the 1997 Institute, and other scholars working on events will be able to 
              participate as part of the audience, i ncreasing the opportunities for
              productive dialogue on these topics.  Finally, cross-fertilization and joint
              research will multiply the effective power of these researchers to  attack the
              questions that could lead to an integrated theory of events in natural
              language.
