Title       : Robust Feedback Control of Improper Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1997 
File        : a9616567

Award Number: 9616567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302410             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Daniel Cobb cobb@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECDS-9616567  Cobb    Roughly speaking, an improper system is one whose gain
              increases over a large bandwidth.  In this project, we demonstrate the
              importance of the problem of feedback compensation for improper dynamic systems
              from both a theoretical and practical perspective.  In doing so, we highlight
              specific applications which are described most naturally by improper models and
              develop some preliminary theoretical results for the case of a single-input,
              single-output plant.  Our results show clearly the striking differences between
              the improper plant case and the heavily studied strictly proper case.  We then
              proceed to frame our preliminary findings in terms of the few existing results
              in the literature where improper systems are discussed explicitly.  The
              importance of improper models becomes clear when one distinguishes between
              actual system behavior and the model which is chosen to describe that behavior.
               In practice, every physical device exhibits decreasing gain at sufficiently
              high frequency.  Nevertheless, an improper model is sometimes still the most
              appropriate choice for analyzing a given plant, since the exact characteristics
              of the high-frequency roll-off may be difficult or impossible to establish and
              may occur well outside the frequency range of primary interest.  Also, a
              strictly proper perturbation of an improper model has higher order than the
              improper model itself and exhibits large separation of time scales, leading to
              difficult analytic and numerical problems.  Our main theoretical result states
              that, for an improper plant, stabilizing compensators are characterized not
              only by their effect on closed-loop poles but also by the high-frequency
              interaction of plant and compensator gains in the control loop.  The
              admissibility of this high-frequency loop interaction is determined entirely by
              the sign of the high-frequency loop gain.  This result is based on
              consideration of a large class of plant perturbations; it has no counterpart in
              the theory of strictly proper systems .  In the light of our results, some
              changes are required in those aspects of the literature which, at least
              superficially, pertain to the improper case.  For example, the celebrated
              Q-parametrization of stabilizing compensators does (at least nominally) apply
              to the improper plant case.  Our results demonstrate that a small modification
              of the theory is necessary, leading to a tightening of the constraint on the
              parameter Q.  A significant portion of our proposed research is experimental. 
              Several specific application areas are discussed in this proposal.  For
              example, certain problems in motion control of passenger vehicles lend
              themselves naturally to improper models.  We intend to pursue these problems in
              a laboratory setting with the intention of demonstrating the advantages of
              improper control design for certain important applications.  In the ECE
              Department at UW, we have a preexisting laboratory facility intended for
              precisely this kind of work.  Only small expenditures will be necessary for
              equipment, mainly in constructing non-traditional motion sensors.   We intend
              to carry out theoretical work which will extend the preliminary results
              discussed in this projectl to the multivariable case.  In principle, these
              results can be incorporated into most any area of control theory.  Some of the
              more interesting implications of our results are related to the
              well-established topics of Q-parametrization, robust stabilization, singular
              perturbations, singular systems, and H2 and H( optimality.  We propose to
              carefully develop appropriate generalizations of these theories to the improper
              plant case to the extent that time permits.  Simultaneously, we intend to
              verify the practicability of the results obtained relative to a variety of
              control problems by conducting real-time, hardware-based experiments in our
              existing laboratory facility.
