Title       : Mechanisms of Cleaning Organic Films from Solid Substrates using Aqueous and
               Organic Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9616638

Award Number: 9616638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine S. Grant grant@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Zietlow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ruben G. Carbonell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      ABSTRACT    CTS-9616638  C.  Grant/ P. Carbonell  NC State        The
              main objective of this work is to obtain fundamental insight into cleaning
              mechanisms in order to develop environmentally benign cleaning alternatives.
              Experiments will yield kinetic information about the removal of organic films
              from rotating disks using aqueous nonionic surfactant solutions in conjunction
              with organic solvents.  Such kinetic information gives insight into the
              mechanism of cleaning processes.  Because of the inherent immiscibility of the
              aqueous and organic phases, it is possible to partition the contaminant into
              the organic phase.  This enable the aqueous phase to be recycled, reducing the
              total volume of cleaning waste generated.  Both phases can bne analyzed to gain
              further insight to the stability of the resulting emulsion and the surfactant
              interactions with the organic sovent.  Prior to work by our group has allowed
              better understanding of the mechanism for abietic acid film removal from
              rotating disks using micellar and submicellar aqueous nonionic surfactant
              solutions.      From prior work, it was discovered that cleaning occurs by a
              three stage process.  The first state is controlled y the solubilization of the
              organic phase through surfactant penetration and subsequent mass transfer from
              the interface to the bulk aqueous solution.  During the first stage, the film
              absorbs water from the aqueous solution reducing its viscosity, until drops
              start to move on the disk surface under the action of shear forces.  These
              drops aggregate into spiral-shaped continuous rivulets through which the
              organic phase flows until it comes off the disk edge.  Such behavior occurs
              during the second stage of cleaning, which has a rate of removal appreciably
              faster than the first stage.  The rivulets eventually break, leading to a third
              stage with lower removal rates, in which the removal mechanism is apparently
              the roll up of organic phase drops under the action of shear forces. 
              Photographs showing the morphology  of the film structure in the different
              cleaning stages provide experimental evidence that supports the described
              mechanism.  A model was derived that relates the empirical observations of
              cleaning rates to physical parameters describing solubilizing film
              hydrodynamics.   The proposed research will investigate the combined rates of
              hydrodynamics, dissolution, and partitioning in the removal of two
              contaminants:  abietic acid and polybutene form different solid
              substrates(i.e., exopy-glass laminate, copper, nickel).  This work will also
              study the phase separation behavior of the contaminated effluent in an effort
              to recycle the cleaning solution.  Our research will be unique because an
              organic solvent will be used in conjunction with an aqueous nonionic surfactant
              solution allowing for reuse of the aqueous cleaning solution.  The proposed
              research will be carried out in collaboration with CORPEX Technologies, Inc. in
              Research Triangle Park, NC through         the NSF GOALI program.  CORPEX
              Technologies manufactures cleaning solutions that are combinations of
              surfactants and organic solvents.  Preliminary experiments conducted at CORPEX
              Technologies have determined that the addition of an organic solvent to an
              aqueous solution will increase the rate of cleaning when used with surfactants.
               In addition, once cleaning is complete the organic solvent can be phase
              separated from the aqueous solution.  The organic contaiminant (i.e.,grease or
              oil) partitions into the organic phase,  leaving a very clean aqueous solution.
               This minimizes waste water generation and produces only a small amount of
              organic waste.   In prior work exclusively with aqueous based cleaners, the
              amount of contaminant removed from the rotating disk was continuously measured
              as a function of time in the bulk cleaning solution using a UV absorbance
              detector.  With the addition of an organic solvent, however, the cleaning
              solution becomes turbid.  As a result, optical techniques such as UV absorbance
              can not be used.  To circumvent t his problem, radioactive tracers will be
              mixed with the organic contaminant.  This contaminant will be spin coated onto
              the disk to form a uniform film.  During cleaning experiments, an on-line
              liquid scintillation analyzer will be employed to continuously detect the
              amount of contaminant removed from the disk.  The heterogeneous scintillation
              analyzer created scintillation by passing the sample over solid beads as
              opposed to mixing with a liquid cocktail.   The fundamental cleaning
              information obtained by this project will assist CORPEX Technologies in its
              continuing development of environmentally friendly cleaning solutions.  The
              majority of the experimental work will be done at NCSU.  However, the close
              proximity to CORPEX will enhance the technical interaction and enable a rapid
              transfer of technology from NCSU to CORPEX.
