Title       : Mathematical Science: RUI: Collaborative Research Nonlinear Population Dynamics:
               Mathematical Models, Biological Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1998     
File        : a9616205

Award Number: 9616205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Desharnais   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    213/224-3481

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9169,9229,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9616205  Desharnais       A central question in population biology is that of 
              understanding and explaining observed fluctuations in animal  numbers.  The
              study of nonlinear dynamics has opened the way to a  new phase of population
              research in which experiments are focused  directly on phenomena such as
              equilibria, periodic and aperiodic  cycles, and chaos.  The investigators
              undertake a spectrum of  activities essential to the testing of nonlinear
              population  theory: from the translation of biology into the formal language 
              of mathematics, to the analysis of mathematical models, to the  development and
              application of statistical techniques for the  analysis of data, to the design
              and implementation of biological  experiments.  Laboratory populations of flour
              beetles of the genus  Tribolium are used in the experiments.  By means of their
              studies  the investigators provide rigorous experimental tests of  nonlinear
              population phenomena and behavior.  These include: (1)  dynamical transitions
              from stable equilibria, to invariant loops  (aperiodicities), to period
              locking, to strange attractors and  chaos; (2) transient and intermittent
              dynamics with aims towards  defining practical concepts of intermittency for
              use with  stochastic population models and the testing of some of the  unusual
              transient behaviors forecast by stochastic nonlinear  models; (3) the dynamics
              of meta-populations using beetle  populations linked by migration; and (4) the
              dynamical behaviors  that can be produced by the interaction of environmental 
              periodicities with nonlinear demographic effects.       The investigators study
              how biological populations (in  particular, populations of insects) fluctuate
              in time and how  different circumstances can lead to drastically different, and
               sometimes unexpected, changes in these fluctuations.  This study  is carried
              out by means of an interdisciplinary program that  integrates the use of
              sophisticated mathematical models and  statistical analysis with the design and
              implementation of   laboratory experiments using species of beetles that are 
              economically important insect pests.  The investigators seek to  describe and
              explain a variety of patterns in population  fluctuations, ranging from those
              that are regular and predictable  to those that are irregular and "chaotic."
              They seek to  understand the environmental conditions that give rise to these 
              various kinds of population behavior.  This understanding is  essential if the
              impact on biological populations of  environmental perturbations and
              manipulations (by Man or by  Nature) is to be predicted.  These impacts have
              far-reaching  consequences, ranging from food production and pest control to 
              wildlife management and the conservation of species diversity.
