Title       : U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Studies on Fibre-Matrix Bonding and Physical
               Properties of Carbon-Carbon Composites Made with Carbon Fibres of Different
               Morphologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1999    
File        : a9616298

Award Number: 9616298
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19355              (Estimated)
Investigator: L M. Manocha 91269230238  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sardar Patel University
	      
	      Gujarat, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9616298  Manocha  Description:  This is a research project in materials
              science entitled U.S.-India  Cooperative Research: Studies of  Fiber Matrix
              Bonding and Physical Properties of   Carbon-Carbon Composites Made with Carbon
              Fibers of Different Morphologies.  The  project which adds an international
              component to domestic research is under the  direction of Danny Edie of 
              Clemson University and L.M. Manocha of Sardar Patel  University.  The goal of
              the research is to develop a low-cost carbon fiber for high-  performance
              materials.  The ongoing NSF supported research at Clemson has shown  that
              mechanical and thermal properties of low-cost pitch-based carbon fibers can be 
              greatly improved by producing non-circular fibers.  The ultimate properties of 
              these  non-circular fibers are influenced by flow conditions during extrusion
              and the  molecular make-up of  the mesophase precursor.  The collaboration with
              Professor  Manocha s group will permit  testing and evaluation of  these
              non-circular fibers in  carbon/polymer and carbon/carbon composites.  This
              addition to the testing at Clemson  will determine if the enhanced fiber
              properties translate into improved composite  performance.      Scope:  This
              collaboration  adds an important dimension to domestic research  through   the
              inclusion of complimentary Indian expertise in fabrication and characterization
              of  carbon/carbon composites. The Indian counterpart heads a strong research
              program in  this area and is recognized internationally for his work with this
              class of high-  temperature materials.  The U.S. investigator s expertise is in
              fiber formation and  characterization. The project  provides an opportunity for
              graduate students at both  universities to gain a unique research  perspective
              through  participation in an  international team. This joint effort is well
              balanced technically and should  result in   mutual benefits.           ***
