Title       : Attenuation Mechanisms and Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1999    
File        : a9616013

Award Number: 9616013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn J. Rix glenn.rix@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Carlos Santamarina  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: CMS-9616013, Glenn Rix, Georgia Tech    The response of particulate
              materials such as soils to  dynamic loads is characterized by the velocity and 
              attenuation spectra over a range of frequencies. Prior  research on the
              near-surface characterization of soil  deposits has emphasized the study of
              velocity, due in part  to difficulties in measuring attenuation in the
              laboratory  and field. However attenuation data can be uniquely used to  more
              fully characterize the response of near-surface soils  to dynamic loads.    The
              particulate nature of soil and the attenuation due to  geometric spreading and
              wave-phenomena add to the complexity  of evaluating the loss mechanisms for
              material attenuation  in soil. The objectives of this research program are to 
              enhance the understanding of loss mechanisms in near-surface  soils and to
              develop robust assessment procedures. The  problem is approached from two
              extreme scales: the  clarification of underlying physical processes at the 
              microscale and the development of adequate methods for field  (i.e.,
              macroscale) measurement. These are initial steps  toward developing laboratory
              and field measurement  procedures which reflect a detailed understanding of the
               loss mechanisms.    Research tasks include the study of energy losses in
              double  layers (micro-level simulations and experimental studies), 
              reassessment of hysteretic losses at low strain in light of  new
              phenomenological hypotheses (experimental studies), and  development of active
              and passive field testing procedures  (analytical, model, and field studies).
              Specialized devices,  new laboratory and field measurement procedures, and
              unique  simulation software and algorithms are used.    An improved
              understanding of loss mechanisms and the  development of new methods of
              assessment will enhance the  ability to characterize near-surface materials
              (e.g., aging,  chemical effects, saturation), and improve the wave-based 
              monitoring of geoprocesses (e.g., inversion of state of  stress in situ, assess
              ment of the spatial evolution of  liquefaction, and response of systems to
              dynamic  excitation). The improved understanding of material loss  mechanisms
              and advances in field assessment methods will  also benefit site
              characterization for earthquake hazard  mitigation.
