Title       : Soft X-ray Molecular Spectroscopy: Dissecting the Continuum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9616908

Award Number: 9616908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erwin D. Poliakoff epoliak@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program   of
              the Chemistry Division, Poliakoff will identify and characterize   aspects of
              the photoelectron ejection process which retain their   molecular character far
              from threshold using soft X-ray molecular   spectroscopy.  Electronically
              excited photoions will be created using   tunable synchrotron radiation, and
              their dynamics will be investigated   via their dispersed fluorescence.  These
              studies are unique in that the   range of kinetic energies probed extends
              hundreds of eV into the   ionization continuum, where the molecular character
              of the electron   ejection still persists.  Vibrational and rotational energy
              deposition   into molecular photoions over a broad range of photoionization
              energies   will be determined.  Earlier experiments on simple molecules will be
                extended to examine small polyatomic molecules.  The results of these  
              experiments will provide a useful database for experiments employing  
              photoionization and will furnish insights into fundamental scattering  
              phenomena, thereby aiding the continued development of molecular   scattering
              theory.    In the experiments performed in this project, the motions that
              electrons   make when molecules dissociate under the influence of  high-energy
              light   will be correlated with the motions of the nuclei.  The light used in  
              these studies will come in part from a synchrotron radiation source at  
              Louisiana State University.  The data acquired in these studies is  
              inaccessible by other  techniques and will be used to guide and shape  
              theoretical models for these processes.  Some of the processes studied in  
              this project are relevant to understanding the physical and chemical  
              reactions involved in the X-ray processing of materials.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
