Title       : Accuracy of Thin Slice Judgements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1997     
File        : a9616761

Award Number: 9616761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25974              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nalini Ambady na@wjh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Description. Recent research on person perception has shown that people
              can make surprisingly accurate judgments based on minimal information. The
              proposed research will address conceptual gaps in knowledge about judgmental
              accuracy by integrating theoretical and empirical approaches from the areas of
              nonverbal communication, social cognition, and personality psychology. The
              objective of the proposed research is to examine several possible mechanisms
              that might account for the accuracy of `thin slice` judgments. Variables to be
              investigated can be classified into three major categories: variables relating
              to characteristics of the target, to the information judged, and to
              characteristics of the judges. By examining several mediating variables within
              each of these categories, it should be possible to identify the major variables
              and combinations of variables that influence the accuracy of judgments that are
              based on minimal information.  %%%  Project Justification. Recent research has
              shown that people can make surprisingly accurate judgments based on minimal
              information (such as a 2-second video clip of another person). The objective of
              this proposal is to examine several possible mechanisms that might explain the
              accuracy of such judgments. These include variables related to characteristics
              of the person being judged, variables related the people who are making the
              judgments, and variables related to the type of information that is available
              to the judges. The goal of this research is to identify the major variables and
              combinations of variables that influence the accuracy of judgments that are
              based on minimal information.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
