Title       : Spectroscopy of Multiply-Charged Transition Metal Ions Clustered with Solvent
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9616606

Award Number: 9616606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynmarie A. Posey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lynmarie Posey of Vanderbilt University is supported by the Experimental  
              Physical Chemistry Program to study the gas-phase spectroscopy of  
              doubly-charged transition metal (TM) ions clustered with solvent.    
              Coordinated doubly-charged TM ions are quite common in the condensed   phase,
              but not in the gas phase, since the second ionization potential   (IP) of the
              metal is greater than the ligand IP, and the metal ion repels   the resulting
              positive ligand.  Electrospray ionization (ESI) has been   used to transfer the
              clustered doubly-valent ion from the condensed to   the gas phase, without
              reduction of the metal.  She will combine ESI and   laser spectroscopy to study
              (a) the electronic absorption spectroscopy of   the neutral solvent to assess
              the electronic or structural perturbations   resulting from coordination or
              electrostatic binding; (b) change in the   lowest energy ligand-to-metal charge
              transfer band as a function of the   number of solvent molecules; (c) d-d
              transitions.  Systems to be   investigated are first row TM ions clustered with
              various neutral solvent   molecules which differ in their basicity, polarity,
              steric bulk and   vibrational structure.    Most of the interesting chemistry
              involving transition metals occurs in   the condensed phase yet the analytical
              tools providing the most precise   information are often gas-phase techniques. 
              It is clear then that one   must ensure that the gas-phase system and condensed
              phase system are as   similar as possible.  The electrospray ionization
              technique will allow   transfer of the chemically interesting solution phase
              species to the gas   phase where high resolution laser spectroscopy can be
              brought to bear to   provide extremely detailed information on the structure of
              the divalent   transition metal ions.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
