Title       : Collaborative Project: Identification of a Common Coat Protein Binding Domain in
               the Ilarvirus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9616300

Award Number: 9616300
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Sue Loesch-Fries   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9616300  Loesch-Fries  The long-range goals of this project are to understand
              how specific ribonucleoprotein complexes form; to define their structure, and
              most importantly, to understand their biological significance. The immediate
              experimental goals of this work will be accomplished by studying a model virus
              system that has been developed collaboratively in two laboratories. Although
              the coat proteins of alfalfa mosaic virus and the ilarviruses are both
              unrelated at the primary amino acid level and serologically distinct, they are
              functionally interchangeable in their capacity to bind different viral RNAs and
              to activate virus replication. These investigations will biochemically identify
              common nucleotide determinants in alfalfa mosaic virus and ilarvirus RNAs that
              are bound specifically by the viral coat proteins. The biochemical data will
              then be extended by evaluating RNA and/or protein sequence mutations in the
              context of functional virus replication and assembly.  Two experimental
              approaches will be followed to identify the nucleotide sequences and structures
              required for coat protein binding.  First, electrophoretic mobility bandshift
              analysis, hydroxyl radical footprinting, and chemical modification interference
              analysis will be used to analyze the binding of citrus variegation virus (CVV)
              coat protein and citrus leaf rugose virus (CiLRV) coat protein to the 3'
              untranslated region of AlMV RNA (170 nucleotides) and to a 3'-terminal
              39-nucleotide minimal coat protein binding site that has been described
              previously. These experiments will permit comparison of the binding
              determinants recognized by the cognate (AlMV) and heterologous (CVV/CiLRV) coat
              proteins. Second, in vitro selection of RNA ligands from a pool of random or
              semi-random oligoribonucleotides will be used to identify 1) sequences and/or
              structures in the RNA determinant that are essential for binding AlMV, CVV, or
              CiLRV coat proteins, and 2) new RNA sequences and/or structures that display
              enhanced binding affinity for AlMV  and ilarvirus coat proteins. The biological
              significance of the identified RNA-protein interactions will be evaluated using
              two distinct assay systems: 1) a virus replication assay in tobacco
              protoplasts, in which the ability of the small selected RNAs to inhibit virus
              production will be analyzed and 2) an assay to evaluate AIMV RNA 3 replication
              and assembly in cells or protoplasts that transiently or constitutively express
              AIMV replicase proteins. The work has significance for greater understanding of
              RNA-protein interactions and the life cycle of viruses that infect a wide range
              of plants.  ***
