Title       : Molecular Genetics of Pre-Mating Reproductive Isolation in Mimulus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9616522

Award Number: 9616522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey D. Bradshaw toby@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas W. Schemske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Olmstead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9616522  Bradshaw    In the central Sierra Nevada mountains of California
              there are two monkeyflower species, Mimulus lewisii and M. cardinalis, which
              are pollinated by different animals -- M. lewisii is bumblebee-pollinated,
              while M. cardinalis is pollinated by hummingbirds.  The flowers of each Mimulus
              species differ in color, size, shape, and nectar production to best attract the
              appropriate pollinator.  The two monkeyflower species do not crossbreed in
              nature because of their different pollinators, but artificial hybrids can be
              produced easily by hand-pollination.  Offspring from the hybrids display a
              tremendous variety of floral traits, since each offspring has inherited part of
              its genome from a bee-pollinated ancestor and part from a
              hummingbird-pollinated ancestor.  No two hybrid offspring are exactly alike.  
              More than 200 hybrid offspring will be taken to Yosemite National Park in
              California, where M. lewisii and M. cardinalis are found together naturally,
              and the rates of bumblebee and hummingbird visitation measured by direct
              observation.  New genome mapping techniques, originally developed for studying
              human disease and for plant and animal breeding, will be used to determine
              which genes in the flowers are responsible for attracting bumblebees and
              hummingbirds.  The working hypothesis is that a few genes, such as those
              governing flower color and nectar production, will have a large impact on which
              pollinator chooses to visit a particular flower.   Investigating the genetics
              of speciation -- the process by which one species splits into two or more new
              species -- is fundamental to understanding the origin of biodiversity. 
              Speciation results from genetic changes that prevent the two species from
              crossbreeding.  Since Darwin, there has been debate about the number and
              magnitude of genetic changes required for speciation.  One view is that
              reproductive isolation is the cumulative result of many mutations, each with a
              small effect, over long periods of time.  Alternatively, others have  suggested
              that a few genes of large effect play a prominent role, and that speciation
              could occur rapidly.  This issue has not been resolved, largely because
              detailed genetic studies have been limited to a few organisms, such as fruit
              flies, which have a long history as experimental models.  Improved methods in
              genome research make it feasible to use wild monkeyflower species to establish
              a synthesis of modern laboratory molecular biology with ecological studies in
              the field.  This general approach could be used to address many long-standing
              questions in biology.
