Title       : Late Adolescents in Transition: Temperament, Stress, and Social Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1997      
File        : a9616350

Award Number: 9616350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35929              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Levitt levitmj@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia E. Silver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Description.  Based on the Convoy Model of social relations, this study
              is designed to assess continuity and change in the individual's network of
              relationships across the late adolescent transition.  Specific aims are (a) to
              assess changes within the adolescent's social network subsequent to leaving
              high school, (b) to examine the impact of temperamental adaptability and
              situational life stress on the post-transition network, and (c) to link
              functional changes in the network to post-transition adjustment.  A second wave
              of data will be collected from an ethnically diverse sample of 745 students
              surveyed in 1995, during their sophomore or senior year of high school.  It is
              proposed that alterations in the social network will be related specifically to
              the transition, that lower adaptability and greater stress will compromise the
              supportiveness of the post-transition network, and that network supportiveness
              will play a significant role in adjustment.  The results will enhance
              understanding of social network evolution through developmental time.  &&& 
              Project Justification.  The transition from adolescence to adulthood may be the
              most difficult period encountered normatively across the life span.  Factors
              associated with successful navigation of this important passage are the focus
              of this research.  Follow-up data will be collected from 745 adolescents who
              were surveyed initially in 1995, during their sophomore or senior year in high
              school.  The goals are to map the changes that occur in the adolescent's 
              social support system subsequent to leaving school and to learn how changes in
              the support system affect post-transition adjustment.  Adolescents who
              generally have greater difficulty adapting to changed circumstances and those
              with higher levels of life stress are expected to have less optimal support
              systems and poorer adjustment following the transition.  This study is unique
              in its inclusion of minority students and of `the forgotten half` of students
              who do not attend college.  The results will enhance our knowledge of the
              operation of social support across crucial life transitions.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
