Title       : RUI: The Universe at Redshifts 1-1000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a9616971

Award Number: 9616971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203988             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. B. Partridge bpartrid@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1217,9178,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  Partridge    The galaxies and clusters now visible in the Universe
              grew from small  perturbations in density present at very early times,
              corresponding to  redshifts >1000. Many details of this evolutionary process
              are poorly  understood. In particular, we have only rudimentary (but rapidly
              improving)  understanding of the formation of cosmic structure in the first 5
              billion  years after the recombination of the primeval plasma, that is in the
              large  range of redshifts 1-1000.    Refined radio-wavelength searches for
              various classes of fluctuations in  the cosmic microwave background radiation
              (CBR) will tell us more about the  early phases of structure formation, at the
              high end of this crucial  redshift interval. Optical, IR and radio observations
              of galaxies or galaxy  fragments at z = 1-3 are already providing important
              clues to the final  stages of galaxy formation (e.g., the onset of star
              formation).    Searches for CBR fluctuations and radio wavelength observations
              of high  redshift galaxies will be carried out.  The goal of the research is to
              help  bridge the gap in our understanding of cosmic evolution during the epoch 
              corresponding to redshifts (z) = 1-1000.    A study of the Hubble Deep Field at
              radio wavelengths will be carried out.  The Hubble Deep Field (HDF) is a small
              but typical region of the sky  selected by astronomers for intensive study at
              all wavelengths, beginning  with a very deep Space Telescope exposure late last
              year. The aim is to use  observations across the electromagnetic spectrum to
              move our understanding  of galaxy evolution forward. Our radio observations
              will be carried out at  the Very Large Array at 8.4 and 1.4 GHz and with
              angular resolution from  10" down to 0.4" (close to the Space Telescope
              resolution).  Among the  scientific goals of our observations are:  --measuring
              radio spectra and morphologies to determine the nature of the  radio emission
              (synchrotron from supernova activity? active galactic  nuclei?)    --refining
              counts of radio source s at low flux densities    --examining the correlation
              of radio and optical luminosities    --improving limits on fluctuations in the
              CBR on angular scales 6"-80"    --searching for the microwave signals produced
              by clusters or protoclusters  of galaxies at z > 1.    Several related projects
              will parallel these efforts, including further  work on foreground sources of
              noise which interfere with searches for CBR  fluctuations, planning for a
              European space mission to map the CBR, and  near infrared observations of both
              high redshift galaxies already observed  at the VLA and of the 2-4 micron
              cosmic microwave background.    A postdoctoral associate will assist in some or
              all of these projects. The  position is intended, however, to provide the
              postdoc with further  experience and training in both teaching and research. In
              addition to his  or her research involvement, the postdoc would design and
              teach one course  per year at Haverford, under the close supervision and
              mentoring of members  of our department.  Undergraduate students will be
              involved in various  aspects of the research.
