Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Hermits, Kings, and Convergence: Integrating Molecules
               and Morphology to Study the Phylogenetic Relationships of the Anomura
               (Crustacea: Decapoda)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1997  
File        : a9616259

Award Number: 9616259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan W. Harvey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9616259  HARVEY    Hermit crabs are best known for using empty snail shells as
              shelters. Most morphological features that define hermit crabs as a group seem
              to be adaptations to the asymmetrically coiled shell. A surprising number of
              species, however, use objects other than snail shells for shelters, or use no
              shelter at all. These hermit crabs tend to be more symmetrical than their
              shell-using relatives, and those that use no shelters are also often
              "carcinized"; that is, the abdomen is reduced and tucked under a wide, heavily
              armored carapace.  Such crabs may not be recognized as hermit crabs, but may
              instead be wrongly placed in other crab groups.  The lack of a reliable
              phylogenetic history has made it impossible to resolve long-standing questions
              concerning the evolution of shell use, asymmetry and carcinization in hermit
              crabs.    In this collaborative research project, Alan Harvey (morphology) and
              Cliff Cunningham (molecular sequences) will integrate extensive morphological
              and molecular data to generate a robust phylogeny for the hermit crabs and
              their allies (i.e., the Anomura). With this phylogeny, Harvey and Cunningham
              will determine 1) how many times anomuran crustaceans independently adopted the
              shell-using habit; 2) whether the carcinized morphology of nonshelter-using
              hermit crabs evolved from the asymmetrical morphology of shell-using hermit
              crabs, or vice versa; 3), which features of both the carcinized and
              asymmetrical morphologies are influenced by the presence and type of shelter
              used by hermit crabs.
