Title       : Photoinduced Electron Transfer in Porphyrin-Bilayers: Raman Spectroscopy and
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  1998    
File        : a9616128

Award Number: 9616128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Akins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/541-0434

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Daniel Akins of CUNY City College is supported by the Experimental   Physical
              Chemistry Program to investigate electron transfer (ET) between   donors and
              acceptor molecules in ordered molecular matrices using   picosecond
              time-resolved Raman spectroscopy.  His research will focus on   (a) structural
              changes accompanying ET; (b) the interplay between the   conformational change
              induced in neighboring molecules and the ET   process; and (c) a system in
              which porphyrin derivatives are positioned   in artificial matrices with
              well-defined distances and orientations.  The   PI will investigate the
              structural changes of the scattering species   (reactant, intermediate, product
              species or matrix) as a function of time   after the photoinitiated ET process.
               Specific experiments include   monitoring conformational change in a model
              system:  a synthetic bilayer   with intercalated donor and acceptor of known
              distances and orientations,   and measuring rates of ET as either separation
              distance or orientation is   varied.    These studies focus on electron
              transfer between molecules embedded or   attached to media that separate and
              orient electron donors and acceptors.    Alignment systems of this nature are
              crucial for important biological   processes such as enzymatic reactions and
              photosynthesis.  Some practical   `spin-offs` that may be facilitated by an
              improved understanding of ET   are the use of synthetic ET systems in
              bioengineering applications such   as drug delivery and the elucidation of the
              cancer-killing mechanisms of   some drugs.  In addition, improved knowledge
              might enable us to design   efficient artificial molecular devices for
              capturing and storing solar   energy and for information processing at very
              high efficiencies.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
