Title       : Dissertation Research: Collapse and Development: A Study of Late Prehistoric
               Society in the Nasca Region of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  1996   
File        : a9616637

Award Number: 9616637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharina J. Schreiber schreibk@sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, MS Christina Conlee will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct one season of
              archaeological excavation, followed by subsequent analysis, at the site of
              Pajonal Alto which is located in the Targua Valley in northern Peru. The
              settlement covers the time interval from ca. 800 B.C. through the colonial
              period and is located on a natural sand mound next to the Taruga River. Flanked
              by cemeteries on the east and west the sites covers almost two hectares and
              consists of several distinct architectural sectors. Due to heavy rains in the
              Peruvian highlands in 1993 and 1994 portions of the site were destroyed and
              emergency recording procedures were conducted in response to the deteriorating
              condition of the site. They revealed the presence of extensive materials which
              date to the Late Intermediate period from ca. 1,000 to 1,500 AD. MS Conlee will
              conduct an extensive horizontal excavation in one compound to determine spatial
              organization and collect data which will provide information on subsistence and
              other aspects of material culture. She will also undertake excavation of
              stratified deposits to construct a detailed ceramic sequence and to determine
              changes in Late Intermediate site organization over time. Cultural material
              recovered during excavation will be identified, counted and weighed. This
              information, in conjunction with spatial data, will be analyzed to establish
              subsistence practices, trade patterns, economic specialization and social
              differentiation  throughout the late prehistoric period.   While archaeologists
              have focused significant attention on how empires arise and are maintained,
              relatively little information is available the process of collapse and how
              constituent units respond when the larger encompassing system is destroyed.
              Prehistoric Peru provides an excellent opportunity to examine this question
              because over several millennia it witnessed the rise and subsequent collapse of
              several empires. The period which MS Conlee will study begins with the fall of
              the Wari Empire, encompasses a period of local development and then ends with
              the rise of the Inca. MS Conlee has proposed several models which serve to
              explain how the Nasca region was integrated into Wari and how it responded to
              the Wari collapse. She has also outlined the material correlates of these
              different scenarios and through her fieldwork will collect data to permit
              differentiation among them  This research is important for several reasons. It
              will shed new light on a little known period of Peruvian prehistory and provide
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase understanding of the
              processes involved in devolution of social complexity and assist in training a
              promising young scientist.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
