Title       : Infants' Individuation of Physical Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1999     
File        : a9616342

Award Number: 9616342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Leslie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9616342  LESLIE  The human brain is sufficiently organized in the first year of 
              life to support the emergence of higher cognitive functions.  One  key function
              is the recognition of physical objects in a changing  environment.  Existing
              research shows that infants have  impressive abilities in this regard.  This
              project will  investigate the development of the cognitive mechanisms 
              underlying this skill.  The approach will draw upon recent  advances in
              understanding mechanisms of visual attention in  adults.  A series of
              experiments will explore how infant  attention picks out and "holds onto"
              physical objects under a  variety of circumstances.  The brain mechanisms
              underlying such  skills are crucial for learning about the world, for learning 
              verbal labels, and for developing numeracy.  The ability to  attend to physical
              objects requires that objects be distinguished  from one another.  One way this
              can be done is to recognize that  two objects have distinctive features. 
              Another way is simply to  note that the objects simultaneously occupy different
              locations  in space.  These simple solutions do not always work (a) because 
              objects can change the features they present (e.g., with a change  in
              viewpoint) and (b) because objects can move in and out of view  (e.g., by
              passing behind an occluder).  For organisms that live  in a complex, moving,
              three dimensional world, such complex  changes are the rule rather than the
              exception.  The problem that  this creates for infants as they track physical
              objects can be  likened to a radar operator who has to track "objects" on a
              radar  screen.  When two blips appear on different locations on the  screen,
              the operator can register the number and location of the  objects and track
              them continuously as they move across the  screen.  However, one of the blips
              might move off the edge of the  screen and after a short period another blip
              might appear.  Is  this the same object as the one that disappeared?  How many 
              objects should the operator report, two or t hree?  The infant  brain must
              regularly face a similar dilemma because of gaze  redirection, occlusions, and
              so forth.  Physical objects in the  world do not have transponders to identify
              themselves to the  infant brain!  Despite this, infants manage to identify and
              track  physical objects, learn verbal labels for them, and even to  enumerate
              small sets of objects.  This project will investigate  how infants first
              individuate, then re-identify physical objects  that from time to time pass
              behind occluders.  Experiments will  measure how infants allocate their visual
              attention to physical  objects based on both locational and featural
              information and on  the integration of the two kinds of information. 
              Experiments  will also determine what limit there may be on how many objects 
              infants can track at any one time.  The results of these studies  will reveal
              properties of early emerging, and thus basic, brain  functions that support
              learning and general cognitive  development.  Longer term, such investigations
              will bear upon  early brain and cognitive development and education issues as 
              well upon the design of artificial systems that can behave  intelligently in
              complex environments.  ***
