Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: Visually Servoed Micromanipulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1997   
File        : a9616757

Award Number: 9616757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60017              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley J. Nelson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9616757  Nelson, Bradley J.  University of Illinois at Chicago    CISE Research
              Instrumentation: Visually Servoed Micromanipulation     The research projects
              supported by this award address a potential technology barrier to the
              commercial success of MEMS devices by theoretically and experimentally
              investigating micropart manipulation of rigid and deformable objects. The
              equipment provided by this award, high performance computing hardware for image
              processing and computer graphics, microforce sensors, micro positioning
              devices, and high resolution optics, are an important part of the following
              projects:  Visually  Servoed Micromanipulators for Automatic Assembly and
              Packing of MEMS Devices- Sensor-Based Manipulation of Deformable Objects and 
              Microstructures The first investigates and develops  visually servoed
              micromanipulators including development of a real-time task representation
              defined in terms of geometric object models of rigid objects, sensor models,
              and the microphysics of micromanipulation.  The latter investigates and
              develops a real-time task representation defined in terms of deformable object
              models of rigid objects, sensor models, and the microphysics of
              micromanipulation.  The projects pursue experimental and theoretical analyses
              that illuminate the similarities and differences between sensor-based
              manipulation in macro and micro domains. The realization of successful
              micromanipulation strategies contributes to the development of automatic
              assembly machines for assembling and packaging future MEMS devices that require
              increasingly complex assembly strategies.
