Title       : Metallaborane Chemsitry. Synthesis of New Main Group Transition Element Cluster
               Types
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9616852

Award Number: 9616852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Fehlner thomas.p.fehlner.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Thomas P. Fehlner, Department of Chemistry, University of Notre Dame,   is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program   of the
              Chemistry Division for the synthesis of new clusters containing   both
              main-group and transition-metal atoms. The project is a three   pronged
              investigation. The first part will explore the chemistry of   chromaborane and
              related clusters where electron delocalizion can occur   throughout the cluster
              network. The chemistry of these compounds will be   used to define the reactive
              sites on the clusters, which will then be   related to the clusters' electronic
              structure. Second, efficient   synthetic routes, which begin from known
              monocyclopentadienyl metal   complexes,  will be developed for dimetallaboranes
              containing a wide   ranging of metals. Thirdly, these dimetallaboranes will be
              used as   ligands to low valent metal fragments in order to form polymetallic  
              species where a transition metal cluster serves as a complex ligand.   The
              chemistry of the transition metals when combined with carbon   containing
              substituents is the basis of the vast field of organometallic   chemistry.
              Research in this area has led to many advances in pure and   applied chemistry.
              This project aims to open a related area in which   transition metals are
              combined with units containing boron. Preliminary   results indicate that these
               `metallaboranes` will possess an extensive   chemistry that in some  ways
              resembles organometallic chemistry, but in   other ways is very different. In
              this investigation new combinations of   boranes and transition metals will be
              prepared and their chemistry   investigated. The new compounds will express the
              unique aspects of their   electronic structures in new kinds of reaction
              chemistry.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
