Title       : The Incorporation of Rare Earth Elements in Coral Lattice: Proxy for Rainfall
               and Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9616645

Award Number: 9616645
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234948             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Sholkovitz esholkovitz@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9616645  Sholkovitz         One   of  the  tasks  facing  geochemists 
              interested   in  understanding how Earth's climate has changed over  time  is 
              the  discovery  and development of tools (paleo-proxies) for  deducing  what 
              past climates were like.  Paleo-proxies are generally  some  sort  of 
              paleontological (for example,  fossil  forminifera)  or  geochemical 
              measurement (for example, oxygen or carbon  isotopic  composition) that is
              assumed to relate to the climatic phenomenon  of  interest - temperature,
              salinity, oxygen, atmospheric  carbon  dioxide.  The problem is that the
              proxies themselves are  usually  not  the result of any one of these
              paleoclimatic conditions  and  thus  lead  to  equivocal interpretations about
              ancient  climatic  conditions.        In  this  project,  the  principal
              investigator  will  used  archived modern coral samples collected from various
              regions  for  which  there  is  also  an  extensive database  of  environmental
               observations such as temperature, salinity, runoff hydrology, and  biology.  
              Since  rare earth elements (REE) are supplied  to  the  ocean  by  weathering 
              of rock exposures on  the  continents,  he  expects  to  see  the REE signal
              from river runoff  -  reflecting  rainfall conditions - preserved in the coral.
               If successful,  he  would be able to extend this study to much older corals
              form  the  geologic  record  and  comparison with other  currently-available 
              paleoclimate  proxies.   The investigator anticipates  that  this  would  lead 
              to  the  development of  a  new  tool  for  studying  paleoclimate.  ***
