Title       : Collision and Surface-Induced Dissociation of Singly and Multiply Charged Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9616711

Award Number: 9616711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas P. Ridge dougr@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean H. Futrell  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9161,9184,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                The detailed reaction dynamics of ion-molecule interactions forms  the focus
              of the research of this project supported by the  Analytical and Surface
              Chemistry Program.  Professor Futrell and  his coworkers at the University of
              Delaware utilize crossed  molecular beam methods to probe the collision induced
              dissociation  processes relevant to ion activation in analytical mass 
              spectrometry.  This unique approach provides information about  energy
              partitioning, fragmentation mechanisms, and energy release  which improves the
              fundamental understanding of mass spectrometric  fragmentation patterns.  This
              approach is being extended to high  molecular weight, multiply charged ions
              produced by electrospray  ionization, and to the investigation of ion-surface
              interactions  and the process of surface induced dissociation.  The use of
              tandem mass spectrometric methods has provided much  structural information
              about biologically significant compounds,  especially with the advent of low
              energy ionization methods such as  electrospray.  The use of ion-noble gas or
              ion-surface collisions  to activate the analyte ion has added significantly to
              the power of  these methods.  The research of this project is directed to 
              developing the detailed mechanistic understanding of these  activation
              processes, improving their applicability for analytical  mass spectrometry.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
