Title       : Time-Resolved Structural Studies of Reacting Molecules Using Stroboscopic Gas
               Electron Diffraction Synchronous with Photoexcitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9616712

Award Number: 9616712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Ewbank   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lothar Schafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
              Professors J. Ewbank and L. Schafer of the Chemistry Department of the
              University of Arkansas will continue to apply stroboscopic diffraction
              techniques to the structural dynamics of chemical reactions.  Laser-excited
              molecules in the vapor phase will be studied using time-resolved electron
              scattering in order to provide information about the time evolution of
              structures and vibrational probability distributions in reacting molecules. 
              The time resolution will be extended down to the picosecond time domain and
              will be used to study UV-induced isomerizations of unsaturated organic
              compounds such as trans-stilbene, and structural and distribution dynamics
              following IR multiphoton absorption-induced processes such as intramolecular
              vibrational energy redistribution and dissociation reactions.  Experimental
              observations of the structural kinetics of energized molecules in
              non-equilibrium distributions are an important chemical frontier which will
              stimulate advances in theory.  Traditional gas electron diffraction (GED) has
              relied on the use of the photographic plate to record and store the information
              generated by the diffraction of electrons by molecules.  This method was
              therefore limited to studying the structures of stable molecules.  Current
              research in molecular dynamics concerns itself with how the structure and
              conformation of a molecular system evolves during a chemical reaction. 
              Experimental information about such processes can be obtained only by means of
              techniques in which the time plays an essential role. The method of real-time
              GED developed by the principal investigators has shown great promise in making
              important contribution to the understanding of the properties of short-lived
              species.  The aim of this project is to capitalize on this potential and
              contribute to our understanding of the basic aspects of molecular dynamics.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
