Title       : A Systematic Study of the Electrical Properties of Grain Boundaries Formed by
               Wafer Bonding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9616784

Award Number: 9616784
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Clarke clarke@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1374,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9616784  Clarke    A systematic study of the electrical characteristics of grain
               boundaries in both a covalent semiconductor (silicon) and an  ionic
              semiconductor (zinc oxide) is proposed in order to  establish relationships
              between grain boundary crystallography,  dopant concentration and electronic
              states, intrinsic and  extrinsic.  Such basic relationships are lacking in
              large part  because of the difficulty in preparing large, flat areas of grain 
              boundary of controlled misorientation that can be characterized  both
              electrically and structurally.  To overcome this limitation,  as well as to
              control the concentration and type of grain  boundary doping, it is proposed to
              use the rapidly developing  technology of "wafer bonding" to prepare
              well-defined grain  boundaries.  Amongst the specific objectives of the
              proposed  research are: the functional dependence of the number and energy  of
              defect states with angular misorientation for twist boundaries  in silicon; the
              demonstration that ZnO epitaxial films can be  wafer bonded to form grain
              boundaries, and the subsequent  extension to identifying the defect states
              produced by individual  and combined dopants of ZnO grain boundaries as a
              function of  crystallographic misorientation; and the development of a 
              simulation scheme for describing the electrical characteristics  of
              polycrystalline semiconductors in terms of the grain boundary  defect states. 
              %%%  The proposed research will study the electrical properties of  grain
              boundaries in polycrystalline semiconductors of importance  in advanced
              electronic systems, such as zinc oxide-based varistor  ceramics (used in
              electrical surge protection systems) and solar  cells made from polycrystalline
              silicon.  Understanding these  properties will enable materials scientists to
              design improved  materials that meet the requirements of  tomorrow's high 
              performance applications.  %%%
