Title       : Ingush Grammar, Dictionary, and Texts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a9616448

Award Number: 9616448
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315082             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johanna Nichols johanna@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                            Ingush grammar, dictionary, and texts    Ingush is a language of
              the Northeast Caucasian (or  Nakh-Daghestanian) language family of the northern
              Caucasus in  Russia.  It is closely related to Chechen, with some mutual 
              intelligibility.  There is no accurate or complete description of  Ingush;
              there is an Ingush-Russian wordlist but no dictionary; no  way for Ingush to
              learn English except through the intermediary  of Russian; and no way at all
              for an English speaker (or any  other foreigner) to learn Ingush.  The present
              Russian-based  orthography so misrepresents the sounds of the language that
              even  if an an otherwise excellent dictionary of the language did exist  it
              would be near-useless for learning or interpreting the  language.           
              The project will produce the needed descriptive materials  and make the
              importance and interest of Ingush better known to  the world through scientific
              linguistic publications.  It will  produce a full-scale descriptive grammar, a
              bilingual  Ingush-English, English-Ingush dictionary, and a set of texts, as 
              well as several typological, theoretical, and historical  publications.  The
              grammar will be a full, descriptively and  typologically sophisticated
              reference grammar of Ingush.  The  PI's pilot work has produced an all-ASCII
              phonemic transcription  system in Latin script, which would also make a
              serviceable  practical orthography, and project materials will use this 
              system.  The dictionary will contain full information on grammar  (inflectional
              paradigms, case government, etc.), pronunciation,  usage, and etymology.  A
              networked electronic database version of  the dictionary, continuously updated,
              will serve the university  users; hard copies (preliminary pocket dictionary
              printout, then  full published version) will serve the Ingush community, 
              journalists, and others.         Benefits will include improved problem sets
              and other  materials for undergraduate courses (in linguistics and in  courses
              on post-Soviet nationalities, Eurasian  history, etc.),  student training and
              visibility, description of an important  language, improved awareness of the
              Ingush language and culture  among American and European linguists, access to
              English for  Ingush speakers and vice versa, and testing and dissemination of 
              the proposed practical orthography.  The lexical database will be  directly
              applicable to future work on closely related Chechen.
