Title       : Ethnoarchaeology of Marine Foraging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9616887

Award Number: 9616887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric A. Smith easmith@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Eric Smith and his colleagues will
              conduct ethnoarchaeological fieldwork among the Meriam, a Melanesian group
              which inhabits the three easternmost islands in the Torres Strait, southeast of
              Papua New Guinea. The islands are surrounded by broad fringing reefs and deep
              waters which are rich in both fish and shellfish. Although now Australian
              citizens and increasingly reliant on store bought flour and rice, the Meriam
              still retain a significant gathering and fishing component in their diet and
              devote considerable effort to gathering shellfish from rocky shore and
              intertidal areas. Dr. Smith and his colleagues will study the shellfish
              gathering strategies employed.  Although the project employs ethnographic
              techniques to study present day people, the direct significance of the proposed
              research is largely archaeological. Prehistoric coastal populations in many
              parts of the world relied heavily on shellfish resources for food and shells
              are abundant in many archaeological sites. Through analysis of such materials
              scientists attempt to reconstruct the subsistence strategies of the inhabitants
              and to trace the effects which prehistoric gatherers had on the landscape.
              Based for example on decreasing shell size over time and increasing utilization
              of smaller species in some parts of the world, archaeologists have postulated
              that overexploitation occurred. However past work by project members among the
              Meriam has shown that no simple and clear-cut relationship exists between
              observed collecting practices and material remains which are ultimately
              deposited at camp sites.  Using a powerful body of theory which derives from
              optimal foraging, the investigators will follow Meriam foragers and record
              subsistence behavior. They will attempt to determine within this theoretical
              framework why particular foraging decisions are made and what the material
              signatures of specific behaviors are.  The research is important for several
              reasons. It will increase our understanding of how subsistence decisions are
              made among technologically simple foragers. It will also provide scientists
              with a set of tools and framework to aid in interpretation of the
              archaeological record in many parts of the world.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
