Title       : Craniofacial Sexual Dimorphism in Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1997     
File        : a9616671

Award Number: 9616671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40915              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Plavcan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York Institute of Tech
	      Wheatley Road
	      Old Westbury, NY  11568    516/686-7516

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Most male and female primates, including human ancestors, show substantial
              differences (dimorphism) in the anatomy of the skull. The recognition of
              dimorphism is important for identifying species in the fossil record. 
              Additionally, because dimorphism is strongly associated with variation in
              social behavior in living primates, it is used commonly to support claims about
              the social behavior of extinct species, especially human ancestors and their
              closest relatives.  However, there is currently very little information
              documenting cranial dimorphism among living primates, and whether such
              dimorphism can be used  to reconstruct the social behavior of extinct species. 
              This study will gather data on a carefully selected set of living primates to
              document the magnitude and pattern of dimorphism in living primates and humans,
              and evaluate whether variation in samples of closely related fossils can be
              attributed to dimorphism, as opposed to variation that occurs between species. 
              The study will also evaluate whether craniofacial dimorphism can be used to
              infer aspects of their social behavior.  This study will provide a strong data
              base for evaluating the diversity of species in the human lineage, and for
              reconstructing the changes in behavior that occurred in the evolution of humans
              and their closest relatives.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
