Title       : Radioastronomical Studies of the Solar Corona and Solar Wind
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9616721

Award Number: 9616721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J.  Bogdan                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Spangler srs@vesta.physics.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1523      SOLAR-TERRESTRIAL
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project researches radio remote sensing of the solar corona and inner parts
              of the solar wind.  This portion of space is extremely important since the
              solar wind originates here, and conditions determine its characteristics. 
              Radio remote sensing consists of "distortions" of radio waves propagating
              through this part of space; in this study, radio waves will be generated by
              natural sources such as radio galaxies and quasars.  The PI can determine the
              amplitude of turbulence in the solar wind and corona from measurements of
              scintillations of amplitude and phase of the received radio waves.  This will
              help determine the importance of turbulence in the structure and dynamics of
              the solar wind.  Specifically, the PI will measure coronal Faraday rotation
              with the VLA radiotelescope and scintillations of interferometer phase with the
              VLBA.  The Faraday rotation observations measure an integral of gas density and
              parallel component of the magnetic field through the corona.  Therefore, these
              measurements establish the magnetohydrodynamic state of the solar corona.  In
              addition, the PI will closely examine data for time variation of the Faraday
              rotation due to turbulence in the corona.  These measurements will:   develop a
              new means of remotely measuring the speed of solar wind, determine if the
              turbulence is elongated by the interplanetary magnetic field, and determine the
              potential of such measurements for remote and early detection of interplanetary
              disturbances of their way to Earth.
