Title       : The Dynamic Development of Post-Insular Native American English Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9616331

Award Number: 9616331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241240             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter A. Wolfram wolfram@social.chass.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Natalie Schilling-Estes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Studies of Native American varieties of English indicate that  these
              varieties may combine source language transfer from ancestral  Native American
              languages, generalized adaptive interlanguage  processes, and even the elements
              of a more expansive, pan Native  American English variety. Although a limited
              tradition of  sociolinguistic inquiry into Native American English varieties
              has  now developed, some essential dimensions of these varieties remain 
              largely ignored. Curiously, one of the most critical but neglected  areas of
              study with respect to Native American varieties of English  is the extent to
              which these varieties may or may not adopt local  dialect norms. Such
              linguistic accommodation is often an important  index of assimilation and may
              indicate in subtle but essential ways  how such groups situate themselves
              sociolinguistically and  culturally. Furthermore, the investigation of the
              types of  sociolinguistic boundaries that exist between vernacular varieties, 
              particularly in tri-ethnic contexts, is critical in addressing  central issues
              concerning the dynamic nature of ethnolinguistic  boundaries in American
              English varieties. This research examines  language change and variation in the
              English of three post-insular  Native American communities in rural North
              Carolina. The Lumbee,  Haliwa Saponi, and Cherokee Native American communities
              of North  Carolina represent instructive contrasts in terms of (1) their 
              recognized status as Native Americans communities, (2) their  historic
              isolation from surrounding communities, and (3) their past  and present
              language contact situations. These situations thus  offer a unique laboratory
              for comparing how ethnic groups configure  their sociolinguistic identity over
              time and space. Extensive  cross-generational sociolinguistic interviews are
              being conducted  in each research site, both with local Native Americans and
              with  cohort speakers from corresponding contact varieties. 
              Qualitative-descriptive and quantitative-variationist analytical   models are
              applied to the emerging data, and the objective analysis  of language variation
              is complemented by the analysis of data  obtained from subjective speaker
              identification tasks. The  comparative analysis includes both intra- and
              inter-regional  dimensions in order to determine the dynamic nature of 
              sociolinguistic boundaries. In addition, data gathered in a variety  of speech
              situations will be utilized in the examination of  intraspeaker variation. The
              research seeks to explicate on an  empirical basis the principles and
              mechanisms that account for  language adaptation, variation and change found in
              language contact  situations
