Title       : Information Technology Research in a Competitive World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  1999   
File        : a9616857

Award Number: 9616857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Decker                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjory S. Blumenthal mblument@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Changes in information technology (IT) markets and technologies over the past
              decade have brought about rapid growth in competition in the computing and
              communications industries.  New firms have sprung up and existing firms from
              related industries such as entertainment have moved into the IT sector to
              compete with traditional equipment manufacturers, software firms, and service
              providers.  Advances in network technology and miniaturization of components
              have led to increasing emphasis on distributed systems and have opened up
              possibilities of convergence of computing, communications, and entertainment
              products.  These changes have also provided an incentive for corporations to
              emphasize development of new products and expansion of market share over
              support of IT research.  Combined with fiscal pressures to limit government
              funded research in all but the most basic types of  research, these trends have
              led to concerns that the United States will have increasing difficulty
              sustaining the information technology base.  The Computer Science and
              Telecommunications Board (CSTB) will establish a cross-disciplinary study
              committee to examine trends in R&D for information technology, determine
              whether a problem exists, and explore options for preserving the research and
              technology base.  In addressing the issue of sources of support for future
              innovations in IT, the study will examine the changing roles of industry,
              academia, and government in the IT research  enterprise.  By consulting with
              industry groups, government agencies, and representatives of successful
              consortia approaches in other industries, the committee will develop
              recommendations as to the most effective way to maintain a balanced IT R&D
              effort.
