Title       : Dissertation Research: Steatite Production on Santa Catalina Island: Issues of
               Specialization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9616559

Award Number: 9616559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8592               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne E. Arnold jearnold@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Jeanne Arnold, MS Virginia Howard will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological excavations on
              Santa Catalina Island, located off the California coast to gain insight into
              how production of steatite vessels developed and changed over time. Steatite is
              a soft rock which is relatively easy to shape by simple technological means. It
              was a valued object which served a number of purposes in prehistory and was
              fashioned into beads and containers. Because prehistoric inhabitants of the
              island and adjacent coastal regions lacked pottery, steatite vessels served a
              particularly important function. Production of such objects was limited
              primarily to Santa Catalina Island because of the high quality raw material
              sources located there. Archaeological evidence indicates that production and
              trade with the adjacent mainland began as early as 1,100 AD and that the
              character of the items produced changed over time. By the late prehistoric
              period it appears that production focused on large ceremonial vessels which
              indicate the presence of a internally differentiated stratified society. This
              is a condition extremely uncommon among hunter and gatherer groups.   MS Howard
              wishes to understand how production of steatite vessels changed over time and
              whether it developed in a way which characterizes early food producing
              societies where such activities shifted from individual households into the
              hands of part or full time specialists. In past work she has located a number
              of quarries on Santa Catalina, developed a tentative chronology of them. On the
              basis of preliminary data she has also tried to understand how production
              changed over time. However her sample is small and is based almost solely on
              surface materials. With National Science Foundation support she will conduct
              excavations at a number of quarry sites. This should yield information on
              chronology and also provide a sample of associated tools used in manufacture as
              well as production debris. With this information MS Howard will reconstruct
              changing production technology over time and gain some insight into the social
              context in which this occurred.  This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide insight into the degree of social complexity obtained
              by prehistoric hunters and gatherers. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists, increase our understanding of United States prehistory and
              assist in training a promising young scientist.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
