Title       : Effective Parenting Practices and the Resilient Social Competence of Low-Income
               Preschoolers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1997     
File        : a9616454

Award Number: 9616454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215980             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Cybele Raver ccru@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary. Poverty has a strong negative impact on children's
              socioemotional development, through the mediating process of acute life stress
              and parents' concomitant use of harsh and coercive disciplinary practices.
              Although these grave, negative consequences of poverty have been identified, it
              is less clear what mechanisms underlie economically disadvantaged parents'
              positive socialization of young children's optimal self-regulatory skills.
              Given that behavioral problems associated with emotional dysregulation may have
              their etiologies early in childhood and that approximately 25% of American
              children under the age of 6 live in poverty, it is particularly important to
              identify parental efforts that may protect young children from developing these
              difficulties. This study tests the relations between positive parenting,
              children's development of emotional self-regulation skills, and children's
              social competence among 180 low-income families, using a prospective,
              longitudinal design. Specifically, parents' positive emotional socialization
              practices are hypothesized to be predictive of preschoolers' skills in
              effectively regulating their own emotions during delay-of-gratification tasks,
              8 months later. Preschoolers' emotion regulation skills, in turn, are
              hypothesized to be predictive of concurrent ratings of sociometric status by
              peers and both concurrent and longitudinal ratings of competence, externalizing
              behavior and internalizing behaviors, by preschool and Kindergarten teachers.
              In addition, because recent research suggests that low attentional control and
              high negative emotionality influence young children's encounters with parents
              and peers, the moderating role of these dimensions of temperament will also be
              tested.  %%%  Project Justification. Children's healthy development is
              considerably threatened by poverty: recent research suggests that young
              children in poverty show greater social and emotional difficulties than their
              middle-income counterparts, and that these difficulties persist throughout the
              school years. Because approximately 25% of American children under the age of 6
              live at or below the poverty line, the deleterious consequences of poverty are
              of particularly pressing concern. It appears that it is not income itself, but
              the cumulative effect of the multiple risks associated with poverty, including
              harsh and punitive parenting, that is associated with these grave, negative
              childhood outcomes. Yet it is not known what the mechanisms are that underlie
              economically-disadvantaged parents' positive socialization of young children's
              resilience. In this light, sensitive, nurturant caregiving may represent a wise
              investment made by parents facing financial disadvantage. This longitudinal
              research aims to take a first step in this direction by mapping out the
              specific mechanisms that link 1) positive steps parents take to socialize young
              children's regulation of their emotions, 2) preschoolers' skills in effectively
              regulating their emotions without adults' help, and 3) preschoolers' social
              competence in the classroom.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                      
