Title       : Asymmetric Synthesis with Chiral Heteroalkyl Radicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9616632

Award Number: 9616632
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip P. Garner ppg@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The Organic Synthesis Program supports Professor Philip P. Garner, of the  
              Department of Chemistry of Case Western Reserve University, in his   studies of
              the development of a new class of recyclable chiral   auxiliaries for
              asymmetric synthesis with chiral heteroalkyl radicals.    Prototype
              hydroxyalkyl radical equivalents contain a chiral acetal group   derived from
              either carbohydrates or terpenes.  General methods,   including radical
              translocation, for the formation of chiral   acetaloxyalkyl radicals are under
              development for the preparation of   these materials.  Systematic variation of
              the auxiliary structure,   coupled with ab initio transition state structure
              modeling, addresses the   nature of the interactions responsible for asymmetric
              induction and   facilitates their optimization.  Both inter- and intramolecular
              variants   of atom/group transfer reactions as well as additions to
              carbon-carbon   double bonds are explored, as is methodology to permit the
              efficient   removal and reuse of the chiral auxiliaries.  Bidirectional and
              iterative   versions of asymmetric `radical aldol` reactions promise
              stereocontrolled   access to 1,3-polyols.  In contrast to the often
              well-defined chemistry of compounds containing   even numbers of electrons,
              compounds containing an unpaired electron   (radicals) are often so reactive
              that their reaction chemistry is   difficult to harness.  Lack of reaction
              control is a particular problem   in the attempted synthesis via radicals of
              compounds displaying the   property of chirality, wherein a molecule differs
              from another in the   same way a right hand differs from a left.  With the
              support of the   Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Philip P. Garner, of the
              Department   of Chemistry of Case Western Reserve University, is developing
              chemical   approaches which allow the exploitation of the intrinsic reactivity
              of   radicals while maintaining a high level of control over the chirality of  
              the resulting products.  These approaches offer new routes for the   synthesis
              of biologically active compounds, which are often chiral.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
