Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Continuous Complexity and Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9616920

Award Number: 9616920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Shub   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IBM T J Watson Res Ctr
	      
	      Yorktown Heights, NY  10598    /   -

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Shub  9616920       The investigator continues studies of the complexity theory 
              of continuous problems and dynamical systems.  The main issues  are: 1) the
              construction of a theory of computation and  complexity which speaks to
              scientific computation and numerical  analysis, and 2) the extent of validity
              of statistical robustness  as a property of dynamical systems, especially
              chaotic dynamical  systems.  The research involved is of interest to a large
              class of  mathematicians and has implications for the relations between 
              abstract mathematics and computer science on the one hand and  abstract
              mathematics and physics and engineering on the other.       Complexity theory
              develops bounds on how much work a method  requires to produce the solution to
              a typical problem in a class  of problems.  Common and important examples
              include methods to  find the solutions of a system of linear or nonlinear
              equations.  Part of the project indeed at aims at just this issue.  Equation 
              solving is at the heart of much of mathematics and, together with  its
              computational aspects, is a main way that mathematics is used  by engineering,
              physics, economics, and many other disciplines.  The other part of the project
              studies questions about much alike  certain kinds of chaotic systems may be. 
              Predicting the specific  behavior of a chaotic system is difficult, because
              small errors  in any measurement of the system are amplified.  But chaotic 
              systems may be relatively nice in a statistical sense; if so,  then sets of
              samples measurements may provide useful information  about the system's
              behavior even though any single measurement is  error-prone.  The investigator
              studies these properties in  dynamical systems and particularly in chaotic
              systems.  There are  important implications for the statistical analysis of
              chaotic  systems --- hence practical consequences for weather and climate 
              studies, agriculture, and engineering.
