Title       : Experimental Studies of Phase Transitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2000  
File        : a9616577

Award Number: 9616577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman Z. Cummins Cummins@sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9616577 
              Cummins    This   experimental   project  will   advance   the   fundamental 
              understanding   of   phase  transitions,  and   critically   test  theoretical 
              models,  using  advanced  methods  of  laser   light  scattering   
              spectroscopy.   Specifically,   the    liquid-glass  transition  will  be
              studied, with emphasis on  the  dynamics  of  supercooled  liquids  and the
              physical mechanism  underlying  the  liquid-glass  transition.  The 
              quantitative  comparison  of  the  measurements  with theory will focus on, but
              not be  limited  to,  the  Mode  Coupling  Theory, which provides  a  detailed 
              set  of  predictions  for  the dynamics of supercooled liquids  and  their 
              evolution  with  temperature.  The  critical  evaluation  of  the  several  
              theories  will  include,  in  addition  to  the   light  scattering  data, data
              from collaborating groups  using   neutron  scattering,  dielectric 
              susceptibility, and  molecular  dynamics  techniques.  %%%  This  project will
              advance the fundamental understanding of phase  transitions,  and  critically 
              test  theoretical  models,   using  advanced   methods   of  laser  light 
              scattering   spectroscopy.  Specifically,  the liquid-glass transition will be
              studied,  with  emphasis  on the dynamics of supercooled liquids and the
              physical  mechanism    underlying   the   liquid-glass   transition.    The 
              quantitative  comparison  of the measurements  with  theory  will  focus  on,
              but not be limited to, the Mode Coupling Theory, which  provides  a  detailed 
              set of predictions  for  the  dynamics  of  supercooled  liquids  and their
              evolution with  temperature.  The  critical  evaluation  of the several
              theories  will  include,  in  addition  to  the light scattering data, data
              from  collaborating  groups using  neutron scattering, dielectric
              susceptibility,  and  molecular dynamics techniques.  ***
