Title       : Application of Signal Processing & Dynamic Modeling Techniques to Modern
               Microsensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9616085

Award Number: 9616085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157779             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. McAvoy mcavoy@isr.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Fuja  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT - McAvoy - CTS-9616085    At present most chemical plants are operated
              without the benefit of real time composition measurements.  The reasons include
              cost, reliability, and robustness of composition sensors.  Silicon based
              microsensors, hold promise for having a major impact on the operation of
              chemical processes.  Each microsensor occupies approximately 400 square microns
              of surface area, so it is feasible to place several hundred sensors on a
              single, small chip.  Tin dioxide (SnO2) gas microsensors are being developed at
              the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), with whom the PI's
              are collaborating.  These sensors have several unique features including their
              small size, approximately 200 micrometers in diameter, their fabrication by a
              conventional complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) foundry, and the
              ability to have their operating temperature changed rapidly, in a cyclic
              pattern, to optimize their sensitivity to a particular gas species.  There are
              a number of problems that remain to be solved before these sensors can be used
              to solve process problems.   Some of these problems include drift and noise
              effects, lack of sensitivity to some chemicals, and material problems.  The
              SnO2 microsensors are nonspecific and they can respond to a number of chemical
              species.    The research project involves further investigations of SnO2
              microsensors.  In using microsensors to broad problems need further study:  (1)
              One can use the sensors to determine whether or not a chemical species is
              present, which is a problem in classification; and (2) one can use the sensors
              to determine which chemicals are present as well as their specific
              concentrations, which is a problem in quantitative analysis.  The short range
              goal of the PI's research is to apply signal processing and dynamic modeling
              techniques to these microsensors to advance their use in the classification
              problem.  Many applications of microsensors involve classification, e.g.
              hazardous leak, odor, and fire detection .  The signal processing and modeling
              methods planned have the potential to be expanded to the quantitative analysis
              problem---thus, the long range goal of the research is to help advance the use
              of microsensor arrays for solving the quantitative analysis problem.
