Title       : Multidisciplinary Collaborative Research: Amines and Agonistic Behavior in
               Crustaceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1997  
File        : a9616198

Award Number: 9616198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Edwards biodhe@panther.gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                  Some biochemicals in the brain apparently
              affect behavior;  for example, a high level of the amine compound serotonin 
              has been linked to aggression in a wide range of both  vertebrate and
              invertebrate species.  It is very difficult  in the complex brain of vertebrate
              animals to study the way  in which particular chemicals affect the function of 
              particular single nerve cells, or neurons.  In contrast,  some invertebrate
              animals have limited numbers of large  identifiable neurons, allowing analysis
              of complex  behavioral processes at the level of the precise cells  thought to
              be involved.  This collaborative work in three  different laboratories exploits
              the well-studied behavior of  crayfish and the very accessible nervous system
              of these  animals, as a model system.  A variety of behavioral, 
              pharmacological, molecular and physiological approaches are  used to determine
              how amine compounds modulate the  aggressive activity of dominant and
              non-dominant animals in  their social hierarchies, and how particular amine- 
              containing nerve cells are important in these behaviors.     Results from this
              work will be fundamental to  understanding how compounds that are used by
              certain cells  as neural transmitters also can have effects on modulating 
              behavior.  By clarifying the roles of amines in complex  behavioral processes,
              such as aggression in the nervous  systems of animals far more complex than
              this model system,  the results will have an impact beyond cellular
              neuroscience  and neuroethology to other areas of behavior neuroscience  and
              psychology.
