Title       : Towards Optimum Formulations of Large Eddy Simulaton of Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9616219

Award Number: 9616219
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. F. Chen                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $528727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Moser r-moser@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Adrian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Balachandar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  CTS- 9616219  Principal Investigator:  Moser   
              This is a grant to initiate a focused project to develop reliable LES methods,
              with well defined bounds on their accuracy, that can be used in complex fluid
              dynamic applications.  Several fundamental questions regarding the detailed
              derivation of the LES equations, the definition of optimal filters, and the
              development of subgrid models will be addressed. The work will focus on the
              challenges that need to be met in the treatment of near-wall regions and
              embedded small-scale laminar sub-regions that have hindered the wide spread
              applicability of LES in complex problems of practical interest.    The
              outstanding issues of LES will be addressed using a new LES formalism based on
              the fact that without knowledge of the small scales, the large scale evolution
              is essentially stochastic.  The formalism provides a technique to precisely
              measure the predictability of the evolution of the large scales, and the
              performance of any particular LES model.  Furthermore, interpretation of LES in
              the light of dynamical systems theory, suggests that past time information can
              greatly increase the predictability of the large scales.  It is expected that
              this research will lead to several advances in the practice of LES.    The
              necessary data for this research will be obtained from direct numerical
              simulation (DNS) and/or particle image velocimetry (PIV) measurements in
              experiments.  These techniques will be applied to three specific test flows:
              plane channel, cylinder in cross flow, and a sudden expansion.  Both DNS and
              PIV are necessary because higher Reynolds numbers are accessible through PIV
              experiments and more detailed three-dimensional data are available from DNS. 
              The three test flows were selected because they are the simplest flows that
              exhibit features that have caused difficulties in LES.  The optimizations
              performed and the models developed in the context of these flows will be
              applicable to LES in a wide variety of flows.     The work will be jointly
              sponsored by NSF and the AFOSR.
