Title       : Early Embryonic Heart Function and the Influence of InternalExternal
               Environmental Factors on Developmental Trajectories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9616138

Award Number: 9616138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren W. Burggren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9616138  Burggren      Our understanding of the forming cardiovascular system of
              early embryos remains extraordinarily limited for any vertebrate, including
              mammals.  Simply put, the vertebrate embryo remains a "black box" from an
              "organismal physiology" perspective.  Consequently, the major objectives of
              this proposal are to:  1) investigate the onset of cardiovascular function by
              determining experimentally the physiological mechanisms leading to flow and
              pressure generation in early stages of heart development; 2) clearly define and
              delineate the "critical windows" for cardiovascular development; 3) determine
              whether "development trajectories" - established early in embryonic development
              and dictated by genotype - can be diverted through challenge by environmental
              factors to produce altered embryonic/larval phenotype.    Measurements will be
              made zebrafish, the African clawed frog, and the domestic fowl.  The first
              phase of experiments will include measurements during the early embryonic
              period of in vivo physiological variables.  The second experimental phase will
              consist of rearing populations of developing embryos under low oxygen and
              assessing their physiological performance and anatomical development.    These
              studies on early embryonic cardiovascular development and how relevant
              environmental factors (e.g. hypoxia) impact it will have very broad
              applicability to both vertebrate physiology and developmental biology,
              particularly in the almost complete absence of similar published data for
              vertebrate embryos.
