Title       : U.S. Support for the International START Secretariat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1997    
File        : a9616861

Award Number: 9616861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Frederick Spilhaus fspilhaus@agu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roland J. Fuchs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This award provides renewed support to the American Geophysical Union for
              support of the work of the International Secretariat of the Global Change
              System for Analysis, Research, and Training (START).  START is a jointly
              sponsored program of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP),
              the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP), and the Human Dimensions of Global
              Environmental Change Programme (HDP).  The primary mission of these networks is
              (1) to conduct research on regional aspects of global change, (2) to assess the
              impacts of the regional findings, and (3) to provide regionally relevant
              integrated and evaluated information to policy makers and governments.  START
              assists in the development of an evolving system of regional research networks,
              each of which will consist of at least one regional research center and a
              number of regional research sites.  Among the most developed of these networks
              is the Inter-American Institute for Global Change (IAI).  Also under
              development are the European Network for Research In Global Change (ENRICH) and
              the Asian-Pacific Network for Global Change Research (APN).  Funds for these
              activities have been provided by the National Aeronautics and Space
              Administration and the U.S. Department of Energy on behalf of all participating
              agencies in the U.S. Global Change Research Program.  During its initial years
              of operation, the START secretariat has played an important role in building
              the international linkages necessary to increase the involvement in global
              change studies of researchers from around the world, and especially from
              developing nations.  The American Geophysical Union's sponsorship of the START
              secretariat has strengthened START's foundation and enabled it to work toward
              its goals of promoting research on the regional origins and implications of
              global environmental changes and of enhancing indigenous scientific capacities
              for global change research.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
