Title       : Microsatellite Analyses of Mammalian Dispersal and Inbreeding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9616843

Award Number: 9616843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Waser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9616834  WASER  The proposed research will develop, test and apply new molecular
              genetic techniques to questions of basic and applied importance for animal
              populations.  The genetic techniques are based on a new form of DNA
              fingerprinting using "microsatellites", short, highly-variable components of
              DNA common to all animals that can identify parentage as well as the population
              from which an individual comes.  The study species, the banner-tailed kangaroo
              rat, is chosen to take advantage of an extensive long-term data base on birth,
              death and migration rates.  Field methodology is proven and the species is not
              currently endangered.  Thus kangaroo rats will be used as a model to answer
              general questions; the results are expected to be widely applicable to other
              mammals.  The goals of the project fall into two categories.  First,
              methodology will be tested to estimate the rates of movement of animals between
              isolated small populations.  Rates of movement between fragments of suitable
              habitat determine such basic population characteristics as within-population
              genetic variation and between-population differentiation.  Movement rates also
              have important applied consequences related to the conservation of wild
              populations, since dispersers can "rescue" declining populations and spread
              important genetic variation.  It has also been recognized recently that some
              apparently healthy wild populations are actually "sinks", maintained only by
              immigrants from other populations.  As yet, there is no economical way to
              measure interpopulation dispersal rates or to determine which populations are
              the "sources" that are most important to conserve.  Second, the rates and
              consequences of inbreeding in natural populations will be determined. 
              Inbreeding is widely believed to be deleterious in animals as it is in humans,
              but few data exist on the degree to which wild animals inbreed, on the
              mechanisms they might use to avoid it, or on how deleterious it actually is. 
              Genetic techniques will allow identification of pa rentage, thus detecting
              inbreeding when it occurs and comparing the survival rates of inbred and
              outbred animals.  The results will contribute both to basic understanding of
              the conditions under which inbreeding occurs in nature and to the ability to
              conserve small populations that are thought to be especially vulnerable to
              inbreeding problems.
