Title       : Group 4 Metal Complexes of Boron Heterocycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1999     
File        : a9616889

Award Number: 9616889
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Ashe ajashe@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Arthur J. Ashe, III, Department of Chemistry, University of Michigan,   is
              supported by the  Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program   of the
              Chemistry Division for the study of  heteroaromatic compounds   involving group
              13 and 15 elements and their transition metal complexes.  Previous research has
              demonstrated that boratabenzene zirconium complexes   can serve as homogeneous 
              catalysts for the polymerization of olefins.   Building on this result and by
              analogy to  ansametallocenes that are known   to be active catalysts, a series
              of metal complexes containing  heteroaromatic ligands will be designed with the
              goal of obtaining highly   active and stereospecific  olefin polymerization
              catalysts. Specifically    boratabenzene complexes which bear pendant 
              substituents of varying   electronic and steric demand and a series of bridged
              boratabenzene  complexes will be prepared. These compounds will exploit
              variations in   electron donating ability  possible with the heteroaromatic
              ligands to   fine tuning and develop more effective polymerization  catalysts. 
              Finally   new boron containing heterocycles will be prepared in order to extend
              the  range of heteroaromatic compounds available to be used as ligands. 
              Transition metal complexes promote  very selective catalytic and  
              stoichiometric transformations of organic compounds. Much of the unique 
              reactivity at the metal center is a reflection of the density of   electrons
              surrounding the metal and  this electron density can be   controlled by
              adjusting the groups that are attached to the metal. A  very   common 'group'
              contains a ring of carbon-hydrogen units in what is called   an 'aromatic' 
              arrangement. In this project a series of metal complexes will   be prepared in
              which an 'aromatic' group  composed of carbon-hydrogen and   boron species is
              attached to a metal. This will permit the electron  density about the metal to
              be carefully adjusted in order to promote   specific chemical and catalytic 
              behavior and will set the ground work   both to understand existing processes
              and to rationally design  new ones.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
