Title       : A New Approach for Processing Compressed Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1999  
File        : a9616206

Award Number: 9616206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahram Latifi latifi@ee.unlv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Junichi Kanai  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As the amount of digital information increases rapidly, the ability to store,
              transmit, or process digital data efficiently becomes a significant issue. Any
              further improvement in handling digital information, beyond technological
              limits in storage capacity and communication bandwidth, should come from
              manipulating compressed data. In the first part of this project, execution of
              common operations in document image understanding and OCR on CCITT-G4
              compressed data is examined. These operations include: blob coloring, thinning,
              and morphological techniques. Direct manipulation of JBIG-coded documents with
              and without progressive coding is another objective of this project. For JBIG
              data, skew estimation and connected component algorithms are investigated. In
              addition, image processing algorithms for compressed binary document images and
              engineering drawings are implemented. The second part of this project deals
              with the feasibility of developing a new source code that allows quick string
              matching (exact and approximate) for OCR-generated text data. Furthermore, a
              new lossless binary image compression scheme that allows fast skew estimation
              for image rotation is developed. Algorithms developed under this project should
              contribute to efficient utilization of storage and bandwidth in information,
              computation and telecommunication technologies.
