Title       : Values and Science in Watershed Management and Restoration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9616958

Award Number: 9616958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael V. McGinnis mcginnis@lifesci.lscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Woolley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A central theme in contemporary environmental policy is recommending the
              adoption of watershed-based approaches to restoring native diversity,
              preserving ecological habitat and managing ecosystems.  A watershed is a
              complex ecological system that sheds water, such as a creek, lake, slough, or
              estuary; its boundaries do not often coincide with political ones. 
              California's watersheds supply water for drinking, recreation, industry and
              farming; and they provide critical habitat for a wide variety of animal
              species.  Rapid population growth in these watersheds has led to increased
              conflict between human users of natural resources, dramatic loss of native
              diversity, and general decline in the health of ecosystems.  In California,
              federal and state government are turning to watershed-based organizations to
              develop and implement environmental policy.  The implications of these
              watershed management activities are not well understood by scientists, policy
              makers or the general public.  Focusing on these activities in California, this
              study will address the following questions:  What are the relevant values of
              participants currently involved in watershed restoration and management?  What
              is the role of scientific information in watershed restoration and management? 
              The research will use a three-part strategy of direct analysis of documents
              from watershed groups; a random sample of opinion of participants in all
              California watershed organizations, and comparative case studies of eight of
              these organizations.  Scientists and policy makers can learn from a comparative
              analysis of the place of values and science in watershed management in
              California.  Results will be disseminated through scholarly and professional
              conferences and journals.  An executive summary will be produced and
              distributed to watershed planners, federal and state policy makers.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
