Title       : Molecular Routes to Nanocrystalline GaN and GaN Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9616501

Award Number: 9616501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne L. Gladfelter gladfelt@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award to Wayne Gladfelter at the University of Minnesota is   supported by
              the Advanced Materials Program in Chemistry and the   Electronic Materials
              Program in the Division of Materials Research. The   twofold goals of the
              research are the development of new precursors to   gallium nitride which will
              permit lower processing temperatures, and the   development of synthetic
              schemes for the growth of nanocystalline   particles of defined size. New
              volatile precursors will be based   primarily on gallium hydride complexes and
              organogallium azides. The   chemical reaction mechanism of the deposition will
              be examined using film   growth kinetics and isotopic labeling. Specific
              labeling of the   precursors with deuterium and simultaneous profiling of H and
              D using   forward recoil elastic scattering spectrometry will permit the  
              determination of the  source of hydrogen incorporation in the films. A   novel
              chain-termination approach will be used to control nanocrystal   particle size
              using known and new gallium hydride complexes. Under this   approach,
              unreactive chain terminating groups will coat the surface of   the gallium and
              nitrogen groups on the particles and prevent further   growth or agglomeration.
               Gallium nitride is an attractive candidate for optoelectronic devices  
              capable of absorbing or emitting blue light. This research will provide a  
              picture of the evolution of gallium nitride film structure as a function   of
              time, temperature, pressure and precursor structure. By correlating   these
              data with studies of the deposition mechanism, the critical   connection
              between growth chemistry and film composition and structure   will be made.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
