Title       : Dissertation Research: Health and Occupational Status in Reform Era China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1997   
File        : a9616112

Award Number: 9616112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9290               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Nichter mnichter@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
              the university of Arizona.  The student is examining how Chinese women deal
              with anxiety brought on by rapid modernization.  Through interviewing a random
              sample of 100 women from a diverse set of occupational status in Yunnan
              province, the student will test the hypothesis that women with lower
              socio-economic status experience more anxiety due to uncertainties about
              employment security.  The role of gender discrimination will also be analyzed
              as it affects women of different social classes.  The research will study how
              these social problems are expressed through psychological symptoms and
              complaints, and how these symptoms impel people to purchase both traditional
              and western medicines.  Methods include participant observation, formal
              interviews, the collection of daily health diaries, life histories, and
              collection of material from the popular media dealing with health,
              psychological and bodily symptoms.   This research is important because like
              other communist countries undergoing reform, rapid change has been a source of
              tension in China.  This project will advance our understanding of the interplay
              between job security and status and psychologically-related illnesses.  Since
              rapid development has been shown to negatively impact on women's status in many
              developing countries, increased understanding of the health implications of
              status differences will be valuable to planners who are creating programs to
              ameliorate the problems associated with development.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
