Title       : Novel Platelet Composites for Improved Mechanical Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a9616668

Award Number: 9616668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen M. Chan hmc0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1374,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9616668  Chan    In recent years, platelet reinforced ceramic composites have 
              emerged as viable alternatives to whisker and fiber reinforced  materials for
              many structural applications.  It is recognized  that there are certain
              characteristics of the reinforcement phase  and the matrix/platelet interface
              which will favor improved  toughness behavior, e.g., ease of debonding at the 
              platelet/matrix interface, high platelet volume fraction, however  detailed
              systematic study has been limited.  Based on recent work  carried out at
              Lehigh, it is believed that a novel composite  system consisting of alumina
              platelets coated with calcium  hexaluminate (CA6) has the potential to surpass
              the properties of  conventional platelet composites.  CA6 exhibits several 
              characteristics which make it exceptionally well-suited for the  proposed
              application.  These include the adoption of an epitaxial  relationship such
              that the weak basal cleavage planes of CA6  align parallel to the (0001)
              a-alumina platelet faces, values of  thermal coefficients of expansion which
              favor debonding, and  thermodynamic stability with alumina.  Mechanical 
              characterization of both the bulk composites and the interface  structures is
              proposed.  The processing and mechanical testing  will be complemented by high
              resolution study of debonded  interfaces using TEM. The goals of the program
              are several-fold.  One aim will be to determine the processing and
              microstructural  parameters of the composite system which optimize the
              mechanical  properties. On a more fundamental level, however, the proposed 
              program will enable the direct correlation between interfacial  structure, the
              toughness, and strength of the interface, and the  mechanical behavior of the
              bulk composite.  %%%%  In recent years, platelet reinforced ceramic composites
              have  emerged as viable alternatives to whisker and fiber reinforced  materials
              for many structural applications.  It is recognized  that there are certain
              characteristics of the reinforcement phase  and the  matrix/platelet interface
              which will favor improved  toughness behavior, however detailed systematic
              study has been  limited.  Based on recent work carried out at Lehigh, it is 
              believed that a novel composite system consisting of alumina  platelets coated
              with calcium hexaluminate (CA6) has the  potential to surpass the properties of
              conventional platelet  composites.  The goals of the program are several-fold. 
              One aim  will be to determine the processing and microstructural  parameters of
              the composite system which optimize the mechanical  properties.  On a more
              fundamental level, however, the proposed  program will enable the direct
              correlation between interfacial  structure, the toughness, and strength of the
              interface, and the  mechanical behavior of the bulk composite.  ***
