Title       : Maintaining Power Quality During Voltage Sags, Using A NovelHigh-Frequency-Link
               Voltage Regulator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9616018

Award Number: 9616018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ned Mohan mohan@ee.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9616018  Mohan  Applications, Voltage sags are the most important power
              quality problems facing the process industry.  In modern industrial plants
              using process-control computers, adjustable-speed drives, robotics, etc., even
              momentary voltage sags can upset automated processes, resulting in loss of
              product and production time, and requiring cleanup and recalibration to restart
              the process.  The power quality can be maintained during voltage sags by
              fast-acting, solid-state voltage regulators which inject a voltage in series to
              compensate for the sag in the phase voltage.  Although cheaper than
              uninturruptible power supplies complete backup during power outages, the cost
              of voltage regulators have limited their application.    Objective, The
              objective of the proposed research is to investigate a novel voltage regulator
              based on highfrequency-isolated cycloconverters which excels in the areas of
              cost, efficiency, size and weigh More importantly, this research seeks to
              establish an entirely new direction in power electronic converters for larger
              power and voltage ratings, where standard modules with a high-frequency link
              can be connected in series and parallel, eliminating costly and lossy
              line-frequency transformers.  These have numerous potential applications in
              power systems: reactive power compensation using (STATCOM), active filters,
              interconnection of photovoltaic, wind electric, and fuel-cell systems,
              interconnection of battery and superconducting energy storage systems, and so
              on.    Method, A novel voltage regulator with a high-frequency link is
              proposed.  It consists of a single inverter for all three phases.  Each phase
              has its own high-frequency transformer and a cycloconverter.  For reducing
              transformer leakage inductances, a co-axial design and various magnetic core
              materials such as amorphous alloys and ferrites will be examined.    Potential
              Benefits, Success of the proposed approach could be a significant step towards
              mitigating the deleterious effects of voltage sags.  The su ccess of this
              research could also lead the way to eliminate line-frequency transformers in
              numerous power system applications.    Proposed Research Tasks, It is proposed
              to analyze and evaluate high-frequency-link based voltage regulators.  Various
              switching schemes, transformer designs such as co-axial transformers, and
              magnetic materials such as amorphous alloys and ferrites will be examined.  A
              three-phase prototype will be built in the laboratory with a rating of 7.5 kVA.
               Its extension to other applications will be evaluated.    Advancement of
              Knowledge and Technology, Since the proposed combination of the high frequency
              link using co-axial, high frequency transformers and new magnetic materials is
              novel, new discoveries are entirely possible which will be beneficial to other
              applications.
