Title       : Electron-correlated Calculations of Two- and Three-body Intermolecular Complexes
               and Their Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9616683

Award Number: 9616683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68700              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Mark Cybulski cybulssm@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is supporting   Professor
              Mark Cybulski at Miami University.  The main goal of this   research project is
              to implement a method for analyzing weak   intermolecular interactions at
              higher levels of Moller-Plesset   perturbation theory (MP3 and MP4) and its
              infinite order generalization   coupled-cluster theory (more specifically,
              L-CCD and CCD models).   The   method involves the joint use of the
              supermolecule approach and   perturbation theory of intermolecular interactions
              at one of the   aforementioned levels of theory.  The concurrent use of both
              approaches   permits the interpretation of the supermolecule interaction
              energies in   terms of rigorously evaluated electrostatic, exchange, induction
              and   dispersion energies.  Specific applications will focus on complexes with 
               unusually large higher-order correlation effects such as Ar-HCN and   NH3-CO. 
               In addition, the magnitude of the three-body nonadditive   effects in an open
              shell complex Ar2-CH will be examined.  In parallel   with calculations of
              interaction energies, calculations of molecular   properties of the complexes
              will be performed and the influence of   component energies on molecular
              properties such as dipole moments and   nuclear quadrupole coupling constants
              will be carefully examined.       There is a growing interest in understanding
              weak intermolecular   interactions in biological systems.  The interactions are
              considered   `weak` in the sense that the interacting species retain, to a
              large   degree, their individual character.  Intermolecular interactions are  
              responsible for base-pair formation across the strands of DNA and RNA.   
              Unfortunately, the information about the energetics of interaction is   not, in
              general, accessible experimentally.  The most promising approach   for studying
              the energetics of intermolecular interactions is   computational chemistry. 
              The goal of this project is to further develop   a method for studying
              intermolecular interactions which proves   particularly useful in providing
              insight into the nature of weak   interactions.   Applications will, initially,
              focus on smaller complexes   such as NH3-CO and Ar-HCN, in which interactions
              were found to be   difficult to interpret.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
