Title       : Collaborative Research: A National Instrument Facility for ElectroMagnetic
               Studies of the Continents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9616986

Award Number: 9616986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen K. Park magneto@ucrmt.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9616986  Park    This award provides partial support for the acquisition of  
              portable magnetometers and associated field equipment by the  University of
              California at riverside that will become part of a  centrally managed pool of
              equipment and made available to US  researchers for field deployment in
              projects using the  magnetotelluric (MT) technique to image the Earth's deep
              interior  structure. The University of California at Riverside is committed  to
              providing the remaining funds necessary to acquire the equipment  system.   
              Remote sensing  of the Earth's crust and upper mantle using MT  methods
              recently has made significant progress in producing images  of internal
              structures with good spatial resolution and with  content (electrical
              conductivity) that is distinct from seismic  images (seismic velocities). The
              MT method makes use of the  time-dependent natural electromagnetic fields (EM)
              induced inside  the Earth by the variations of the Earth's external geomagnetic
               field. The induced electric (telluric) currents diffuse into the  Earth and
              are scattered back from heterogeneities in the electrical  resistivity
              structure. The complex, frequency dependent,  relationship between the
              horizontal magnetic and electric fields at  the surface is called the MT
              impedance and can be inverted to solve  for the resistivity (or conductivity)
              structure of the interior.  Conductivity properties of the interior are of
              considerable  interest because they depend strongly on the presence of
              conducting  ionic fluids or melts which are difficult or impossible to detect 
              with other remote sensing techniques.  ***
