Title       : Mid-Level Language Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9616833

Award Number: 9616833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251279             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Trueswell trueswel@cattell.psych.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9616833  TRUESWELL    This research project will examine the rapid grammatical 
              decisions that people make during reading, listening and  speaking.  The
              comprehension of a sentence requires readers and  listeners to make immediate
              decisions about how incoming words  combine with other words and phrases, in
              order to develop an  interpretation of "who is doing what to whom" in a
              sentence.  In  this way, people are able to maintain, in an incremental
              fashion,  an interpretation of the events and actions described in each 
              sentence.  This research will focus on the processing of  temporary syntactic
              ambiguities, which occur when a comprehender  must choose between two possible
              grammatical alternatives of an  ambiguous word or phrase.  Examining this rapid
              decision process  can help uncover how the language processing system is
              organized  to consult linguistic and non-linguistic information.  One line  of
              research will examine how readers and listeners process  syntactically
              ambiguous phrases.  The experiments will test the  hypothesis that a
              comprehender's initial guess about the intended  interpretation of a phrase is
              determined automatically by  consulting prior experiences concerning how often
              individual  words have appeared in different syntactic contexts.  The 
              experiments will focus on the hypothesis that recognizing a word  includes the
              rapid retrieval not only of the meaning of the word  but also of probabilistic
              information concerning how often the  word has appeared in different types of
              phrases.  This research  will use a variety of different experimental
              techniques which are  aimed at uncovering the time-course of language
              processing,  including the monitoring of eye fixations during reading and the 
              measurement of the response time to words during listening.  A  second line of
              experiments will examine whether speakers are  sensitive to syntactically
              ambiguous phrases in their own speech,  and whether this impacts the way in
              which they produce sentences.   In particular, the experiments  will examine
              whether speakers  provide helpful phrasing (prosodic) cues when there is an 
              increased chance that the listener may incorrectly interpret an  ambiguous
              phrase.  These two lines of  research may help the  development of
              computational systems that interact with humans  via language.  In addition,
              furthering the understanding of how  normal adults process language may improve
              the treatment and  education of those individuals with language impairments.   
              ***
