Title       : Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Gas Phase Organometallic Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1999     
File        : a9616724

Award Number: 9616724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520780             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Weisshaar weisshaar@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jim Weisshaar of the University of Wisconsin in Madison is supported by   the
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to continue his reactivity   studies
              involving  gas phase reactions of bare transition metal atoms   (neutral or
              ionic) with small alkanes or alkenes, under controlled   conditions of initial
              electronic state and collision energy.  Rate   constants and branching ratios
              will be measured as a function of   temperature.  In the case of the metal ion,
              crossed beams will be   exploited to determine the time scale of reaction with
              200 ns resolution    Ultimately, these measurements will be extended to
              reactions of ligated   metal atoms (MO, MCH3, MCO) and small metal cluster
              cations.  Finally,   laser spectroscopy will be used to determine bond
              dissociation energies,   geometry, and the electronic and vibrational structure
              of simple   organometallic radicals such as MCH2, MCH3, and their cations.  
              Saturated hydrocarbon molecules such as methane and ethane are abundant  
              sources of carbon, but they are relatively inert.  Their chemical  
              reactivities can be significantly enhanced, however, by catalysts of  
              transition metal atoms.  The physical chemistry of this activation   process is
              not well understood and this research is devoted to improving   our knowledge
              of the interactions between metal atoms and hydrocarbon   molecules.  Results
              of this research will affect our understanding of   solution-phase
              organo-metallic chemistry, heterogeneous catalysis and   surface chemistry. 
              Furthermore, the data obtained in these   investigations will be of use in the
              development of theoretical models   and techniques for the calculation of
              interaction potentials between   metals and hydrocarbon molecules.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
