Title       : The Computer as a Scientific Instrument
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1999       
File        : a9616981

Award Number: 9616981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199781             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Seidel seidel@itdean.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel B. Hagen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Yost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce H. Bruemmer  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The electronic digital computer has brought about significant changes in several
              fields of  science.  Computer-based modelling and statistical analysis tools
              have automated data  collection, storage and analysis.  Computer simulations
              have allowed scientists to visualize  phenomena they could not observe in
              nature.  Yet such applications also raised questions for the  practice of
              science: Are simulation and data analysis valid sources for causal models?  Can
               experiments be replaced or supplemented by computer simulations of the same
              processes?   Computing has transformed the practice of science in many
              disciplines, yet no history of  scientific computing has yet been written.  As
              a first step toward this goal, the investigators will  examine the use of
              computers as scientific instruments in diverse fields of biological, physical, 
              and behavioral science.    The proposers will begin with a systematic
              bibliographic search of primary and  secondary sources for several fields of
              science for the period from 1975 through about 1975.   Then they will undertake
              historical research, including archival analysis, on-site visits, and a 
              selected set of interviews.  Although the approaches to material in each field
              of science will vary  from one investigator to another, their efforts will be
              united by a common goal and common  research questions, including efforts to
              situate the computer within its institutional, social, and  intellectual
              context; to understand how the computer changed scientific practices and was 
              changed by them; and to analyze how computers were used to promote the
              authority of certain  institutions, individuals, and methods.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
