Title       : International Conference on External Possession and Related Noun Incorporation
               Phenomena, Eugene, OR, Sept. 7-10, 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1997   
File        : a9616482

Award Number: 9616482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Doris L. Payne dlpayne@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This international conference brings together expert scholars to  investigate a
              set of language structures referred to as External  Possession and certain Noun
              Incorporation phenomena found around  the world. These constructions have been
              largely relegated to  "esoteric idiosyncrasies" of particular languages, but
              they in  fact challenge most proposed theories of syntax. This is because 
              features of the sentences involved fail to correspond with  supposed features
              of the verbs involved in those very sentences.  Thus, these constructions
              constitute limiting cases for any  adequate theory of syntax and natural
              language.     The conference will include expert scholars in syntax, lexicon, 
              verb structure, semantics, and psycholinguistics, in an effort to  get as
              holistic and comprehensive a view of the phenomena as  possible. Scholars have
              been explicitly chosen who we believe can  talk and listen well together across
              the major theoretical  divides in the field. Additionally, scholars who have
              explored  these constructions in a wide range of languages (Native North, 
              Central, South American; IndoEuropean including Romance,  Germanic, and Slavic;
              African including Nilotic, Bantu;  Australian; Cinitic among others), and who
              can talc about  particular data in depth, will be included.     The conference
              will be held at the University of Oregon from  September 7 through 10, 1997.
              Following the conference, an edited  volume will disseminate significant
              findings. This will be the  first volume on external possession phenomena, and
              will contain  substantive articles bearing on theoretical advances in the 
              understanding of verbal argument structure, syntax, typology,  language
              processing, and cognition.     In bringing together field data on the one hand,
              with theoretical  and psychological models which do not yet account for them on
              the  other, the project will help set the stage for new research  agendas in
              both psycholinguistics and theoretical linguistics.
