Title       : A Rigorous Analysis of Backflash Outages Caused by Direct Lightning Strokes to
               Overhead Power Lines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9616216

Award Number: 9616216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88597              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pritindra Chowdhuri pchowdhuri@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9616216  Chowdhuri    The probability of backflashover of a power
              transmission line is estimated, at present, by computing the insulator-string
              voltage caused by the traveling voltage waves along the vertical tower.  This
              method of computation neglects the voltage components induced across the
              insulator string by (I) the electromagnetic fields of the lightning channel,
              and (ii) the transient magnetic field of the current which flows along the
              tower.  The effects of these two voltage components could be significant
              because of the close proximity of the sources to the field points.  In
              addition, the insulator-string voltage can also be significantly affected by
              the front time of the lightning return-stroke current.  However, this effect is
              presently not taken into account.    Since the design of the first 345-kV power
              line, it has been recognized that the electrogeometric model is technically
              more logical and accurate than the electrical shadow method in estimating the
              outage rates of overhead power lines.  Yet the electrical shadow method is
              still being used to estimate the backflashover because of its simplicity.   
              The following are proposed for the estimation of outrage rates caused by
              backflashover for lightning strikes to a tower of the overhead power line:    
              (i)  the effects of the electromagnetic fields of lightning channel as well as
              the         transient magnetic field of the tower current on the total
              insulator-string         voltage;     (ii) the effects of the front of the
              lightning return-stroke current on the insulator-        string voltage; and   
               (iii) application of the electrogemetric model for the computation of the
              attractive                          area of a lightning stroke.    The effects
              of the shape of the insulator-string voltage on its critical flashover voltage,
              V50, is related but separate area of concern, which will not be covered in this
              research project.
