Title       : Integration of University of Cincinnati Invertebrate Paleontology Collection
               with Cincinnati Museum Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1998     
File        : a9616480

Award Number: 9616480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238609             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin D. Sumrall sumralcd@email.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nigel C. Hughes  (Principal Investigator former)
              David L. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Merritt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cincinnati Museum Center
	      1301 Western Avenue
	      Cincinnati, OH  452031127    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0600000   Facilities                              
Program Ref : 1355,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9616480  Hughes  This project, which involves the transfer of collections of
              invertebrate paleontological specimens from the University of Cincinnati (UC)
              to Cincinnati Museum Center (CMC), is the essential first phase of a program of
              the CMC that integrates research, collections, exhibits, and education, and is
              popularly known as "Mission Ordovician". This program capitalizes on
              Cincinnati's unique fossil heritage as a tool for introducing the public to
              "Cincinnatian" environments of 450 million years ago, when the rocks upon which
              the city is built were mud on a sea floor. Transfer of UC collections to CMC
              will have impact in two major ways: 1) the finest specimens that are
              transferred will form part of the new Ordovician Hall at CMC, which is
              currently in the planning phase; 2) the UC collection will be properly curated,
              which will facilitate specimen-based research on the ancient life and
              environments of Cincinnati. This research is important because it has direct
              relevance to humankind's understanding organismic and community responses to
              global change, and secondly because CMC will involve the strong community of
              local amateurs as "para-paleontologists" in several aspects of this research.
              Doing this will give the public a chance to become directly involved in a real
              research program in their own backyard. Educational programs associated with
              the exhibit will reach out to other sectors of the community-particularly
              children, who will have the thrill of cracking open a rock, finding a fossil,
              and knowing that the last animal to look at it was a trilobite, alive 450
              million years ago. This project is being accomplished as a partnership between
              the CMC (providing 55%) and the NSF (providing 45% of the funding by way of
              this award).
