Title       : Dissertation Research: The Influence of Cooperative and Competitive Behavior on
               the Evolution of the Chaco Anasazi of the American Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1996    
File        : a9616639

Award Number: 9616639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharina J. Schreiber schreibk@sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, Mr. John Kantner will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He wishes to address a central
              anthropological question of how complex societies arise. Since this phenomenon
              has been observed in many parts of the world and appears to have occurred
              independently in each, understanding of this process should increase our
              understanding of the basic principles which underly social organization and
              social change. Considerable research on the prehistory of the Southwestern
              United States has shown that over time small egalitarian groups increased in
              size and transformed into socially stratified hierarchical societies.
              Anthropologists have offered several hypotheses to explain this process. One
              set of theories focus on the principle of `adaptation` and see this development
              as a means to respond to a changing and unpredictable environment. Another set
              envisions this outcome as the result of political competition in which opposing
              groups work to increase their own power each other's expense.  Mr. Kantner
              argues that this question can most effectively be examined at the level of
              regional system rather than individual archaeological site and it is this
              latter approach which has most often been employed. He has constructed a data
              base for the Chaco Anasazi area of New Mexico, has hypothesized the patterns
              predicted by each model and is currently employing GIS analysis to study a
              large body of material. NSF support will supplement this research through the
              chemical analysis of ceramic materials selected from a series of sites. It is
              important to understand whether or not the Chaco settlements were integrated
              into a larger cooperative unit or whether competition among them was the norm.
              Through compositional analysis it is possible to determine the sources of clay
              and on this basis determine the relative degree of interaction.  This research
              is important for several reasons. It will increase our understanding of how
              complex societies develop and shed new light on the prehistory of the United
              States. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
