Title       : Boundary Layer Quasi-equilibrium and Tropical Atmospheric Circulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1998  
File        : a9616290

Award Number: 9616290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196671             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Raymond raymond@kestrel.nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      P O Box Q, Campus Station
	      Socorro, NM  878010389    505/835-5700

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9616290  Raymond, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology  "Boundary
              Layer Quasi-equilibrium and Tropical Atmospheric Circulations"          Dr.
              Raymond will explore the idea that moist convection over the  tropical oceans
              is controlled by the entropy balance of the sub-cloud layer  of the atmosphere.
               This hypothesis, known as the boundary layer quasi-  equilibrium (BLQ), will
              be examined through a series of modeling  experiments with a recently developed
              cumulus ensemble model and  with the principal investigator's equatorial beta
              plan primitive equation  model as well as through analysis of TOGA COARE data. 
              Dr. Raymond also  will explore the consequences of this hypothesis for tropical
              atmospheric  circulations in general.    Simply stated, this hypothesis asserts
              that the boundary or sub-cloud layer  rapidly adjusts to the inflow and outflow
              of moist entropy in such a way  that inflow balances outflow on time scales of
              half a day or greater.  In  the moist tropics, the primary elements in this
              process are sea-air fluxes  and convective and mesoscale downdrafts from moist
              convection,  although dry entrainment into the boundary layer can be important
              in  instances where very dry air exists just above the boundary layer.  The net
               result is that sea-air fluxes (and in some case, dry entrainment) exert a 
              strong control on convective activity.          In pursing this hypothesis, Dr.
              Raymond will focus on three issues:   (1)  the scales of motion over which the
              BLQ applies, (2) how variations in  middle level atmospheric moisture,
              wind-shear and related conditions  affect the ratio of updrafts and downdrafts
              and thus the boundary layer  balance, and (3) the implications of BLQ with
              respect to large-scale tropical  circulations.            This work has
              important implications for the treatment of  convection in global climate and
              weather models.
