Title       : Reliability, Performability and Scalability of Large-Scale Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1991      
File        : a9010240

Award Number: 9010240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64235              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walid A. Najjar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              Large-scale distributed multicomputer systems, consisting of several           
              thousand processing elements, are rapidly demonstrating their                  
              potential as a low cost high performance supercomputer.  Not only can          
              these system speed-up program execution, but they also allow                   
              significantly larger problems to be addressed.  A wide-spread use of           
              these systems, however, in mission critical as well as commercial              
              applications, depends on their demonstrated reliability, availability          
              and scalability.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The objective of this research project is to investigate the                   
              reliability, scalability and performability of large-scale distributed         
              systems.  As the number of elements in a system increases, the rate of         
              failure of the system is expected to increase given a constant                 
              technology.  Therefore system reliability and scalability are                  
              important considerations in the design of large-scale systems.  The            
              research will focus on two essential issues: the analysis of network           
              reliability and performability, and the evaluation of techniques that          
              can exploit the inherent redundancy of these systems.  The network             
              reliability analysis will examine the effects of multiple node and             
              link failures on the connectivity of the network and on its                    
              communication bandwidth, investigating the probability of occurrence           
              of network disconnection, saturation and communication bottlenecks.            
              The inherent hardware redundancy of large-scale systems can be                 
              exploited to achieve a higher reliability, albeit, at the cost of a            
              reduced computing power.  The second objective will be to investigate          
              the achievable performance/reliability tradeoff and system scalability         
              using various redundancy schemes.                                              
                                                                                             
              The research is essentially analytical in nature but will rely on              
              simulation techniques whenever an exact analytical evaluation is not           
              feasible.
