Title       : Investigation of Speech Perception Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9010114

Award Number: 9010114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1991       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan E. Sussman CDSJOAN@ubvms.cc.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will provide new insight into auditory, phonetic                 
              and attention requirements necessary for speech perception. The                
              research will study children's unique responses to speech                      
              perception tasks in order to uncover basic processing abilities                
              of humans and in order to test theories of speech perception.  In              
              the first phase of study, ten children aged five to six and ten                
              adults will participate in discrimination testing, labeling, and               
              selective adaptation tasks.  The selective adaptation task                     
              typically results in a shift in the location of listeners'                     
              phonetic category boundary after exposure to repeated                          
              presentations of one stimulus (the adaptor).  The boundary change              
              reflects the differing contributions of peripheral auditory, more              
              central auditory, and linguistic/phonetic influences on speech                 
              perception.  These contributing factors can be addressed by                    
              manipulation of characteristics of the adaptor stimulus used                   
              during selective adaptation trials.  Because Sussman and Carney                
              (1989) showed that school-aged children, in sharp contrast to                  
              adults, did not demonstrate a selective adaptation effect, this                
              research should clarify whether results with children were due to              
              children's poorer discrimination ability, different choice of                  
              best phonetic category exemplar, or attention factors.  By                     
              administering different adaptor conditions to children compared                
              to adults and comparing performance to measures of auditory                    
              discrimination, phase one will reveal the importance of acoustic,              
              phonetic, and attention factors for speech perception.  Results                
              from the first phase of research will be expanded into a multi-                
              year project including three sets of investigations.  1) Older                 
              children will be studied to determine if and when the                          
              relationship between lower-level auditory abilities and selective              
              adaptation becomes adult-like.  2) Adult selective adaptation                  
              ability will be studied with a spectral match variable to further              
              examine the necessity of attention factors.  3) Psychoacoustic                 
              and speech perception abilities of children with language                      
              impairment will be studied.  Preliminary research has shown that               
              language-impaired children have poorer discrimination abilities                
              for speech perception than their age-matched peers, and                        
              investigation should clarify the contribution of auditory                      
              perceptual vs. linguistic factors for speech perception.
