Title       : Research Initiation: Analysis of Linear Programming Relaxations of Combinatorial
               Optimization Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1990       
File        : a9010322

Award Number: 9010322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitris J. Bertsimas dbertsim@aris.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Linear programming methods have proven invaluable in solving              
              a wide variety of different applications of combinatorial                      
              optimization.  Based on the belief that a better understanding of              
              the properties of linear programming (LP) relaxations of integer               
              programming formulations can be useful in obtaining additional                 
              insights concerning the problem itself and concerning how to                   
              formulate and solve it efficiently, LP relaxations will be                     
              investigated for several closely related generic combinatorial                 
              optimization problems:  the network design problem with edge                   
              connectivity requirements, the Steiner tree problem, the traveling             
              salesman problem and the vehicle routing problem.  The tightness               
              of these linear relaxations will be analyzed from three                        
              perspectives:  worst-case, probabilistic and algorithmic.  Research            
              will take advantage of the interplay between different areas, such             
              as polyhedral theory, probabilistic analysis, network flows, graph             
              theory and randomized algorithms.  The research will be divided                
              into three tracks.  In track 1, the relative tightness of different            
              relaxations will be investigated, worst-case behavior of                       
              relaxations as compared to the optimal solution will be analyzed               
              and the values obtained by heuristics for a particular                         
              combinatorial optimization problem will be related to different LP             
              relaxations.  In track 2, probabilistic analysis of various LP                 
              relaxation will be performed and the idea of randomized rounding               
              for constructing a solution to the combinatorial optimization                  
              problem from its LP relaxation will be examined.  In track 3,                  
              algorithms to compute the LP relaxations will be developed and the             
              tightness of LP relaxation as well as the use of tight LP                      
              relaxations in large scale optimization algorithms will be                     
              investigated computationally.
