Title       : Design and Analysis of Multiprocessor Computers for Robotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1990      
File        : a9010771

Award Number: 9010771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50931              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas S. Reeves reeves@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              A major goal in robotics is the successful demonstration of mobile,            
              autonomous robots.  The computational power needed for sensory                 
              processing, planning, learning, and motion control is staggering.              
              Some of this need can be met by using special purpose devices, but             
              much computation is still needed for the higher level functions.               
                                                                                             
              A computer architecture for controlling an autonomous, mobile robot            
              must be flexible, have very high performance, and support real-time            
              execution.  Execution of the tasks can be organized into a hierarchy.          
              This project employs a hierarchical, MIMD parallel architecture for            
              this application.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The Hierarchical MultiProcessor consists of several levels; each level         
              is a group of microprocessors connected by two buses.  Communication           
              between processors is accomplished by message passing.  One of the             
              buses at each level is also used for communication between adjacent            
              levels.  Several novel techniques of improving the communication               
              efficiency in this architecture are presented.                                 
                                                                                             
              A major thrust in this project is to perform a detailed performance            
              analysis of the architecture and its variations.  The complexity of            
              the multiprocessor, multi-bus architecture, and of the real-time task          
              execution, presents formidable challenges for performance analysis.            
              Techniques for doing this analysis, are being developed.                       
                                                                                             
              The Robotics and Intelligent Systems Laboratory at N.C. State is in            
              the process of building a mobile, autonomous robot.  A reduced version         
              of the HMP architecture is being implemented, which will be followed           
              by a full-scale implementation.
