Title       : Research Initiation Awards: Study of Thermal Phenomena at Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1990       
File        : a9010311

Award Number: 9010311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : September 15,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arunava Majumdar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Roughness measurements of solid surfaces, such as thin films                   
              and machined metals, at microscales and nanoscales show that                   
              the surfaces are rough and disordered over several decades of                  
              length scales.  Similar features have been observed in                         
              turbulent fluid interfaces.  Such disordered structures                        
              strongly influence thermal phenomena at interfaces.  Previous                  
              studies on thermal phenomena at such interfaces have                           
              conventionally made either oversimplifying idealizations of                    
              smoothness of an interface or resorted to empirical and semi-                  
              empirical methods of analysis.  This lack of physical                          
              understanding of the phenomena was mainly due to an inability                  
              to quantify the disorder in these structures.  This study                      
              proposes to use the novel concepts of fractal geometry to                      
              understand and characterize the fundamental nature of                          
              disordered surfaces.  Such a characterization quantifies the                   
              structure of surfaces at every length scale within certain                     
              limits.  This is particularly important in providing key                       
              insight into the interactions of thermal phenomena with                        
              interfaces at relevant length scales.  Preliminary studies on                  
              applying fractals in contact conductance have explained                        
              several previous experimental results.  Based on these                         
              encouraging prospects, this study proposes to use fractals to                  
              study interfacial thermal phenomena of scientific and                          
              engineering importance such as contact conductance, frictional                 
              heating, and interactions of radiation with surfaces.
