Title       : Research Initiation Grant: An Efficient and Comprehensive Transport Model for
               Semiconductor Device Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1990     
File        : a9010457

Award Number: 9010457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kristen M. Biggar, N-BioS               
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Goldsman neil@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Effects of electron transport dominate semiconductor                           
              device behavior.  The main objective of the proposed                           
              research is to develop a comprehensive, physically                             
              accurate transport model, which is suitable for                                
              efficient numerical evaluation.  The model will                                
              integrate two approaches for characterizing electron                           
              transport:  the Legendre polynomial technique, and                             
              the energy transport method.  In addition to                                   
              determining current densities and electric potentials,                         
              when fully realized, the model will allow for rapid                            
              calculation of the electron distribution function                              
              throughout a device.  Initial studies will focus on                            
              numerically solving the homogeneous Boltzmann                                  
              transport equation, using Legendre polynomials, while                          
              incorporating the effects of phonon scattering, one                            
              non-parabolic conduction band, and impact ionization.                          
              The model will then be used to calculate currents                              
              generated by ionization in MOSFETs.  Next, the                                 
              effect of several conduction bands will be introduced.                         
              Finally, the effect of nonlinear electron-electron                             
              scattering will be accounted for by using Fokker                               
              Plank formulation.  Spatial dependence will be                                 
              obtained by evaluating the energy balance equation to                          
              determine the space-dependent average electron                                 
              energy.  The space-dependent distribution function                             
              will then be determined by simultaneous solutions of                           
              the energy balance equation and the homogeneous                                
              Boltzmann equation.  This study will facilitate a                              
              better understanding of the physical phenomena                                 
              which affect submicron device operation, and is well                           
              suited for applications in CAD.
