Title       : Research Initiation Awards: Experimental Investigation of Transient Convective
               Freezing and Melting of Ice on a Cold Tube Bank in a Crossflow of Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1990       
File        : a9010442

Award Number: 9010442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1990       
Expires     : August 15,  1990     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Kazmierczak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research is an investigation of the phenomena of freezing                 
              and melting of ice on a cold tube bundle.  The tube bank is                    
              immersed in a flowing stream of water (T    OoC) and the ice                   
              layer is studied that grows on the outside surface of the                      
              tubes, when the tubes are internally cooled below the freezing                 
              temperature (Tw   OoC).  The subsequent melting process of the                 
              ice formations when the coolant is removed will also be                        
              studied.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The main focus of this research is to document in terms of new                 
              correlations, the time-dependent heat transfer (Nusselt                        
              number) and fluid flow (pressure drop) characteristics (per                    
              row) of the systems as the freezing and melting process                        
              proceeds.  We will photographically record, at various times,                  
              the exact ice shape profiles and will visualize the resulting                  
              flow field through the tube bank.  Under the steady state                      
              condition, the local Nusselt number distribution will be                       
              obtained.  Experiments will be conducted in the low to                         
              moderate Reynolds number range and for a number of different                   
              cooling temperature ratios.  Both in-line and staggered tube                   
              geometries will be considered.  The effect of the tube's pitch                 
              and the upstream turbulence level will be documented.                          
              The interest in this research is justified from both a                         
              practical and from a fundamental view-point.  The results of                   
              the proposed study is important to the field of thermal energy                 
              storage involving phase change materials.  To be more                          
              specific, the findings obtained in this study would have                       
              direct engineering consequence in the design of ice storage                    
              systems and in phase change storage heat exchangers.  From the                 
              broader perspective, the problem under investigation is a                      
              highly complex coupled phase change heat transfer and fluid                    
              dynamic problem that addresses new areas in which our current                  
              understanding is lacking and needs improvement.
