Title       : Information Processing Biases in Experimental Asset Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1990      
File        : a9010667

Award Number: 9010667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133934             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Forsythe robert-forsythe@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Forrest D. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Neumann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Are market prices a good estimate of value?  Economists routinely              
              answer yes, but other social and behavioral scientists are less                
              certain.  An abundant literature in psychology, political science,             
              and sociology finds judgement bias in the processing of information            
              by individuals.  This project examines whether judgement bias about            
              the value of an asset can affect trading behavior in markets.                  
              Laboratory experiments are used to test for the existence of                   
              judgement bias.  A procedure is developed for measuring the cost               
              of judgement bias in a laboratory setting.  In practical situations            
              one normally would not be able to control the amount of judgement              
              bias, hence there is a need for methods that measure the cost of               
              judgement bias in the absence of experimental control.  These                  
              empirical methods are developed and two methods of validation are              
              used.  Market prices might be correctly established in the presence            
              of judgement bias as long as some group of traders are sufficiently            
              well-informed and act as arbitragers.  This possibility is examined            
              as part of the experimental design.                                            
                                                                                             
              The ability of markets to accurately forecast future events is                 
              often taken for granted by economists despite demonstrations by                
              psychologists of the existence of substantial judgement biases by              
              individuals in performing the tasks necessary for the efficient                
              operation of markets.  To an economist, the psychological evidence             
              about these biases is often unconvincing.  The experimental studies            
              which document their existence frequently use unpaid students who              
              are required to participate to earn course credit.  Thus                       
              participants have nothing at stake.  If these biases do exist at               
              the individual level, can they persist in a market setting where               
              individuals have financial incentives and can gain experience to               
              avoid mistakes?  Finally, if these biases do exist are they                    
              important in any meaningful sense?  Persistent statistical evidence            
              of widespread judgement bias would be of little importance if                  
              judgement bias cost an individual only one cent.  This project is              
              important because it develops rigorous measures of the cost of                 
              judgement bias and tests for the presence of significant judgement             
              bias in experimental asset markets.
