Title       : ROW: Edge Effects in Fragmented Piedmont Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1990      
File        : a9010009

Award Number: 9010009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11771              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn A. Maguire lmaguire@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   Clearing of Caroline Piedmont hardwood forests following                  
              European settlement reduced or eliminated populations of many                  
              plant and animal species farmland abandonment and secondary                    
              succession to pine and then hardwood forests in the first half of              
              this century afforded some species a partial recovery. In the                  
              second half of this century, urbanization is again fragmenting                 
              Piedmont forests with renewed threat to forest interior species.               
              The secondary fragmentation of Carolina Piedmont forests offers a              
              timely opportunity to study population and community responses                 
              and develop predictive models for both theoretical and practical               
              use.                                                                           
              The purpose of this planning research is to develop the ability                
              to predict likely changes in population status and community                   
              composition for selected forest taxa as functions of measures of               
              environmental pattern reflecting forest fragmentation.  The                    
              geographic region of interest is the Carolina Piedmont,                        
              particularly Durham and Orange Counties and adjacent sections of               
              neighboring counties, which contain the largest protected                      
              sections of Piedmont forest as well as the most rapidly                        
              urbanizing areas.  Taxa selected for study will likely include                 
              forest birds and vascular plant communities.  Measures used to                 
              describe forest fragmentation may include total and core areas in              
              several forest types; distribution of forest fragment patch                    
              sizes; amount of edge between forest types and other land uses;                
              distances among patches; lengths, widths and habitat                           
              characteristics of riparian and other corridors connecting forest              
              patches; and ages of patches, measured since lost major                        
              disturbance.  This planning activity will provide the information              
              necessary for development of a more complete study of forest                   
              fragmentation and landscape ecology.
