Title       : Population Mobility and Disease Spread in Dominica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1990       
File        : a9010265

Award Number: 9010265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Sattenspiel SattenspielL@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                   This is a study of the effect of cultural factors, social                 
              ties, and short-term population mobility (such as daily shopping               
              and visiting) in the spread of parasitic disease on the island of              
              Dominica in the Lesser Antilles, West Indies.  Methods involve                 
              the development and analysis of mathematical models.  The                      
              movement of individuals in the course of their daily activities                
              is an important aspect of human behavior.  Since most human                    
              illness is spread by direct or indirect human contact, population              
              mobility is a critical factor involved in its spread between                   
              regions.  Previous research on population movements has                        
              concentrated on large-scale permanent migrations, often because                
              of better labor markets in new areas.  Although this kind of                   
              mobility has proven useful in explaining global patterns of                    
              disease spread during human history, it is not of use in                       
              explaining its every-day occurrence.  Short-term mobility is far               
              more important for this problem because it is more common and                  
              because long stays in an area are not required in order for                    
              transmission to occur.  This project will provide quantitative                 
              data on the nature of such mobility and its importance for the                 
              spread and maintenance of disease in an area.  While a major                   
              focus of this study is the ultimate utilization of these data in               
              epidemiology, the study itself is anthropological in nature and                
              draws on the importance of social ties among kin and non-kin, and              
              the significance of population mobility in a market-based                      
              economy.
