Title       : Job Exit Behavior: An Empirical Analysis for the U.S. UsingSIPP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1990     
File        : a9010307

Award Number: 9010307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela J. Smith                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theresa J. Devine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              Transitions into employment have been studied extensively within               
              the "search" framework -- a paradigm which incorporates                        
              uncertainty in the labor market explicitly. Theoretical models                 
              have been developed; wage and unemployment duration data have                  
              been interpreted in light of this theory using estimation methods              
              developed primarily for this purpose; the theory has then been                 
              revised and refined in light of empirical findings. Overall, this              
              research has advanced out understanding of the dynamics of                     
              unemployed worker behavior and provided insights into important                
              policy issues (unemployment benefits, in particular). Transitions              
              out of jobs and between jobs -- long recognized as a major form                
              of motion in the labor market --  have not been studied as                     
              extensively. Theoretical models of job-exit behavior have been                 
              developed within the search framework, but empirical research                  
              has lagged behind.                                                             
                                                                                             
              Planning activities for an empirical analysis of variation in                  
              job-exit behavior across major demographic groups in the U.S.                  
              labor force are the focus of this project. Specifically, the                   
              potential of both parametric and nonparametric estimation                      
              techniques for determining patterns of systematic variation in                 
              job-exit behavior across workers in alternative age, race and                  
              gender groups will be explored. Among the questions addressed                  
              will be: (i) Do workers in alternative job groups generally exit               
              their jobs involuntarily (versus voluntarily) ? and (ii) Are                   
              there systematic differences across groups in terms of                         
              destinations? That is, are workers with certain characteristics                
              more likely than others to enter alternative jobs directly, or                 
              perhaps more likely to engage in nonmarket activity? In                        
              addressing these questions, potential sources of systematic                    
              variation suggested by economic theory will be investigated.                   
              These will include the relationship between job-exit behavior and              
              variation in educational attainment, on-the-job training, marital              
              status, parental status, occupation and industry attachment,                   
              union membership and valuation of nonwage benefits (health                     
              insurance, in particular).                                                     
                                                                                             
              The limited experience accumulated on demographic variation in                 
              job-exit behavior in the U.S. may in part be attributed to                     
              constraints imposed by the data that have been available to date.              
              This project includes construction of a labor market histories                 
              data set for a large, representative sample from the U.S.                      
              population from the Public Use Files for the 1986 Panel of the                 
              Survey of Income and Program Participation.
