Title       : Origins of Children's Semantic Categories of Spatial Relations: A
               Cross-Linguistic Study of English, Korean and Dutch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1990       
File        : a9010883

Award Number: 9010883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Soonja Choi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              According to a currently influential view, children begin                      
              language acquisition by mapping linguistic forms onto concepts                 
              previously established through nonlinguistic cognitive                         
              development.  The project will evaluate this hypothesis by                     
              comparing the early semantic categorization of topological                     
              spatial actions (e.g., PUT IN/ON) by children learning English,                
              Korean, and Dutch.  These languages classify spatial actions in                
              strikingly different ways for purposes of linguistic expression.               
              However, to the extent that children rely on nonlinguistic                     
              concepts rather than analysis of the linguistic input for the                  
              meanings of words, their spatial semantic categories should be                 
              similar, or at least should not differ systematically according                
              to language.  Two cross-sectional studies will be carried out                  
              with 80 children in each language (age range 1;0-3;6).  In the                 
              production experiment, children are encouraged to tell the                     
              experimenter how to spatially arrange objects.  The comprehension              
              study assesses sensitivity to language-specific semantic                       
              distinctions with the "preferential looking paradigm".  The data               
              will be analyzed (1) to determine how early children learning                  
              each language develop language-specific principles of                          
              categorizing spatial actions, and (2) to aassess, through                      
              analysis of correct and incorrect patterns of generalizations,                 
              the relative difficulty for children of alternative principles of              
              spatial classification.  Our conclusions should enable us to                   
              characterize more precisely than is now possible the nature of                 
              the interaction in early language acquisition between                          
              nonlinguistic categorization predispositions and children's                    
              sensitivity to the semantic categories of the input language.
