Title       : Research Initiation Award: Stability of Feedback Systems with Sensor or Actuator
               Failures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1990      
File        : a9010996

Award Number: 9010996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Nazli Gundes gundes@ece.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9220,
Abstract    :
              The project will study the problem of                                          
              integrity in linear, time-invariant, multi-                                    
              input, multi-output feedback systems.  We                                      
              consider the closed-loop stability of the                                      
              unity-feedback system under three classes of                                   
              sensor or actuator failures.  In the first                                     
              class any arbitrary number of loops, including                                 
              all, may fail; in the second class any number                                  
              of loops, except all, may fail; in the third                                   
              class, any loop but only one loop may fail.                                    
              We analyze the stability of the unity-feedback                                 
              system with failures in each of the three                                      
              classes.  For the first class of failures, the                                 
              plant and the compensator have to be stable                                    
              from the start since the failure of all loops                                  
              will reduce the configuration to a cascade                                     
              connection.                                                                    
              For a given multi-input multi-output plant                                     
              which has no unstable hidden modes it is                                       
              possible to parametrize the class of all                                       
              compensators that stabilize the closed-loop                                    
              system.  Our goal is to parametrize the class                                  
              of compensators that achieve integrity for                                     
              each of the three classes of failures.  As                                     
              expected, such parametrization is possible                                     
              only for certain classes of plants.  The                                       
              objectives are to identify those plants for                                    
              which simultaneous stabilization of the                                        
              nominal plant with each failure can be                                         
              achieved, to find a systematic method to                                       
              synthesize compensators that achieve this                                      
              simultaneous stabilization, and to find the                                    
              class of all achievable closed-loop transfer                                   
              functions.  This will indicate which                                           
              performance objectives can be achieved                                         
              together with integrity.  Based on the                                         
              parametrization of all compensators that the                                   
              results will also be used in synthesis of                                      
              compensators for systems with partial loop                                     
              failures where constant gain factors are                                       
              introduced in the feedback-loops and extended                                  
              to an algebraic synthesis method for the case                                  
              of structured dynamics being introduced in the                                 
              loops.
