Title       : Preservation, Microfilming and Computerized Cataloging of the Frank H. Cushing
               and Fredrick W. Hodge Papers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9010988

Award Number: 9010988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim Walters   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen Whitaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Batkin  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Southwest Museum
	      P O Box 128,
	      Los Angeles, CA  90042    213/221-2164

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Mr. Craig Klyver, the Southwest Museum                  
              will catalog and conserve the anthropological papers of Frank                  
              Hamilton Cushing and Frederick Webb Hodge.  Both played active                 
              roles in the development of American anthropology and the                      
              documentation of traditional Southwestern Native American                      
              cultures.  Cushing conducted both ethnographic and archaeological              
              research in the late 1800's and was a pioneer in new methods of                
              ethnological investigation.  He lived and worked among the Zuni                
              people over an extended period of time and was one of the first                
              participant/observer ethnographers.  Based on this original work,              
              he later returned to the Southwest as a Smithsonian Institution                
              staff member to conduct archaeological research in a attempt to                
              understand the development of the patterns he observed.  Hodge                 
              was also a Smithsonian staff member who first accompanied Cushing              
              and then later undertook extensive publication of his findings.                
              Together the Cushing and Hodge photographs, letters, manuscripts,              
              and other documents cover 30 linear feet.  Because many of these               
              materials are fragile and poorly catalogued they are not readily               
              available to researchers.                                                      
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support the Southwest Museum                  
              will provide proper storage, repair damaged items, and take steps              
              to preclude further deterioration of these collections.  The                   
              materials will be catalogued on ARGUS, the museum's computerized               
              collection management system.  On-line access to documents and                 
              photographs in the collections will be available to other                      
              ARGUS-user institutions.  In addition, the materials will be                   
              microfilmed and copies deposited with the National                             
              Anthropological Archives, the Museum of the American Indian, and               
              the Zuni Tribal Archives, as well as the Southwest Museum.                     
              Printed indexes and finding aids will be generated, and the                    
              original materials conserved and housed in proper containers.                  
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons.  It will preserve               
              documents which contain significant scientific information and                 
              make them more readily available to researchers.
