Title       : The Role of Law and Social Movements in Environmental Conflicts: A Japanese Case
               Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1990     
File        : a9010464

Award Number: 9010464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lisa Martin                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28257              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Kidder rkidder@vm.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              Environmental degradation is one of the most serious problems                  
              facing industrialized societies.  Remedies or prevention of harms              
              caused by environmental pollution require collective activities of             
              many people.  Sociolegal research has for many years focused on the            
              connections of law to disputing, dispute transformation, and social            
              change.  This project will draw on theories and research from this             
              literature to examine the expansion or contraction of rights and               
              the handling of conflicts about the environment.                               
                                                                                             
              Using a new class-action lawsuit in Kobe, Japan as a case study,               
              this project will trace the formation of a social movement and the             
              transformation of its conflict with industry and government over               
              the issue of air pollution.  Through interviews with participants              
              involved in the filing of 500 lawsuits by Japanese citizens in an              
              industrial pollution case, the investigators will trace how the                
              grievances of individual citizens produced a victims' organization,            
              government legislation, subsequent government retreat from aid to              
              victims, and involvement in litigation.  Thus, the in-depth study              
              permits detailing the different social forces which have affected              
              the development of both political and legal action as well as the              
              relationship between the two.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research will illustrate the complex legal, cultural, and                 
              political processes involved in policy formation and the relevance             
              of theory in this area to the explanation of responses to                      
              environmental change.  It promises to extend our understanding of              
              the connection between legal institutions, policy change, and the              
              actions of everyday citizens as well as provide important new                  
              insights into patterns of conflict management in Japan and                     
              elsewhere.  How rights are articulated and how law becomes                     
              mobilized on issues relating to the environment have immensely                 
              important theoretical and policy implications for understanding                
              global environmental change, the development of rights movements,              
              and the process of legal mobilization.
