Title       : Study of Cross-Phase Modulation in Optical Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1990 
File        : a9010599

Award Number: 9010599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Govind P. Agrawal gpa@optics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is related to an                                         
              experimental and theoretical study of the                                      
              effects of cross-phase modulation (XPM) in                                     
              optical fibers and how such effects can be                                     
              used for influencing the behavior of one                                       
              optical pulse by copropagating it together                                     
              with another ultrashort pulse.  The project                                    
              is divided into three parts.  The first                                        
              part is concerned with the XPM interaction                                     
              between the pump pulse and the Stokes pulse                                    
              that is generated internally through the                                       
              process of stimulated Raman scattering.                                        
              The second part is related to the XPM                                          
              interaction between the pump and signal                                        
              pulses launched simultaneously at the fiber                                    
              input.  The pump and signal pulses are                                         
              allowed to have different carrier                                              
              wavelengths, different pulse widths, and a                                     
              relative time delay between them.  The                                         
              third part is related to the XPM                                               
              interaction when the pump and signal pulses                                    
              have the same carrier wavelength but excite                                    
              the orthogonally polarized modes of a                                          
              single-mode fiber.  The objective is to                                        
              study how the XPM interaction can be used                                      
              to modify the propagation characteristics                                      
              of a signal pulse (such as its phase,                                          
              frequency, shape, or spectrum) through an                                      
              intense pump pulse.  The study is useful                                       
              for many engineering applications in the                                       
              fields of photonic switching and high-                                         
              speed optical communications.
