Title       : U.S.-China Cooperative Research (Astronomy): Quasar Absorption Lines: Physical
               Conditions in the Early Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  1994   
File        : a9010583

Award Number: 9010583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24211              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill Bechtold jbechtold@as.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 9200      US CHINA COOP IN BASIC SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1217,9200,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a two.year collaborative project between                               
              Jill Bechtold of the University of Arizona and                                 
              Huang Keliang of Nanjing University to study                                   
              physical conditions in the early universe.  The                                
              project is sponsored by NSF and the Chinese State                              
              Education Commission.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The absorption lines observed in the spectra of                                
              very distant quasars provide a powerful probe of                               
              intervening gas along the line of sight.  The high                             
              luminosities of quasars enable astronomers to study                            
              the Universe at great distances and hence at epochs                            
              when the Universe was about 20 percent of its                                  
              current age.  This was a period when many important                            
              events took place .. the formation and rapid early                             
              evolution of galaxies, the beginnings of the                                   
              collapse of large structures such as clusters of                               
              galaxies and superclusters, and the rapid turn.on                              
              of quasars themselves.  Some quasar absorption                                 
              lines are caused by clouds in the interstellar                                 
              medium of normal galaxies; others by intergalactic                             
              clouds in the interstellar medium of normal                                    
              galaxies; others by intergalactic clouds that                                  
              probably represent pre.galactic or proto.galactic                              
              material of primordial metal abundance.  In either                             
              case, quasar absorption lines provide direct                                   
              information about the physical conditions in                                   
              objects in the early Universe that are too faint to                            
              study any other way.                                                           
                                                                                             
              This goal of this project is to analyze the most                               
              detailed optical spectra of quasar absorption lines                            
              obtainable with currently available telescopes and                             
              instrumentation.  The spectra were obtained with                               
              the echelle spectrog.raph at the 4 meter telescope                            
              at the Kitt Peak National Observatory.
