Title       : Applying Genetic Algorithms to Neural Network Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1991      
File        : a9010546

Award Number: 9010546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1990  
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73267              (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Darrell Whitley whitley@cs.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              This work will use genetic algorithms to solve two classes of                  
              optimization problems related to neural networks: (1) the                      
              optimization of weights in recurrent and feed forward neural                   
              networks and (2) the optimization of the connectivity of neural                
              networks.  To establish a challenging criteria for measuring                   
              success, it will build and test large networks for radar signal                
              pulse detection.  The use of genetic algorithms for defining                   
              neural network connectivity has emerged as an area of research                 
              only in the last year.  A genetic algorithm has been used to                   
              fefine network connectivities for small problems, producing nets               
              which learn much faster than standard "fully-connected" nets and               
              which are suprisingly consistent in the number of data                         
              presentations required for learning.  This work will extend the                
              current approach by combining the genetic algorithm code for                   
              weight optimization with a variation on our current approach to                
              optimizing the connectivity.  This combination should allow                    
              optimization of connectivity and weights simultaneously on large               
              problems.  Finally, the successful optimization of feed forward                
              networks using genetic algorithms is significant because these                 
              algorithms make no assumptions about how the weights (parameters)              
              that the genetic algorithm is asked to evaluate are actually                   
              used.  It should be possible to applied the genetic algorithms                 
              directly to recurrent network optimization problems which tend to              
              have restrictive storage and computational requirements when                   
              trained with true gradient descent learning techniques.
