Title       : The Dynamics of Change in the Plea Bargaining System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1991      
File        : a9010178

Award Number: 9010178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80739              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chet Mirsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael McConville  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              By the year 1860, the criminal justice system transformed from a               
              court-centered system of public adjudication, dependent upon jury              
              trials, to a police-centered system of private adjudication,                   
              dependent upon guilty pleas.  By 1914, the first public and                    
              private defender agencies were established and the public relied               
              more and more on guilty pleas and non-trial dispositions.  The                 
              dominant theoretical perspective of most longitudinal research                 
              that, as trials became more complex and as the number of criminal              
              cases increased, guilty pleas began to dominate as a means of                  
              facilitating the rapid disposition of the criminally accused.                  
              More recent research suggests that plea capitulation and the                   
              abandonment of jury trials have a much longer history than                     
              generally understood and that these changes relate to structural               
              factors at the very core of the criminal justice process.                      
                                                                                             
              This project will analyze the sociolegal context surrounding the               
              abandonment of jury trials.  The research will trace the                       
              historical underpinnings of the guilty plea system focusing on                 
              the structural factors which gave birth to the system more than                
              fifty years prior to the establishment of institutional defense                
              and the advent of modern case pressure.  Through a detailed                    
              analysis of New York City's prosecution files between 1800 and                 
              1900, previously unstudied trial transcripts, the Minute Book of               
              the Court of General Sessions, and biographies of lawyers who                  
              appeared in criminal cases, the study will provide the first                   
              systematic account of the construction of criminal cases in the                
              nineteenth century with a focus on the method of disposition.                  
              The analysis will explain how the ascendancy of the police in the              
              evidence-gathering function and an increase in adversariness                   
              among lawyers combined to eliminate jury trials and to replace                 
              them with guilty pleas.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will increase understanding of the                
              reasons for change in the disposition of criminal cases from one               
              legal form to another.  The analysis will consider whether the                 
              shift in legal form occurred because of internalized responses to              
              the growth of business in courts or as a result of externally-                 
              generated pressures during a period in which there was profound                
              change in the structure of society and the role of the state.                  
              Through such an historical analysis, important insights will be                
              gleaned, both theoretically and practically, for understanding                 
              the present criminal justice system.
