Title       : Production and Immobilization of Antibody Fragments for Improved Affinity
               Purification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1990      
File        : a9010955

Award Number: 9010955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130143             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas S. Clark clark@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Schultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research involves novel strategies to produce                             
              antibody polypeptides with optimal structures for                              
              immobilization to insoluble carriers.  Each approach is                        
              designed to result in immobilized, monovalent antibody                         
              fragments with their combining sites facing out from the                       
              carrier surface, and attachment to the carrier will be                         
              achieved in a highly specific manner through a site on                         
              the polypeptide far removed from the combining site                            
              itself.  Attachment in this fashion should allow complete                      
              retention of antibody binding activity and thus lead to                        
              improved techniques of affinity purification.  In                              
              addition, immobilizing antibody fragments rather than the                      
              much large whole antibody should increase the number of                        
              antibody combining sites that can be immobilized on the                        
              carrier surface.                                                               
                                                                                             
              In the case of Fv fragments, site-directed mutagenesis                         
              will be used to incorporate a single attachment site at a                      
              desired location on the polypeptide.  The modified                             
              polypeptide will then be expressed in E. coli.                                 
              Production of Fv fragments in E. coli may prove to be a                        
              superior alternative to present-day hybridoma technology,                      
              which is frequently the limiting factor in monoclonal                          
              antibody production and isolation.  Moreover, both site-                       
              directed mutagenesis and random mutagenesis can be used                        
              to rapidly obtain antibody polypeptides with variant                           
              binding activities.  Protein engineering may also be used                      
              to introduce pH or metal-regulated binding affinity into                       
              the combining site.
