Title       : Interaction of the Goldfish Kainate Receptor with G Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1993       
File        : a9010229

Award Number: 9010229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1990    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148635             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Oswald reo1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Podleski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1188      SYNAPTIC MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The kainate receptor is a large membrane protein found in the                  
              brain of all vertebrates, including humans.  This protein is one               
              of a larger family of proteins called glutamate receptors that                 
              are implicated in a wide variety of normal physiological                       
              processes (e.g., transmission of information in the nervous                    
              system, learning and memory, control of cell death) as well as a               
              number of pathological processes (e.g., epilepsy, alcohol abuse,               
              and drug abuse).  Kainate receptors are the most prevalent of the              
              glutamate receptors and are found in particularly high numbers in              
              the brains of lower vertebrates, such as fish.  In order to                    
              understand in detail the function of the brain, we need to                     
              understand as much as possible about the functioning of the                    
              individual components, in particular those components are                      
              involved in the transmission of information.  Recently, we have                
              found that at least one type of kainate receptor in the brain of               
              the goldfish transduces its information by interaction with                    
              another type of protein, known as a GTP binding protein or G                   
              protein.  The purpose of this proposal is to study the                         
              interaction of this kainate receptor with G proteins and to                    
              produce cDNA clones coding for the receptor.  The production of                
              cDNA clones will allow us to determine that some aspects of the                
              structure of the protein and may eventually allow us to produce                
              the protein without the use of experimental animals.  These                    
              studies should provide a better understanding of the structure                 
              and function of an important molecular component of the brain.
