Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Decision, Risk, and Management Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1990     
File        : a9010634

Award Number: 9010634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5725               (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Frederick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award for doctoral dissertation research in decision risk, and            
              management science will support research costs for work on the                 
              dissertation, "The Relation of Gainsharing, Work Climate, and Social           
              Performance."   This project will integrate organization theory with           
              businesss-and-society theory.  The empirical examination of multiple           
              stakeholder models has led organization theorists to conclude that it          
              is extremely difficult for managers to fulfill the conflicting needs of        
              internal and external stakeholders.  Missing from this body of research        
              is an examination of intervening variables.  Business-and-society              
              theorists have proposed that participatory management is an attribute          
              of socially responsible companies and that it is likely to enhance a           
              company's social performance.                                                  
                                                                                             
              The dissertation will empirically examine the relationship between             
              gainsharing (an institutional form of participatory management) and a          
              company's social performance as it pertains to multiple stockholders.          
              Two companies with successful gainsharing plans will be contrasted             
              with two companies with less successful gainsharing plans, through             
              interviews, examinations of archivaal data, field observations, and            
              surveys.  This work will provide theory and data of use for firms'             
              managers on (1) the relationship between a company's standard operating        
              policies, and procedures associated with gainsharing and its social            
              performance, and (2) the relationship between a company's work climate         
              and its social performance.
