Title       : Research Initiation Award: Energy Based Damage Model and Procedure for Safety
               Analysis of Structural Systems In Steel Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1993       
File        : a9010208

Award Number: 9010208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Iqbal Singh Sohal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Most engineering structures are being designed to carry specified              
              service or normal loads.  However, recent developments in computer             
              technology have created a potential for design of structures                   
              against the loads expected during the whole cycle of their life.               
              The structures designed by using this approach will have improved              
              durability, maintainability and damageability.  Herein, an energy              
              based damage model will be developed for computation of residual               
              strength and stiffness of damaged steel structural members.  The               
              residual strength computations will utilize yield, limit and                   
              failure surfaces of the member which will be defined in terms of               
              generalized forces for steel structural members.  For safety                   
              evaluation of structural systems, a damage analysis computer code              
              is to be developed.  For increasing the efficiency of the safety               
              analysis procedure, a stiffness matrix will be derived for the                 
              damaged member by employing a deflected shape which varies with                
              increasing deformations.  The safety  of structural systems will               
              be evaluated by utilizing a procedure developed by modifying the               
              existing reliability technique.  The whole procedure of determining            
              probabilities of damage and failure of structural systems will be              
              automated.  The above developments will be validated by comparisons            
              with existing experimental and analytical results.  The developed              
              damage model and safety analysis algorithm will aid in design of               
              structural systems based on desired probability of damage and                  
              failure.  They will also aid in design of steel structural systems             
              which, under the extreme loads, will avoid concentration of damage             
              and premature failure.
