Title       : Consumption, Labor Supply and Portfolio Choice with Time andState Nonseparable
               Utility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1990       
File        : a9010728

Award Number: 9010728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33409              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley E. Zin zin@bobbyorr.gsia.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry G. Epstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A class of utility functions is proposed which relaxes some of                 
              the restrictive assumptions constrains current models.                         
              Specifically, time and state separability are no longer required.              
              With respect to time separability, a recursive (due to Koopmans)               
              specification permits the consumption-leisure tradeoff in any                  
              period to depend on consumption and leisure levels in subsequent               
              times. This dependence weakens the a priori constraints imposed                
              in the standard models on the relative responses of consumption                
              and leisure to price and income shocks and this permits one to                 
              model more flexibly the intertermporal substitutability of each                
              of consumption and leisure. With respect to state separability,                
              this relaxed assumption has the flexibility to disentangle                     
              intertemporal substitutability from risk aversion.                             
                                                                                             
              A further contribution of this work is that it allows for the                  
              estimation of alternative utility specifications. The predictions              
              of the model developed in the theoretical section differ                       
              significantly from both the expected utility model and the                     
              separable model. These alternatives can be tested wither                       
              separately or jointly. Expected utility is a nested special case               
              and can be tested as a simple parameter restriction. Time-                     
              separability utility can be tested using non-nested tests. This                
              project will provide the first such empirical testing of a model               
              that embodies both time and state nonseparabilities.                           
                                                                                             
              The approach taken here will enable a very flexible modeling of                
              intertemporal substitution elasticities, allowing some separation              
              between risk preferences and substitution preferences and also                 
              allowing a greater separation between wealth and substitution                  
              effects. The empirical testing will permit a quantitative                      
              analysis of the importance of both state and time                              
              nonseparabilities for dynamic economic analysis.
