Title       : Issues in Game Theory and Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1990      
File        : a9010246

Award Number: 9010246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82643              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Rosenthal rosentha@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A key assumption in traditional game theory is that all players are            
              completely rational.  This sometimes leads to absurd conclusions.              
              One part of this project is to continue exploring the implications             
              of more evolution-based hypotheses about behavior in games.  Within            
              economic theory, three problems are addressed.  First, recent                  
              strategic-game models of the problems associated with the massive              
              debt owed by certain sovereign nations to private commercial banks             
              have yielded provocative but counterfactual predictions.  The goal             
              here is to see whether the results change.  Second, in some                    
              economic games a counterintutive theoretical result has emerged:               
              that more competition on one side of a market leads to a price                 
              change in the wrong direction.  The intention here is to explore               
              the general class of market games in which this phenomenon arises.             
              Third, adopting the view that government decision-making is a                  
              complicated ongoing bargaining process involving competing and                 
              overlapping constituencies, bargains struck at one point in time               
              necessarily have implications for what will confront future                    
              bargainers; yet there is no way that compromises can be agreed to              
              by the as-yet-nonexistent players.  The aim here is to explore the             
              extent of the social inefficiencies that inevitably result.                    
                                                                                             
              The research on evolution and bounded rationality in games is                  
              especially exciting.  One of the major problems with bounded                   
              rationality is modeling the limitations on rationality in a way                
              that is not arbitrary or only descriptive.  In this project                    
              economic agents use a variety of rules of thumb for bounded                    
              rationality reasons.  These rules are applied across a number of               
              different social situations and evolutionary processes.  The                   
              frequencies of the specific rules found in a society are derived.              
              For instance, one might imagine that in a society in which the rule            
              of thumb "avoid risky investments" was widely practiced, the                   
              prospects for high payoff (at least temporarily) from more                     
              aggressive strategies might be better on average than in other                 
              societies, although not in all situations.  This in turn might lead            
              to an invasion of such strategies and the subsequent relative                  
              success in turn of more conservative strategies.  This project                 
              develops analytic tools that permit us to determine under what                 
              conditions a steady state with a blend of behaviors comes about and            
              under what conditions perpetual periodic waves occur.
