Title       : Research Initiation Award: An Object-Oriented Model for Engineering Applications
               Using A Geographic Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9010587

Award Number: 9010587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa M. Adams adams@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0317000   Urban Technology                        
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1442,
Abstract    :
              The full potential of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) in the              
              field of engineering has not been realized.  A growing source of               
              spatial and non-spatial information may be found organized in GIS              
              databases.  These systems have the potential for storing time                  
              dependent geographic information.  Effectively integration GIS                 
              databases with engineering applications involving planning,                    
              management, construction, analysis and design to create powerful               
              decision support tools would be of enormous benefit.                           
                                                                                             
              This research will identify and specify the GIS queries and object-            
              oriented (OO) data structure required to model and simulate                    
              physical and geographical processes and systems which are functions            
              of time and geographic location.  The object-oriented database                 
              model will be capable of representing spatial and non-spatial                  
              geographical data including geometric, material and functional                 
              information.  By automatically accessing GIS databases, powerful               
              engineering decision support software which is consistent and                  
              accurate can be developed at less cost.  The results of this                   
              research will serve as a link between engineering software and                 
              geographic databases.  Engineering systems used, for example, to               
              model waste water management, management, shoreline erosion,                   
              wellhead protection or air pollution transport will have direct                
              access to actual geographic information.  This results of this work            
              will enhance the functionality of GIS software for engineering                 
              applications..//
