Title       : Science Upgrade for R/V Knorr
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1990  
File        : a9010423

Award Number: 9010423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard W. West                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $699306             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Coburn jcoburn@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5416      SHIPBOARD SCIENTIFIC SUPP EQUI
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will provide support for shipboard scientific                     
              support equipment for the research vessel KNORR, operated by the               
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, and dedicated to use in                  
              support of ocean science research.                                             
                                                                                             
              The Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program provides funds              
              for ship equipment deemed essential to the proper and safe                     
              conduct of ocean science research. This Program provides support               
              for such items as deck equipment including winch systems for the               
              deployment and retrieval of scientific instruments, navigational               
              equipment such as radars, gyroscopes and earth satellite                       
              receivers to pin point the location of research sites,                         
              communication equipment including radio transceivers and                       
              satellite transceivers for voice and scientific data                           
              communications and other equipment such as motorized workboats                 
              for transporting scientists to and from data retrieval sites.                  
                                                                                             
              The Project Director, Robertson P. Dinsmore is fully qualified to              
              direct this project having had considerable experience in                      
              overseeing similar activities.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The R/V KNORR is undergoing a major overhaul/refit/upgrade                     
              including lengthening by 34 feet, replacement and modernization                
              of the propulsion system and refurbishment of interior services                
              and surfaces.  This effort is being funded by the Navy through                 
              the Office of Naval Research.  The NSF contribution will complete              
              the project by supplying funds for the scientific upgrade of the               
              R/V KNORR.  This includes modifications to the existing ship                   
              controls to allow precise dynamic positioning, installation of a               
              fully integrated winch readout system, a modern workboat which                 
              will also serve as a rescue boat, two new cranes and a                         
              hydrographic boom for handling scientific gear, the refurbishment              
              of the ship's hydrographic winch, installation of modern echo                  
              sounding systems and an uninterruptible power supply for                       
              scientific instruments.
