Title       : The Impact of Time on Distributed Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1990       
File        : a9010730

Award Number: 9010730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Welch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 2875      SYSTEM SOFTWARE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this project are to develop realistic, partially             
              synchronous models of distributed systems and to determine the                 
              relationships between them.  A variety of partially synchronous models         
              will be collected by studying real distributed protocols and                   
              formulating their timing requirements as abstractly as possible.               
              Application areas include distributed file systems and communication           
              networks.  Relationships between the models will be determined by              
              defining simulations between models and looking for problems that              
              differentiate them.  Timing constraints will be added to distributed           
              problems (previously studied without them) and the resulting upper and         
              lower bounds on time complexity will be analyzed.  The first problem           
              to be so analyzed is that of implementing atomic registers.                    
                                                                                             
              The significance of identifying partially synchronous models is that           
              they are more realistic than the two extreme timing models                     
              (synchronous and asynchronous) often used.  Understanding the                  
              relationships between models is important because they indicate                
              precisely what time behavior is necessary and sufficient for                   
              particular properties to hold.  Systems builders can then concentrate          
              on providing the appropriate time behavior.  Model simulations can             
              save work and unify results when results carry over from one model to          
              another.  Studying real protocols and specific problems can lead to            
              results that are useful in the specific problem domains.
