Title       : Induction and Stabilization of Axonal Neurites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9010981

Award Number: 9010981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Shea   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : McLean Hospital
	      
	      Belmont, MA  02178    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Neuritogenesis, the growth of neural processes, is important for               
              neuronal communication.  In order to initiate and sustain neurite              
              outgrowth during embryonic development, nerve cells must receive               
              a series of signals secreted by surrounding glial cells in the                 
              form of protease inhibitors, protein splitting suppressor                      
              enzymes.  Studies using cultured neurons implicate the role of                 
              two classes of multiple protease inhibitors that act on specific               
              internal and external proteases.  One class of protease                        
              inhibitors induce neurite outgrowth and the other maintains the                
              outgrowth of existing neurons once neuritogenesis has been                     
              initiated.  Biochemical and immunohistochemical methods will be                
              employed to identify the different protease inhibitors that                    
              migrate into neurons.  By injecting protease inhibitors into                   
              neurons, Dr. Shea will be able to determine which inhibitor is                 
              responsible for cytoskeletal stability, the framework that                     
              sustains the shape of mature neurites. This investigation will                 
              provide additional information on the regulation of axonal                     
              neuritogenesis.
