Title       : RUI: Development of Antipredator Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1990     
File        : a9010588

Award Number: 9010588
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1990     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74164              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold A. Herzog   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Defense against predators is one of the most important survival                
              skills for any animal.  In many species, newborn individuals must              
              be able to recognize potential enemies and to exhibit effective                
              antipredator behavior.  However, little is known about how these               
              behaviors develop.  Animals lacking parental care have no                      
              opportunity to learn effective behaviors from adults and thus are              
              ideal for investigating how behaviors are individually acquired                
              in nature.  Dr. Herzog's experiments will investigate how an                   
              important class of behavioral tactics, antipredator responses,                 
              are learned under natural conditions.                                          
                                                                                             
              Using garter snakes, a species with virtually no parental care,                
              this research will investigate aspects of the control,                         
              modification, and evolution of defensive behaviors.                            
              Specifically, Dr. Herzog will examine how animals learn to                     
              recognize predators, the types of experience that cause                        
              modifications of antipredator strategies, and how genes influence              
              the ability of animals to learn new responses.  The "predators"                
              in the experiments will be lifelike models, and no animal will be              
              harmed in the course of the research.                                          
                                                                                             
              The research will enhance knowledge of the evolution of learning               
              ability and of the processes that enable very young animals to                 
              adapt to hostile environmental contingencies.
