Title       : Voting Behavior in Sub-Presidential Elections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9010956

Award Number: 9010956
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1990  
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119610             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aage R. Clausen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence A. Baum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An understanding of voting in sub-presidential elections is essential          
              to a full understanding of voting behavior in the United States.  This         
              derives most obviously from the fact that most voting is performed at          
              the state and local level, choosing government officials responsible           
              for allocating and administering public resources on a vast scale.             
              Despite the importance of these voting decisions, attention to them has        
              been overshadowed by attention to the presidential contest, and to a           
              lesser extent, to congressional elections.  In addition to substantive         
              findings, a contribution of this study is the development of a                 
              framework for analyzing voting behavior in sub-presidential elections.         
                                                                                             
              Important to the study of sub-presidential contests is the variation in        
              the visibility of the several races and the fact that low visibility is        
              a condition common to many state and local elections.  An understanding        
              of voting in such elections has not been provided by the much more             
              extensive research on the highly visible presidential elections.  Yet          
              such races are the norm in American politics rather than the exception.        
                                                                                             
              The site of this investigation is the 1990 general election in Ohio            
              which features a highly visible governor's race, moderately visible            
              contests for four state executive offices, and two potentially low             
              visibility nonpartisan races for seats on the Ohio Supreme Court.  The         
              variation in visibility is important to an understanding of the                
              differences in the sources and kinds of information that are used by           
              voters as information becomes less obtainable.  Informational                  
              differences are expected to be critical to the understanding of the            
              bases for preferences between candidates.                                      
                                                                                             
              Different models of voting behavior will be tested, including party            
              line, split-ticket, incumbency preference, and coattail voting                 
              patterns.  The sources and levels of information brought to bear on the        
              voting decisions, and how they change as a function of the campaign,           
              will be examined in relation to variation in the visibility of the             
              different contests.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Interviews of 1,200 Ohio citizens will be conducted shortly after Labor        
              Day, respondents will be re-interviewed immediately prior to the               
              election, and all pre-election respondents will be re-interviewed              
              immediately after the election.  Respondents will be asked a series of         
              questions regarding evaluations of, attitudes toward, and preferences          
              for the competing candidates.  Knowledge of the candidates will be             
              critical information as will the sources of this knowledge, such as            
              mass media and the activities of parties and candidates in                     
              communicating with and enlisting the support of voters.  A full battery        
              of socio-demographic questions will be asked of each respondent in             
              addition to questions on prior voting behavior, political affiliations         
              and policy-related attitudes.
