Title       : Modulation of Pituitary Cell Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9222192

Award Number: 9222192
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244041             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Korn korn@oracle.pnb.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9106,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Changes in the concentration of intracellular calcium ions                     
              regulate                                                                       
              an enormous variety of physiological functions in nearly all                   
              cells.                                                                         
              These functions include hormone and neurotransmitter secretion,                
              skeletal muscle contraction, heart rate and force of contraction,              
              digestive and excretion processes, and control of DNA expression               
              and protein synthesis.  Changes in intracellular calcium levels                
              are                                                                            
              also involved in more global physiological and pathological                    
              events,                                                                        
              which include learning and memory, cell and organ development,                 
              neurological and degenerative disorders and aging, to name a few.              
                                                                                             
              Dr. Korn is interested in determining the physiological                        
              circumstances and the different parts of the cells that are                    
              involved in elevation and reduction of intracellular calcium                   
              levels                                                                         
              during hormone secretion.  By using a technically sophisticated                
              approach of combining patch clamp electrophysiology, video                     
              imaging                                                                        
              and photometry, he will explore the mechanisms by which calcium                
              regulates growth hormone secretion from somatotrophs.                          
              Somatotrophs                                                                   
              an anterior pituitary cell type, is an excellent system to use                 
              since growth hormone secretion is under the excitatory hormonal                
              control of growth hormone releasing factor and inhibitory                      
              hormonal                                                                       
              control of somatostatin.  Dr. Korn will analyze the time course                
              of                                                                             
              calcium changes in different cytoplasmic compartments following                
              the                                                                            
              stimulation and inhibition of hormone secretion.  The results are              
              likely to give answers with widely ranging implications for                    
              understanding cellular processes as well as to provide new                     
              insights                                                                       
              specifically into the mechanisms governing growth hormone release              
              and the control of ion channels in endocrine cells.  Since the                 
              results will have implications for how hormone secretion can be                
              manipulated in both man and animals, the findings may eventually               
              be                                                                             
              important for the field of animal husbandry, for associated                    
              agricultural industries, and the pharmaceutical industry.
