Title       : Quadratic Lyapunov Functions and State Feedback via InteriorPoint Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1995 
File        : a9222391

Award Number: 9222391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Boyd boyd@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9216,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9222391  Boyd  One of the most useful qualities of a properly designed feedback 
              control system is robustness, i.e., the ability of the closed-  loop system to
              continue working well despite large variations in  the (open-loop) plant
              dynamics.  This property is also the source  of some of the hardest problems in
              control system analysis and  synthesis.  For example, the problem of
              determining a feedback  law that is guaranteed to work well when connected to
              any plant  model from a given set of models-the robust synthesis problem-is  in
              general quite difficult.  A recent advance is an analytic  solution to a
              specific type of robust synthesis problem.  This  analytic solution can be
              derived in several different frameworks:   Hoo-optimal control,
              linear-quadratic game-theoretic control, or  linear exponential quadratic
              Gaussian (LEQG) optimal control.  In  contrast, this research centers around a
              method that couples  Lyapunov theory with (numerical) convex optimization (but
              is  closely connected with the analytic solution method mentioned  above).  In
              particular, newly developed interior point  optimization methods will be
              applied to some convex and  quasiconvex problems that arise in control theory
              (analysis and  synthesis).  Preliminary investigations suggest that the impact 
              of interior point methods on Lyapunov function and state feedback  search
              problems will be as profound as it has been on linear and  quadratic
              programming.  The goal of the research is to develop  the foundations for
              method of control system robustness analysis  and robust controller synthesis
              that substitutes convex  optimization for the computations required in the
              analytic  solution mentioned above, but in return solves a much larger  class
              of problems.  Moreover, with interior point optimization  methods, the increase
              in computation effort over that required  for the analytic solution, may be
              quite modest.   ***
