Title       : Collaborative Research: Development of Spatial Coding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9222073

Award Number: 9222073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112346             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janellen Huttenlocher hutt@cicero.spc.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9222073  HUTTENLOCHER    This research concerns children's ability to remember
              the locations  of objects.  Remembering where things are in the world has very 
              clear adaptive importance.  Yet, somewhat surprisingly, the well-  known work
              of Piaget claimed that children younger than 9 or 10  years remember location
              only in terms of whether something touches  or is close to a landmark, but not
              in terms of distance.  This  description of spatial development has guided much
              subsequent  thinking about curricula in areas such as geography, map-reading, 
              and geometry.  However, recent work using new techniques suggests  that, by as
              early as 16 months, children can indeed encode distance  accurately.  In
              addition, the small errors they do make show a  pattern of systematic bias that
              suggests that, like adults,  children of this age encode location in terms of
              spatial  categories, as well as at a more fine-grained level, combining the 
              two levels when they search for objects.  This process can be  called
              hierarchical coding.  The first group of new experiments  will test the
              hypothesis that children use hierarchical coding from  a very early time, by
              excluding several other accounts of their  bias patterns.  The second line of
              work will use a new paradigm to  investigate coding of distance as early as 4
              months.  Infants of  this age cannot crawl, and are just beginning to reach, so
              finding  distance coding at this time would suggest that crawling and  reaching
              are not vital to such coding (as Piaget and others have  suggested).  A third
              set of experiments will establish the nature  of the categories used in
              hierarchical coding, in particular,  whether the probability and extent of
              subdivision of larger spaces  increases with age.  The fourth line of work will
              focus on biases  in spatial judgment, aimed at testing the hypothesis that
              these  occur when spaces are subdivided.  Taken together, the work should 
              establish a new theoretical account of spatial development.     ***
