Title       : Telephone Survey of Sound Change in Progress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1993      
File        : a9222458

Award Number: 9222458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Labov wlabov@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  This research will use a telephone survey of North American               
              dialects of English to trace the development of linguistic                     
              changes in progress on a broad geographic scale.  Telephone                    
              interviews offer a rapid and inexpensive method of sampling broad              
              geographic areas with a sampling density proportionate to the                  
              variation in the data.  The survey will establish a network of                 
              native speakers who are available for repeated interviews  to                  
              obtain both phonetic and phonological information on a wide range              
              of variables.  The data obtained will be used to investigate                   
              general questions in the theory of language change, as well as                 
              provide national maps of the regional features of English.                     
                   Current research on English dialects shows continued change               
              and increasing diversification of broad regional patterns through              
              chain shifts, mergers, lexical splits and the vocalization of                  
              liquids.  A number of principals have been proposed to account                 
              for the geographic spread and transmission of these changes                    
              across generations, including specific quantitative models for                 
              areal diffusion.  Efforts to confirm these models have been                    
              limited so far to sociolinguistic studies of small areas; the                  
              regional data that has been gathered is dispersed over time and                
              space in ways that inhibit comparison.  Furthermore, the                       
              traditional methods of dialectology do not gather the information              
              on perception and categorization of speech needed to investigate               
              the mechanism of phonological change, and the traditional focus                
              on rural communities does not provide the data needed to                       
              investigate the correlation between community size and the                     
              advancement of change.                                                         
                   Results of a pilot survey of the North Central States show                
              considerable success in recruiting a number of subjects and in                 
              obtaining phonetic and phonological information that shows clear               
              regional differentiation of sound changes in progress.  Current                
              methods of instrumental analyses of telephone recordings provide               
              data of sufficient quantity and internal reliability to map                    
              individual vowel systems.  An extended survey of the Middle                    
              Western United States will be conducted from the eastern boundary              
              of Ohio westward to the Continental Divide and from the Ohio                   
              River northward to the Canadian border.  The survey will gather                
              data that will trace the progress and mechanism of the Northern                
              Cities vowel shift, its relation to the southern vowel shift, the              
              merger of long and short open /0/, ongoing mergers before liquids              
              and nasals, and the lexical distribution of the tensing of short               
              a and o in those regions where splits have occurred in the past.               
              The sample will be representative of both geography and the                    
              population size of communities.  The basic unit of sampling will               
              be areas of influence of the largest urbanized centers as                      
              established by newspaper circulation.
