Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Modelling Territorial Patterns and Stability of Wolf-Deer
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1994      
File        : a9222533

Award Number: 9222533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Lewis mlewis@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigators study the spatial and temporal dynamics of              
              territory formation for wolves (Canis lupus) and the resulting                 
              impact on the distribution of white-tailed deer(Odocoileus                     
              virginians).  Their model is based on field studies from                       
              northwestern Minnesota that indicate that adjacent wolf packs                  
              form  distinct territories that are separated by "buffer zones"                
              where packs rarely trespass.  These buffer zones can provide a                 
              spatial refuge for the primary prey species: white-tailored deer.              
              The field studies show that deer density is higher in the inter-               
              territorial areas (refuges) and is lower near the center of                    
              established territories (where deer populations may be subject to              
              intense predation).  The buffer zones may also stabilize wolf-                 
              deer interactions by providing a reservoir of deer that can                    
              recolonize areas of wolf territory that have suffered heavy                    
              predation losses.                                                              
                   The mathematical model the investigators develop describes                
              the behavioral wolf-wolf and wolf-deer interactions using a                    
              system of coupled of nonlinear partial differential equations,                 
              and describes the long-term ecological wolf-deer interactions                  
              using a system of coupled nonlinear difference equations. The                  
              analysis of the model equations will employ mathematical and                   
              numerical techniques from areas such as perturbation theory and                
              finite difference numerical methods.  This should lead to a                    
              detailed quantitative understanding of wolf territorial pattern                
              formation,  and an illustration of how territoriality influences               
              the distribution and abundance of deer.  The research will have a              
              wider application to the general area of territorial pattern                   
              formation; such patterns provide the basis for social                          
              organization in many mammals and birds.
