Title       : U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: The Behavior and Application of
               Fiber-Reinforced Thermoplastic Sheets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9222912

Award Number: 9222912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles Wallace                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4862               (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Byron Pipes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5941,9146,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support the travel by Prof. R. Byron Pipes of                  
              the Center for Composite Materials to conduct collaborative                    
              research with Dr. Debes Bhattacharyya of the Department of                     
              Mechanical Engineering at the University of Auckland. The                      
              principal goal of the research is to establish a base for                      
              fiber-reinforced thermoplastic composites that can be integrated               
              into engineering practice. Thermoplastic polymers can undergo a                
              reversible phase change from solid to liquid thereby enabling the              
              development of shaping and joining industrial methods analogous                
              to those for conventional metallic materials. It is also                       
              possible to incorporate various types of fiber reinforcement to                
              suit the end use of the formed product. The potential processing               
              advantages of thermoplastics have led to the development of                    
              thermoforming processes and to the adoption of sheet forming                   
              techniques typical of those used with metallic materials. This                 
              research will investigate ways fiber-reinforced thermoplastic                  
              sheets can be converted into three-dimensional models using                    
              existing metal-forming equipment with minimal modification.                    
                                                                                             
              The research areas of the principal investigators are                          
              complementary and the cooperative work should produce                          
              substantial results. Dr. Bhattacharyya is an expert in the                     
              sheet forming of conventional metallic materials. Prof. Pipes                  
              is a recognized authority in composites processing.  The                       
              travel of Dr. Bhattacharyya to the Center for Composite Materials              
              in Delaware is funded through the New Zealand Ministry of                      
              Research, Science and Technology (MORST).
