Title       : Fabrication and Physics of Low-Disorder Electron and Hole Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1994   
File        : a9222418

Award Number: 9222418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansour Shayegan shayegan@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research involves a study of the materials science and physics            
              of the growth of very high-quality GaAs/AlxGa1-x heterojunction thin-          
              film structures using the molecular beam epitaxy technique, and the            
              new electron interaction physics expected to manifest in such ideal            
              electron systems.  Very low-disorder, dilute two-dimensional (2D)              
              electron and hole systems at the GaAs/AlGaAs interface in the                  
              regime of very small Landau level fillings where transitions                   
              between quantum liquid and solid states of the system are expected             
              will be studied.  Several novel quasi-2d systems with an additional            
              degree of freedom will also be studied.  These include systems                 
              which contain two or more layers of electrons in close proximity so            
              that interlayer Coulomb interactions are strong, and thick-layer               
              electron systems in wide parabolic wells.  The additional degree of            
              freedom in these structures is expected to lead to new collective              
              sates such as the recently observed fractional quantum Hall state              
              at the even 1/2 denominator filling in a double-layer electron                 
              system.  These systems will be probed via low-temperature                      
              magnetotransport measurements.                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              The impact of this advanced materials research program is two-fold.            
              First, optimization of molecular beam epitaxy growth techniques to             
              produce very high-quality, selectively-doped interfaces and                    
              heterostructure thin-films with the least amount of imperfections              
              can be useful for the fabrication of other advanced semiconductor              
              structures and devices.  Second, these low-disorder structures will            
              make accessible a new regime in semiconductor physics where new                
              physical phenomena are expected to arise from the electron-electron            
              interactions.
