Title       : Collaborative Research: Flux and Fate of Sediment and Water from Small,
               Mountainous Rivers to the Continental Margin: The Gulf of Alaska Example
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1998      
File        : a9222405

Award Number: 9222405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bilal U. Haq                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268789             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Milliman milliman@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7334

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9222405  Milliman, John D.  The College of William and Mary 
              Title: Flux and Fate of Sediment and Water from Small, Mountainous  Rivers to
              the Continental Margin: The Gulf of Alaska Example    Small rivers charging
              directly from mountains into the ocean carry  greater sediment loads than
              commonly envisioned, a relatively great  percentage of which may escape to
              deeper waters during high stands  of sea level.  This award supports a study of
              the flux of Holocene  fluvial sediment into the Gulf of Alaska, whose generally
              small  tributary rivers are collectively the largest supplier of sediment  from
              North America.  Alaskan rivers are relatively uninfluenced by  human
              activities, although glacial activity has resulted in higher  sediment yields
              than noted for other rivers with similar drainage  areas.    High-resolution
              seismic profiling, in conjunction with seismic data  previously collected, will
              allow the identification of sediment  accumulation and discharge patterns on
              the shelf and slope, as well  as trace individual sediment layers derived from
              episodic (flood)  events.  Sedimentological data will help define the escape 
              routes/processes, and a variety of radiometric datings will show  frequency of
              occurrence and rates of accumulation.  Facies will be  defined by compositional
              and textural analyses, as will be sources  (and fates) of terrigneous grains
              and organic matter in shelf  sediments.  Measurements of total organic carbon
              and total  nitrogen, d13C, d15N, and lignin oxidation productions in sediment 
              organic matter will be used to determine the amount and source of  organic
              matter accumulating in the sediments.    Contemporaneous oceanographic
              processes controlling strata  formation will also be evaluated.  This
              information should help in  the interpretation of the older strata observed by
              seismic  profiling and coring.
