Title       : Political Geography of Mayan Peten
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1997  
File        : a9222373

Award Number: 9222373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299762             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don S. Rice drice@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grant D. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prudence M. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Don Rice and his                  
              colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological                    
              research in the Peten region of Guatemala. The goal of the work is             
              to understand what happened to Mayan cultures after the collapse of            
              the "Classical Maya." Archaeological evidence clearly demonstrates             
              the degree of social complexity which was achieved at the height of            
              Mayan development. Priest emperors ruled over large areas of                   
              lowland Middle America. A writing system was devised and the                   
              importance of monumental architecture is demonstrated by temple                
              mounds which survive to present times. Both archaeological and                 
              textual data indicate that large numbers of people were integrated             
              into single political units and that traditional agricultural                  
              techniques served to provide adequate food in a difficult lowland              
              tropical environment. In approximately the 9th century AD however              
              this classic Mayan society "collapsed" and the reasons for this are            
              poorly known.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Dr Rice and his colleagues will focus on the time interval between             
              the 9th and 17th centuries AD, when Europeans conquered this area.             
              They will work from early Spanish texts which described, and                   
              located - in a general way - major Mayan towns. Through on the                 
              ground survey they will attempt to locate these and through limited            
              archaeological excavation, provide dates. This information will                
              provide the framework for a major excavation project which will                
              allow the Mayan "decline" to be traced over a ca. 800 year                     
              interval.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This project is important for several reasons. It will provide                 
              information on a little understood period of prehistory. The data              
              it produces will be of interest to many archaeologists and it will             
              increase our understanding of how complex societies arise, and also            
              decline.
