Title       : Models of Uncertainty Due to Lack of Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1995      
File        : a9222159

Award Number: 9222159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270145             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas S. Wallsten   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will investigate how people make judgments about the             
              truth of statements when they have only incomplete knowledge.  The             
              problem arises very frequently in areas ranging from business to               
              public policy to personal matters.  As examples, an intelligence               
              analyst may be asked for a probability judgment of whether Boris               
              Yeltsin will remain in power in Russia for the next six months, an             
              EPA official may have to set a pollution standard for a substance              
              based on sparse knowledge of its health effects, or a physician may            
              have to select a treatment plan given inconclusive medical data.               
                                                                                             
              The work will focus primarily on the cognitive processes of                    
              judgment and response selection.  The research will develop                    
              psychological theories, based on prior work, that can be expressed             
              as mathematical models, test these theories and models empirically,            
              and modify them accordingly.  The models will provide a framework              
              for distinguishing the subjective degree of confidence one has that            
              a proposition is true from the overt decision or response one makes            
              or provides to someone else.  One's degree of confidence depends on            
              what one knows about the topic area, as well as on how that                    
              knowledge is organized and searched, whereas the response selection            
              depends on motivational and related factors.                                   
                                                                                             
              One question this research will investigate concerns the                       
              relationships among certain documented phenomena.  One is a covert             
              bias to think statements are true.  The other is an additional bias            
              to call statements true relative to one's covert judgment (when the            
              response options are limited to true or false), but not a bias to              
              assign probabilities that statements are true (when the response               
              options are numbers from 0 to 100).                                            
                                                                                             
              Another question concerns how a person's strategy for searching his            
              or her knowledge base depends on the specific form and sequence of             
              the judgment tasks that he or she faces.  Additional issues the                
              research will investigate include differences in judging past                  
              versus future events, the comparison of confidence in the truth of             
              statements across knowledge domains, payoff effects on judgment and            
              responding, and effects of degree and organization of knowledge on             
              judgment.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The long-range goal of the work is to improve the quality of                   
              judgments.  It should become possible to combine the mathematical              
              models of judgment to be developed in this work with derived                   
              measures of performance either to improve accuracy or to calibrate             
              it in a manner that suitable corrections can be imposed.
