Title       : Spatial Transformations and Visual Attention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1995   
File        : a9222118

Award Number: 9222118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn C. Robertson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9222118  ROBERTSON    A large body of research has demonstrated that spatial
              attentional  scanning of the visual field can occur without accompanying eye 
              movements.  This is referred to as covert attentional orienting.   Covert
              orienting allows one to search the visual field for  information in a way that
              can confuse an observer as to one's  actual focus of attention.  Covert
              orienting also influences where  one's eyes will move next.  It is critical in
              gathering information  to determine where visual resources are most needed, a
              process that  has obvious survival value.    Data from neurological patients
              have shown that covert orienting  can break down in ways that affect only one
              half of space.  More  interestingly, the half that is affected is not limited
              to  retinotopic coordinates or the visual field contralateral to the  affected
              hemisphere.  It also includes the half of space defined in  scene-based
              coordinates.  Right hemisphere damage will affect  covert orienting into the
              left half of retinotopic space, but it  also will affect covert orienting into
              the left half of a display  rotated 90 degrees from upright where retinal and
              scene-based  coordinates are dissociated.  This fact means that at least some 
              spatial parameters of the display are intact in these patients and  are used to
              guide attentional search.  It also suggests a very  strong link between the
              internal representation of space and  attentional search of the visual field.  
               Experiments will address the question of how various spatial  transformations
              of a display (rotation, reflection, and location  translation) affect different
              types of attentional orienting.  They  will exploit a rightward bias in normals
              in early visual orienting  to determine where search begins and what path it
              follows under  various spatial transformations.  Are some components of covert 
              orienting tied to retinotopic space and others to scene-based  space, and if so
              which ones operate in what space?  The issue will  be approached through the
              combine d study of normals and  neurological patients who neglect one half of
              their visual space.  These studies will lead to a fuller understanding of how
              the human  brain represents a visual scene and the interaction between 
              attentional mechanisms and the internal representations that are  critical for
              action in the real world.    ***
