Title       : Modeling and Control of Single Wafer Microelectronics Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1994  
File        : a9222457

Award Number: 9222457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272613             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Edgar edgar@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Isaac Trachtenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1403,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An emerging technology is the single wafer rapid thermal                       
              chemical vapor deposition (RTCVD) system.  In these systems a                  
              single wafer is loaded into a cooled stainless steel chamber                   
              where low pressure gases react on the radiatively heated wafer                 
              surface.  Compared to the multiwafer system, the RTCVD system                  
              represents considerably less cost both in initial capital and                  
              in required wafer fabrication floor space.  In addition, cold                  
              wall operation in the RTCVD system eliminates the particulate                  
              generation occurring on the hot walls of the multiwafer                        
              system.  Adding plasma enhancement to a CVD reactor (PECVD)                    
              prevents thermal damage to the wafer by permitting lower                       
              temperatures of operation.  The throughput for single wafer                    
              reactors needs to be maximized (e.g. rapid thermal processing)                 
              to be competitive with multiwafer systems.                                     
                                                                                             
              This study will focus on deposition and etch technology using                  
              single wafer CVD and etching reactors with plasma enhancement                  
              and rapid thermal processing capability.  For these unit                       
              operations, new fundamental (theoretical) mathematical models                  
              will be developed that relate the operating and equipment                      
              design variables to reactor performance.  These models will be                 
              verified using data from two reactor configurations; one of                    
              these reactors is a flexible manufacturing reactor from Texas                  
              Instruments, which will be used to study silicon nitride                       
              deposition.  The other is a reactive-ion etcher using carbon                   
              tetrafluoride CF4 and hydrogen H2.  This project will also                     
              research new control strategies that permit design of model-                   
              based controllers for each reactor.  Of particular interest                    
              will be a nonlinear programming-based technique called                         
              nonlinear model predictive control.  Active collaboration with                 
              personnel at Texas Instruments and SEMATECH will facilitate                    
              ultimate transfer of this technology to the semiconductor                      
              industry.
