Title       : Asynchronous Algorithms: Scalable Algorithms for Multiprocessors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1995     
File        : a9222734

Award Number: 9222734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205218             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michel Dubois dubois@paris.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George P. Papavassilopoulos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This project is concerned with the analysis, implementation  and simulation of
              asynchronous algorithms.  Asynchronous  algorithms do not  require
              synchronization and thus are  particularly suitable for large-scale 
              multiprocessors or  massively parallel systems. Moreover, asynchronous 
              algorithms  are tolerant to processor and link failures and easily adapt  to 
              changes in parameters or sensor data in real-time embedded  systems. The 
              theoretical analysis of convergence considers models  with stochastic  delays. 
              Asynchronous  algorithms running on a multiprocessor are processes  with 
              random communication delays.  With this approach complex  problems such as  the
              effects of random message delays due to  variable load conditions in the 
              interconnection network and  the reliability issues related to probabilistic 
              link or  processor failures are easily analyzed.  The approach is also  
              applied to the analysis of problems in which the  solution changes with time
              and  of algorithms with good time-adaptation.  Finally, the convergence of 
              algorithms which are trapped in periodic orbits can be improved through 
              randomization techniques.    Six asynchronous algorithms with the above
              features  are implemented on the Intel Touchstone DELTA machine accessible  at 
              Caltech.  Extensive evaluation of each algorithm is performed in order to 
              assess the effectiveness of asynchronous  algorithms in the context of 
              large-scale multiprocessor  systems.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
