Title       : Communal Breeding in Nicrophorus tomentosus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1993        
File        : a9222148

Award Number: 9222148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle P. Scott mps@christa.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Reproductive cooperation and conflict lie at the heart of the             
              evolution of sociality.  Communal breeding in which adults share a             
              nest or mate and may provide care for unrelated young, has been                
              identified as one path leading to complex social systems in both               
              insects and vertebrates.  But even in social insects and birds,                
              facultative reproductive cooperation among non-relatives is rare.              
              To understand the origins of alternative reproductive strategies,              
              where individuals can breed either independently or communally, it             
              is essential to identify the options open to each individual and               
              assess the relative success of each alternative.                               
              %%%                                                                            
                   Both male and female Nicrophorus tomentosus (Coleoptera:                  
              Silphidae) demonstrate facultative communal brood care.  More than             
              one male and/or female may help to rear young that may not be                  
              related.  The aims of this research are to examine the frequency of            
              communal breeding in a natural population and to identify the                  
              parentage of these offspring using a DNA fingerprinting technique.             
              %%%                                                                            
                   This study will examine why the reproductively dominant                   
              individuals allow communal breeding and how this might be achieved.            
              Several hypotheses for the evolution of sociality and of communal              
              breeding in particular, have been constructed with considerable                
              general application.  These have been tested in communally-breeding            
              vertebrates and in social insects with joint nest foundation.  They            
              can and should be tested in other groups.                                      
              %%%                                                                            
                   The study is of practical value because the survival of the               
              many species committed to a Social way of life is dependent on                 
              survival of individuals and the well-being of their social                     
              organizations.***
