Title       : Numerical Competence in the Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1993      
File        : a9222367

Award Number: 9222367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 28,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67665              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah T. Boysen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary G. Berntson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9177,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research project is evaluating the capacity for numerical                 
              competence of non-human primates.  The research focuses on the                 
              ability of adolescent and adult chimpanzees to acquire number-                 
              related abilities, including counting, number comprehension, and               
              the symbolic representation of quantities.                                     
                                                                                             
              Drs. Boysen and Berntson already have documented the acquisition               
              of counting by chimpanzees, as well as the ability to manipulate               
              number symbols through implicit counting strategies.  Additional               
              studies of the use of fractions for labelling portions of foods                
              and other objects will be completed with two young-adult animals.              
              Fraction concepts will be tested using novel objects and the                   
              introduction of a novel fraction.  To test receptive number                    
              comprehension, the chimpanzees are shown an Arabic numeral and                 
              then must construct an array of the same number from a collection              
              of objects.  This is a high-level counting skill, and preliminary              
              tests indicate success unprecedented in animal research.                       
                                                                                             
              This research is adding greatly to our understanding of the                    
              information-processing capacities of non-human primates for                    
              symbol use, and the similarities and differences in                            
              representational abilities between humans and apes.  The                       
              demonstration of such abilities in a species that shares our                   
              primate heritage will make important contributions towards                     
              characterizing the possible evolution of cognition in our early                
              hominid ancestry.  These studies may also yield significant                    
              teaching and training strategies for the acquisition of complex                
              numerical skills, which could be applied in a variety of settings              
              and for a range of compromised human populations, including                    
              learning-disabled, autistic, and developmentally-delayed                       
              children.
