Title       : RUI: Reciprocal Thyroidal/Melatonin Influences During Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1996     
File        : a9222504

Award Number: 9222504
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91231              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Wright wrightm@elms.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Our Lady of Elms College
	      291 Springfield Street
	      Chicopee, MA  010132837    413/598-8351

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Metamorphosis is a developmental process that is                          
              characterized by changes in form and physiology of non-reproductive            
              structures to allow for the occupation of new ecological niches.               
              In amphibians, the internal and external changes of metamorphosis              
              occur in temporal relationships that appear to depend on a                     
              progressively-rising level of thyroid hormones in the blood.                   
              Moreover, the rate at which metamorphic events occur is also                   
              influenced by environmental factors such as the daily changes of               
              light and darkness.  Since melatonin, a hormone produced and                   
              secreted by the pineal gland, plays a major role in signalling                 
              photoperiodic changes, Dr. Wright will determine whether it                    
              interacts with thyroid hormone in the regulation of the metamorphic            
              process.  Using both in vitro and in vivo approaches, she will                 
              examine the influence of circadian rhythms on the reciprocal                   
              interactions between melatonin and thyroid hormones in the                     
              development of the tadpole.  Amphibians serve as primary models for            
              embryological and developmental studies and the vast majority of               
              what we have learned about the developmental biology of amphibians             
              is directly applicable to our understanding of human development.              
              Therefore, these results are likely to provide new insights into               
              the role of hormones in early development.  Moreover, the findings             
              will be related to conservation of biological diversity since                  
              identifying the environmental and hormonal factors that influence              
              development may help in understanding the recent global decline in             
              amphibian populations.  Dr. Wright is supervising this research                
              at an undergraduate institution and, therefore, a major goal of                
              this project is to introduce students into the scientific process              
              and to prepare them for professional scientific careers.
