Title       : Neuroendocrine Control of Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1995   
File        : a9222099

Award Number: 9222099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245437             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Elliott Albers biohea@panther.gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Steroid and peptide hormones have a major impact on the behavior               
              of mammals.  While it is believed that many of the behavioral                  
              effects of hormones result from their action on the central                    
              nervous system, how hormones change brain function to influence                
              behavior is not well understand.  Dr. Albers, who has previously               
              received support from the National Science Foundation, will                    
              continue his work on steroid-peptide-transmitter interactions, a               
              general problem of substantial interest in neurobiology.                       
              Sophisticated anatomical and biochemical techniques are used to                
              examine a sexually dimorphic communicative behavior which has                  
              proven to be an excellent model system.  Specifically, Dr. Albers              
              will focus on three different brain sites where it is believed                 
              that vasopressin, a neuropeptide, interacts with the gonadal                   
              steroid hormones testosterone and estradiol to regulate                        
              communicative behavior.  He will determine whether the gonadal                 
              steroids influence the behavior by changing the amount of                      
              vasopressin that can be released at these brain sites or by                    
              changing its sensitivity at a particular brain site.  Moreover,                
              Dr. Albers will explore the interconnections of the three brain                
              regions implicated in the control of this behavior and thus,                   
              provide new information about their neural circuitry.  He will                 
              also investigate whether social factors that influence the                     
              expression of this communicative behavior do so by altering the                
              activity of vasopressin in the brain.   Finally, a carefully                   
              designed set of pharmacological studies will be carried out to                 
              determine how the noradrenergic transmitter system is involved in              
              coordinating the expression of this communicative and other                    
              behaviors.  The results from these studies will make an important              
              contribution to our understanding of the basic mechanisms                      
              underlying the relationship between the nervous and endocrine                  
              systems in the regulation of behavior.
