Title       : Developmental Regulation of the Synthesis of Peroxisomal Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1994   
File        : a9222290

Award Number: 9222290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne M. Becker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the regulation of nuclear genes that                  
              encode enzymes involved in the process of photorespiration.  The               
              current emphasis is on the gene for hydroxypyruvate reductase (HPR)            
              and on the regulated expression of this gene in cucumber seedlings             
              and in transgenic tobacco plants.  HPR gene expression is                      
              restricted to photosynthetic tissues, stimulated by light,                     
              inhibited by high CO2, and dependent on the presence of intact                 
              chloroplasts.  Using an HPR cDNA as a probe, it has been shown that            
              regulation of gene expression by both light and CO2 involves                   
              changes in transcript (mRNA) abundance, probably reflecting changes            
              in the rate of transcription.  The PI has isolated and sequenced a             
              cucumber genomic clone for HPR that contains the entire coding                 
              region plus 2.2 kilobases of 5' flanking region and 0.8 kilobases              
              of 3' flanking region.  It has been shown that the gene, called                
              hpr-A, is expressed in transgenic tobacco plants in an organ-                  
              specific, light-regulated manner.                                              
                                                                                             
              Here, the PI proposes to identify cis-acting regulatory elements               
              involved in the effects of CO2 on HPR gene expression, using                   
              appropriate deletion and/or fusion constructs of the 5' flanking               
              region, the transcribed region, and the 3' flanking region of hpr-             
              A.  The PI also plans to assay in vitro for trans-acting factors               
              (nuclear proteins, most likely) by using mobility shirt and DNA                
              footprinting assays.  In addition, the PI intends to characterize              
              more fully the regulatory effect on HPR gene expression of CO2 (or             
              of a photorespiratory metabolite, probably).                                   
                                                                                             
              As one of the few research groups currently studying the regulation            
              of photorespiratory enzymes and the first with a sequenced gene for            
              an enzyme of the photorespiratory glycolate pathway, the PI is in              
              a good position to contribute significantly to our understanding of            
              the regulation of these genes by CO2.  Given the importance of                 
              photorespiration to photosynthetic efficiency and hence to crop                
              yields, results form this research should be of interest to others             
              with more applied agronomic interests and perhaps also to those                
              concerned about the effects of the increasing CO2 concentration in             
              the earth's environment.
