Title       : A Unified Crystallography for Periodic or Quasiperiodic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1995   
File        : a9222792

Award Number: 9222792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177000             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. David Mermin ndm4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Research will be done to complete and extend a broader, simpler,               
              and more physically based reformulation of the crystallographic                
              description of periodic and quasiperiodic materials.  There are now            
              great simplifications to be made in both the derivation and the                
              description of the so-called superspace-group categories of                    
              quasiperiodic materials.  In the case of the (3+1) non-cubic and               
              the (3+3) cubic superspace groups this reformulation will clarify              
              conceptually, condense in form, and extend in scope the existing               
              scheme, while demonstrating explicitly that its present restriction            
              to weakly modulated crystals is entirely unnecessary.  Rules will              
              be extracted for this new crystallography (including rules for the             
              compatibility of point group and lattice that are obscure in the               
              quasiperiodic case) by deriving the generalized crystallography                
              from the general stability conditions for materials with                       
              diffraction patterns consisting of Bragg peaks.  The extension of              
              this approach to magnetic and color groups will be investigated in             
              both the periodic and quasiperiodic case and the question of                   
              commensurate-incommensurate transitions will be reexamined from                
              this new perspective.                                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              Research will be done on a new formulation of crystallography.  The            
              work is motivated by the discovery of quasiperiodic materials which            
              are not adequately described by conventional crystallography.  In              
              reformulating crystallography to account for these quasiperiodic               
              materials, a new scheme has been devised to cover periodic                     
              materials as well.  This unique approach could have a major impact             
              in crystallography.
