Title       : Professional Ethics: A Group-Oriented Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9222907

Award Number: 9222907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. May   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The orientation in philosophy to ethical questions has                         
              traditionally been to those that arise between individuals.  This              
              project seeks to shift away from the individualistic model of the              
              isolated professional struggling to decide what is right.  The                 
              emphasis in it is to consider questions about the ethical                      
              responsibilities of professionals in groups and organizations.                 
              To be undertaken by a philosopher who has already done extensive               
              work in the theory of collective resp9onsibility and in                        
              professional ethics, the project seeks to provide a group                      
              oriented picture of professional ethics.  It recognizes that                   
              professionals work increasingly for large corporations or                      
              institutions, and that they are members of communities that have               
              created expectations on the part of the public.  Generally,                    
              professionals are not isolated practitioners nor their own                     
              bosses; they must contend with various groups that have a                      
              significant impact on their professional lives.  Issues of                     
              collective and shared responsibility need to be integrated more                
              fully into the educational and theoretical discussions of                      
              professional ethics.  This project will explore the theoretical                
              and practical significance of reorienting the discussion of                    
              ethics in the professions to include attention to its                          
              institutional context.  It will produce a book focused on the                  
              professions of engineering and law, with significant application               
              to the various sciences.  This project will interest scholars as               
              well as profesionals from a wide spectrum of the population, most              
              importantly those who are currently writing or revising codes of               
              professional conduct.
