Title       : Trophic Effects of Corticosteroids in the Hippocampus: Mechanisms and
               Implications for Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1993   
File        : a9222009

Award Number: 9222009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80543              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Roy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Glucocorticoids, a family of steroid hormones secreted primarily               
              by the adrenal glands, bind selectively to protein receptors in                
              the hippocampus, a brain region involved in the formation of new               
              memories.  Both the pyramidal cells of the CA1 region and granule              
              cells of dentate gyrus within the hippocampal structure show                   
              extensive hormone binding, much higher than the rest of the                    
              brain.  These steroids are normally secreted at basal levels                   
              unless elevated during times of stress.  Chronic elevations of                 
              physiological glucocorticoids, for example during prolonged                    
              stress, have been shown to have deleterious effects on pyramidal               
              cells of the hippocampus and this is alleviated by removal of the              
              adrenals.  Long-term adrenalectomy is not without cost to the                  
              hippocampus, however, since this treatment causes loss of granule              
              cells in the dentate gyrus.  Thus, in selective regions of the                 
              hippocampus, basal levels of glucocorticoids actually protect the              
              cells from dying.  Dr. Roy will characterize the anatomical                    
              changes that occur to the dentate gyrus following adrenalectomy.               
              Furthermore, since this is a critical brain region for learning                
              and memory, he will correlate changes in the anatomy with                      
              performance in tests of spatial memory.  The results will not                  
              only yield vitally significant information about the basic                     
              function of glucocorticoids in neuronal survival and cell death,               
              but will also define its behavioral consequences when this                     
              protective effect of hormones is removed.  Information about the               
              basic processes underlying the death of subpopulations of brain                
              cells as well as the mechanisms that prevent cell death in a                   
              healthy brain may impact greatly on our appreciation and                       
              treatment of such brain disorders as caused by stroke,                         
              Alzheimer's disease, and the normal aging process.
