Title       : Swarm Recruitment Behavior in Wasps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9222108

Award Number: 9222108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Jeanne jeanne@macc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9222108  Jeanne    The most remarkable of the social wasps are the tropical
              species in which new  colonies are established by large groups called swarms. 
              The 24 "swarm-founding"  genera evolved from a more primitive type, still
              represented in the tropical fauna,  in which colonies are founded by one or a
              few inseminated queens acting  independently, without the help of workers.  Not
              only do the swarm-founding  species form the largest, most conspicuous, and
              most pugnacious colonies, but they  dominate the "independent-founders"
              ecologically, exceeding them in sheer  numbers in some localities by several
              thousand to one.  An important reason for  the striking success of the
              swarm-founders is that their entire life cycle is spent  as a group.  This
              gives them an advantage in countering the high risk of predation  that faces
              life in the tropics.      Swarming cannot work unless the scout wasps, who
              choose a site suitable for a  new nest, can communicate its location to the
              rest of the swarm.  How this is done  is known for one species only:  the
              scouts lay a trail of chemical scent-marks,  which their swarm-mates follow to
              the new site.  The scent is produced by a  particular gland on the abdomen in
              this species.  A number of other swarm-  founding genera have the same gland,
              but in some of these the form of the gland  is different, suggesting other
              functions.  In still other species the gland is entirely  lacking, suggesting
              other means of recruiting swarm members.  These facts  suggest (1) that
              chemical trails are not universal among swarm-founders and (2)  that
              swarm-founding itself may have had two or more independent origins.     The
              ultimate objective of Dr. Jeanne's research is to determine the specific 
              swarm-recruitment mechanisms utilized by seven key swarm-founding genera  and
              to use the results to test among several hypotheses on the evolution of these 
              mechanisms.  The results will yield a much-improved picture of the varieties of
               communication evolved among the swarm-founding genera  and provide an explicit
               phylogenetic model for the evolution of swarm-recruitment mechanisms.  This
              will  make it possible to conduct rigorous comparative studies on the adaptive 
              significance of these mechanisms.  Finally, the research will contribute 
              significantly to understanding the evolution of an extraordinarily successful
              form  of social behavior in insects.
