Title       : RUI: Mechanisms of Synchronized Oscillatory Activity in the Nervous System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9222327

Award Number: 9222327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132927             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Angstadt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Siena College
	      515 Loudon Road
	      Loudonville, NY  12211    518/783-2300

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9106,9178,9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The basic patterns of rhythmic motor behavior are generated by                 
              central nervous system circuits called neural oscillators.  The                
              oscillatory activity under investigation in this study, induced by             
              suppression of calcium currents, is unusual in that it depends on              
              sodium currents (rather than calcium currents as observed in other             
              animals) and because the oscillations occur synchronously in all               
              neurons of the same invertebrate nervous systems.  These novel                 
              features will allow several questions of broad significance to be              
              addressed.  First, what cellular mechanisms generate these                     
              sodium-dependent oscillations and why are sodium-dependent                     
              oscillators so rare compared to calcium-dependent oscillators?                 
              Second, what cellular mechanisms are used to synchronize                       
              oscillatory activity within neural networks?  To answer these                  
              questions, Dr. Angstadt will 1) develop an isolated neuron                     
              preparation that expresses oscillatory activity similar to that                
              observed in intact ganglia, 2) identify and characterize the role              
              of persistent ionic currents in generating the oscillations, and 3)            
              determine the cellular mechanisms responsible for synchronizing the            
              oscillations in different neurons.  His approach will be to remove             
              identified neurons from invertebrate ganglia, isolate these neurons            
              in cell culture, and study their ionic currents using voltage clamp            
              techniques.  In other experiments, mechanisms underlying                       
              synchronization of oscillations will be investigated in experiments            
              on intact ganglia.  These studies are important because they will              
              further understanding of persistent sodium conductances in nerve               
              cells, including their functional role in the generation of                    
              oscillatory activity, and may provide a model system for studies of            
              cellular mechanisms underlying the synchronized neuronal activity              
              associated with epileptic and other seizures in more complex                   
              nervous systems.
