Title       : Fermi Surface Cross-Sectional Images from Photoelectron Angular Distributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1994  
File        : a9222646

Award Number: 9222646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Kurtz kurtz@phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   Recent interest in areas such as thin-film magnetics and high             
              temperature superconductivity have underscored the need for                    
              detailed measurements of Fermi surfaces. This proposal addresses               
              the problem by using a newly developed technique using                         
              photoelectron spectroscopy to determine Fermi surfaces. The                    
              technique is generally applicable to a wide range of materials and             
              will provide information on both bulk and surface systems. It is               
              sensitive to the structure of the Fermi surface in regions of low              
              symmetry and studies can be performed at elevated temperatures                 
              where phase transitions may be important.                                      
                   Measurements will be made using a novel display-type electron             
              energy analyzer that will produce energy resolved two dimensional              
              images of photoemission intensity versus emission angle. The work              
              will be conducted at the LSU Center for Advanced Microstructure and            
              Devices (CAMD) synchrotron light source. The initial investigations            
              will involve noble metals which are well-understood from previous              
              studies and will later be extended to metals with heavily nested               
              Fermi surfaces. Some of these materials undergo magnetic phase                 
              transitions where the topology of the Fermi surface can change                 
              substantially; such experiments will support further theoretical               
              progress. These techniques will also be applied to high temperature            
              superconductors where the nature of the bands intercepting the                 
              Fermi surface will be investigated. Since the method samples large             
              regions of k-space, these materials will be surveyed for unexpected            
              features and will provide the rapid overviews of electronic                    
              structure. Conventional instrumentation will be used for high-                 
              resolution studies when appropriate. The work will be done in                  
              collaboration with researchers at Lawrence Livermore Laboratory,               
              the National Institute of Standards and Technology at other                    
              universities.                                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
                   As new classes of materials are developed, techniques for                 
              characterizing their relevant properties must improve. This need               
              will be addressed in the development of a new display-type electron            
              energy analyzer, to perform photoelectron spectroscopy in an                   
              imaging mode. The measurements rely on synchrotron radiation to                
              eject electrons from surfaces of the material of interest; this                
              radiation will be provided by the LSU Center for Advanced                      
              Microstructure and Devices (CAMD) storage ring. By imaging the                 
              directions of the emission, the detailed nature of the material's              
              Fermi surface can be explored. This provides information that is               
              valuable for a theoretical understanding  of material behavior and             
              gives feedback for improvements in materials processing.                       
                   Initially, the method will be applied to metallic systems that            
              are well understood by other techniques. The approach will refined             
              to study materials with more complicated Fermi surfaces that can be            
              altered by coercing them to undergo magnetic phase transitions and             
              will be used to demonstrate the flexibility of the methodology.                
              Finally, this advanced instrumentation will be applied to high                 
              temperature superconductors as the origin of superconductivity in              
              the cuprate oxides remains elusive. The project provides a new                 
              method for characterizing the electronic states at the Fermi                   
              surface and will result in an improved understanding of fundamental            
              electronic properties. As the measurements rely on the highest                 
              quality materials, collaboration with researchers at the Lawrence              
              Livermore Laboratory, the National Institute of Standards, and at              
              other universities will be undertaken.//
