Title       : Long-Range Atmospheric Transport and its Relationship to Air/Snow/Ice Chemistry
               at Summit, Greenland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1996     
File        : a9222963

Award Number: 9222963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Odile de la Beaujardiere                
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159701             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan D. Kahl kahl@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1303,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is one of four coordinated projects that will make use of the             
              camp facilities established on the ice sheet in the interior of                
              Greenland as part of the GISP-2 ice core drilling effort, in order             
              to investigate how atmospheric trace elements are deposited on the             
              ice and what kind of changes they undergo as they are being                    
              incorporated into the ice.  An understanding of such processes is              
              necessary in order to properly interpret the proxy climate data                
              that can be recovered from ice cores.  While significant progress              
              has been made recently in extracting and analyzing ice cores,                  
              progress in understanding the air to snow transfer process for                 
              reactive chemical species has lagged behind.                                   
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to provide a detailed understanding of             
              the atmospheric transport processes that influence the                         
              precipitation chemistry over the Greenland ice sheet.  The                     
              examination of variations in air-snow-ice chemistry measurements               
              during the time for which reliable global meteorological archives              
              are available will allow the extrapolation of the ice core                     
              chemistry-atmospheric transport link backward in time to periods               
              for which meteorological information does not exist.                           
                                                                                             
              Knowledge of long-range atmospheric transport is basic to the air-             
              snow transfer process.  The recovered ice cores contain impurities             
              and components whose sources are distant, and which were carried by            
              the atmospheric circulation to the interior of Greenland.                      
              Variations in the physical and chemical composition of the ice                 
              along the core reflects to a large extent variations in atmospheric            
              circulation patterns.  As part of this project a long-term                     
              atmospheric trajectory climatology will be prepared as well as an              
              examination of the seasonal and interannual variability of observed            
              transport patterns.
