Title       : Renovation of the Vertebrate Paleontology Collections at Carnegie Museum of
               Natural History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9222284

Award Number: 9222284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $618259             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Dawson   (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Berman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              K. Christopher Beard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst
	      4400 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152134080    412/622-3241

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Section of Vertebrate Paleontology of Carnegie Museum of                   
              Natural History will over three years institute major                          
              improvements of collection facilities in Vertebrate Paleontology,              
              specifically installation of a modern moveable compactor system                
              in the collection area, thereby increasing storage capacity by                 
              approximately 110%.  These improvements will promote and advance               
              study, maintenance, and conservation of the paleontological                    
              collections, which are international stature and importance.                   
              These collections include over 100,000 specimens, ranging in age               
              from Late Silurian to Quaternary and encompassing all vertebrate               
              classes.  Field research projects add specimens at the average                 
              rate of 2500 per year.  The paleontology collection areas include              
              two large rooms in the Museum's basement as well as space set                  
              aside for collections in the second floor office complex.  These               
              areas are filled to current capacity, with the result that large               
              parts of the collections are difficult to access and crowded past              
              optimal conditions.  The only solution to these crowded                        
              conditions is to increase density of the collections, which is                 
              best accomplished by compactors.  Data verification of the                     
              Section's computerized database will accompany rehousing                       
              specimens in compactors.  Previous Carnegie Institute commitments              
              to this project include computerization of the collections and                 
              additions to the staff of two full time preparators/collection                 
              managers (the latter to be implemented in 1993).  Compactor                    
              installation will be preceded by development of environmental                  
              controls and renovation of spaces occupied by the collections.                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Collections of this type comprise a nationally important suite of              
              resources that serve to facilitate a much broader array of                     
              activities than just current research.  They are key resources                 
              for educational endeavors important to all age groups and levels               
              of specification.  They provide the documentary data base for the              
              past history of life on earth.  They are important repositions                 
              for materials awaiting the attention of future generations.
