Title       : Understanding Academic Science and Engineering: A Longitudinal Study of Research
               Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9222782

Award Number: 9222782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah G. Johnson johnsd@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Hackett  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study is the first phase of a longitudinal study of                       
              organizational and contextual influences on academic research                  
              groups in U.S. science and engineering.  The study will examine how            
              research groups are organized and how they change over time; how               
              contextual variables influence group structure, functioning, and               
              performance; and how contextual and group variables together                   
              influence members' careers, work-related attitudes and values, and             
              research behavior (including problem selection, research style,                
              productivity, quality, and risk tolerance).  The main purposes of              
              Phase I are to operationalize major concepts and develop measures,             
              field test data-gathering techniques, devise a sampling plan,                  
              design data management and analysis systems, and address and refine            
              the research questions through analysis of preliminary data,  This             
              will be done through face-to-face interviews, questionnaires, and              
              an examination of documents for approximately fifty-five                       
              researchers and their teams, drawn from a national sample of                   
              scientists and engineers in four fields.                                       
                                                                                             
              This project addresses fundamental questions about the social                  
              organization of academic research and thus should be of interest to            
              a wide audience, including federal decision makers, scholars                   
              interested in the social organization of science, the community of             
              researchers and practitioners concerned with higher education, and             
              social scientists interested in groups, organizations, and work                
              life.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The immediate products of Phase I will be a detailed final report,             
              an executive summary, and a one-page abstract of the project (25               
              copies of each) for NSF, and an academic paper (based on cross-                
              sectional data) reporting on differences in group characteristics              
              and performance among research teams.
