Title       : A Physical/Chemical/Biological Simulation Model of Southern Ocean Air-Sea-Ice
               Interactions to Predict Carbon Source/Sink Intensity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1993      
File        : a9222304

Award Number: 9222304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149843             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Martinson dgm@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Taro Takahashi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This physical-biological modeling study of the interactions                    
              that control the exchange of carbon dioxide between the ocean and              
              the atmosphere in the Southern Ocean is a joint effort between                 
              Columbia University and the University of Southern California.                 
              This component of the project concerns the physical and chemical               
              processes in the ocean that determine the fluxes of carbon dioxide.            
                                                                                             
              The Southern Ocean is of particular importance in this context                 
              because it represents one of the two global regions where deep                 
              convection allows the ventilation of upwelling water masses, and               
              where the sinking of surface waters removes unutilized nutrients               
              from the euphotic zone.  This area has a large range of physical,              
              chemical, and biological processes, so that the seasonal amplitude             
              of the carbon dioxide flux is also large, and makes individual                 
              observations poor estimators of the annual mean value.  In fact it             
              is currently not clear whether this region is one of net uptake or             
              release of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.                                   
                                                                                             
              An existing one-dimensional model which describes the vertical                 
              air/sea/ice interactions and energy fluxes will be modified to                 
              include the effects of air-sea gas exchange and the relevant                   
              chemistry and carbon flow within the planktonic communities of the             
              upper ocean.  A series of experiments will be performed to                     
              determine the sensitivity of the model to parameterization schemes,            
              initial conditions, and boundary conditions.  Ultimately the model             
              will be coupled to a global circulation model developed by the                 
              Goddard Institute of Space Studies in order to answer such specific            
              questions as what are the factors that determine the general                   
              patterns of horizontal phytoplankton distribution as observed by               
              satellite-based color scanners; what is the relationship between               
              pigment distributions and rates of primary productivity; what                  
              fraction is new production exportable to the deep ocean, and what              
              is the magnitude of the biogenic flux of carbon dioxide in the deep            
              Southern Ocean.
