Title       : Theoretical Research in Condensed Matter Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1995      
File        : a9222682

Award Number: 9222682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Robert Schrieffer schrieff@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The recent emphasis on strongly correlated fermion systems,                    
              stimulated in part by the discovery of high temperature                        
              superconductivity, has led to the development of new concepts and              
              techniques which go beyond the conventional Landau theory of a                 
              Fermi liquid which for four decades has been the basis for the                 
              understanding of metals, semiconductors, insulators and                        
              superconductors.  The strong interactions between electrons in the             
              oxides, when compared to the relatively narrow band widths                     
              involved, lead to partial charge localization and local magnetic               
              moment formation.  These moments, coupled by exchange interactions,            
              produce antiferromagnetic spin fluctuations which exhibit long                 
              range spin order at low temperature for certain ranges of electron             
              concentration.  This research addresses the nature and mechanism of            
              the transition from Fermi liquid to strongly correlated behavior               
              with emphasis on the spin correlation effects as seen by neutron               
              scattering, magnetic resonance, photoemission and transport                    
              properties.  Continuing previous work, the one electron spectrum               
              and the dynamic spin susceptibility are being studied using                    
              diagram, functional integral and numerical methods based on one-               
              and three-band Hubbard models.  A new transport equation is being              
              developed to include strong spin fluctuation effects.  Contact with            
              experiment and other theoretical approaches will be stressed.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              The theoretical research will address the transition in interacting            
              systems of electrons when they go from conditions in which they can            
              be treated as independent particles to when they are strongly                  
              correlated.  The conditions for this transition, and the                       
              theoretical techniques to deal with it, lie at the foundations of              
              much of current condensed matter physics including the high                    
              temperature superconductors.
