Title       : Expression and Purification of Functional Tubulin Domains for Crystallization
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1992  
File        : a9222988

Award Number: 9222988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Berl R. Oakley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9108,9237,
Abstract    :
                This is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research.  The                         
              determination of the structure of the tubulin dimer, the major                 
              component of microtubules, would be of great value in understanding            
              how microtubules assemble, disassemble and function in cells.  In              
              addition, it should greatly improve our knowledge of how several               
              medically and agriculturally important compounds bind to and act               
              upon microtubules.  Previous efforts to crystallize tubulin have               
              failed because of problems with tubulin heterogeneity and stability            
              and because of the tendency of tubulin to assemble into                        
              microtubules rather than crystallize.  To circumvent these                     
              problems, Dr. Oakley proposes to purify beta-tubulin, one of two               
              molecules that form the tubulin dimer, and to purify a polypeptide             
              containing an important structural domain of beta-tubulin.  The                
              genes encoding the molecules will be placed under the control of a             
              powerful inducible promoter and inserted by transformation in the              
              filamentous fungus, Aspergillus nidulans.  The molecules will be               
              produced at high levels and will be purified by affinity                       
              chromatography using six histidine residues inserted at the                    
              carboxyl termini of the molecules.  GTP and drug binding studies               
              will be performed to determine if the molecules have their native              
              structure and if the structure is stable over time.  If these                  
              experiments are successful, the purified molecules will                        
              subsequently be used for structural studies.                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Tubulin, the monomeric component of microtubules, is a structural              
              protein ubiquitous in the eukaryotic world and fundamental to life             
              as we know it.  Understanding its molecular structure would be                 
              important for understanding its functions in nature, and would                 
              allow genetic engineering approaches to be used to adapt it for new            
              functions of possible commercial interest (such as molecular                   
              switches).  Tubulin is a scaffolding for shape, a road map for                 
              intracellular motility, a determinant of post-cleavage cell fate;              
              it is the stuff of the mitotic spindle, responsible for chromosome             
              segregation to daughter cells, and the stuff of cilia and flagella,            
              responsible for cellular locomotion.  Tubulin is actually a family             
              of genetically distinct proteins, which are further diversified by             
              post-translational modifications.  It has proven very difficult to             
              get structural information on tubulin, because of the difficulties             
              inherent in purifying a homogeneous protein from natural sources.              
              This project represents a plausible yet very high-risk approach to             
              obtaining sufficient quantities of homogeneous, pure, native,                  
              monomeric tubulin for structural studies.
