Title       : Strategic Information in Bargaining and Contracting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1993     
File        : a9222656

Award Number: 9222656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin A. Cantor                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23042              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Hackett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0303000   Conflict Resolution                     
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There are a number of models describing bargaining behavior and                
              conflict resolution in the face of uncertain outcomes.  This                   
              study will use laboratory experimental methods to evaluate the                 
              predictive capacity of two alternative models of bargaining in                 
              the context of an incomplete contract.  In its most simple form,               
              parties in the first stage of an incomplete contract first make                
              some form of relationship-specific investment that enhances value              
              or reduces costs in the second stage, when uncertainty is                      
              resolved.  Once the state of the world is known, parties to the                
              incomplete contract realize a surplus to be divided among                      
              participants.  Bargaining divides surplus and completes the                    
              contract.  The subgame perfect equilibrium bargaining hypothesis               
              predicts that surplus divisions from bargaining are independent                
              of sunk costs, i.e., in this case, relationship-specific                       
              investments.  Alternatively, an equity-theoretic model predicts                
              that bargaining will divide surplus proportionately with each                  
              party's share of total investment when individual investments are              
              observable.  When this information is not available, outcomes are              
              equivalent to those predicted by the perfect equilibrium                       
              hypothesis.                                                                    
              The predictive power of these alternative bargaining hypotheses                
              will be tested by systematically varying bargainers' information               
              on relationship-specific investments.  Moreover, since investment              
              incentives in contracts are determined by bargaining outcomes,                 
              and since the hypotheses to be tested imply different bargaining               
              outcomes, this study will also contribute to our understanding of              
              the linkage between bargaining behavior and contractual                        
              performance.
