Title       : Mental Representations of Spatial and Nonspatial Relations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1995      
File        : a9222002

Award Number: 9222002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy P. McNamara t.mcnamara@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9222002  MCNAMARA    This research will investigate aspects of human memory. 
              One line  of experiments will investigate the nature of spatial memory.  A 
              series of nine experiments will attempt to determine whether  spatial memories
              are "orientation specific" or "orientation free."   In orientation-specific
              representations, locations are specified in  view-specific reference frames and
              the representation has a  canonical orientation.  One's memory of a map or of
              the globe is an  example of an orientation-specific representation because it
              is  oriented with north at the top.  Orientation-free representations,  on the
              other hand, are not view dependent and do not have a  canonical orientation. 
              An example of such a representation is  memory of the interior of one's home;
              such memories typically do  not have a canonical orientation.  An obvious
              difference between  these types of memories is the number of perspectives we
              had on the  spatial layout when it was learned (typically only one for a map, 
              but several for natural environments).  The experiments will test  this
              explanation and other explanations of the differences between  memories of
              small- and large-scale spaces.  Another series of four  experiments will
              investigate the causes of asymmetries in distance  estimations.  Previous
              research has shown that when people estimate  distances from memory, estimates
              from salient landmarks to less  salient locations (e.g., from the Washington
              Monument to the  Pension Building) are larger than estimates from the less
              salient  building to the landmark.  The goal of the proposed experiments is  to
              determine why these asymmetries occur.  These studies of spatial  memory will
              provide crucial new knowledge about the basic  mechanisms that underlie our
              ability to recognize scenes and to  navigate in familiar and unfamiliar
              environments.  This knowledge  will shed light on the causes of individual
              differences in spatial  ability, and will aid in the development of freely
              moving robotic  systems.    The second  line of experiments will investigate
              the causes of  associative priming.  When people retrieve information from
              memory,  performance is often affected by previous retrieval operations or  by
              the context in which the retrieval takes place.  In the lexical  decision task,
              for example, one must decide whether a string of  letters is a word or a
              nonword (e.g., blit).  It has been widely  documented that lexical decisions on
              a word are faster and more  accurate when the word is preceded by an associated
              word (e.g.,  hospital-doctor) than when the word is preceded by an unassociated
               word (e.g., library-doctor).  This facilitation is called  "priming," and it
              occurs in nearly all tasks that require memory  retrieval.  The goal of this
              line of research is to test various  theories of associative priming.  The
              ubiquity of priming indicates  that it is caused by a fundamental mechanism of
              memory retrieval.   Thus, an understanding of the causes of priming will
              provide  important new insights into basic properties of human memory.    ***
