Title       : Towards A Toolkit for Active Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1995      
File        : a9222926

Award Number: 9222926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahram Ghandeharizadeh shahram@pollux.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9222926  Hull    Towards a Toolkit for Active Databases    This is the first
              year funding of a three-year continuing award.   This is an interinstitutional
              collaborative research. Design,  implementation and experimentation activities
              are conducted at both  sites.  Active databases present a novel and promising
              paradigm for  programming databases.  The Heraclitus project supported by this 
              grant is focused on the development and application of database  programming
              language constructs and techniques that can be used to  specify and implement
              active databases.  A central thesis of the  project is to elevate "deltas",
              i.e., sets of proposed  modifications to the database state, to be first-class
              citizens in  database programming languages (DBPLs).  While deltas have been 
              used before in limited contexts and ad hoc ways, the Heraclitus  languages
              permit programmers and users to freely create, manipulate  and apply deltas. 
              This offers the potential of developing novel  mechanisms for supporting a
              variety of applications including  active databases, database interoperation,
              hypothetical database  access, concurrency control protocols, backup and
              recovery  protocols, and resolving conflicts between updates.  The research  is
              centered around the development of a DBPL called  Heraclitus Alg,C , an
              extension of C that incorporates the  relational algebra and deltas, and
              persistence for relations and  deltas.  A variety of topics are being studied
              in connection with  Heraclitus Alg,C , including language design,
              optimizations,  parallel implementations, theoretical issues, and applications
              to  active databases and database interoperation.  The research will  yield
              fundamental insights into active database technology, and  also methodologies
              for using this technology so that diverse  databases connected by the
              "information highway" can be used in a  coherent manner.   ***
