Title       : RUI: Neural and Hormonal Regulation of Auditory Behavior Via Identified Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9222129

Award Number: 9222129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243866             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Stout   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon J. Atkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Andrews University
	      
	      Berrien Springs, MI  49104    616/471-7771

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Many animals use sound for communication, particularly for highly              
              species-specific mating calls, as in birds and insects.  In                    
              crickets, females ready to mate show an easily measurable behavior             
              of turning toward the source of an appropriate mating call.                    
              Insects also have accessible single nerve cells that permit testing            
              for the neuronal mechanisms of whole behavior patterns.  Particular            
              single nerve cells in parts of the brain of female crickets have               
              been found to respond physiologically to key features of the male              
              calling pattern.   In this project a synthesized call is used to               
              see how changes in the call pattern change behavioral                          
              responsiveness of the females, and specific explorations and                   
              lesions of nerve cells in the brain are used to determine the                  
              neural circuit underlying the response to the call.  Hormonal                  
              effects also modulate the responsiveness of females as they become             
              mature, and this model system allows a novel approach to test                  
              directly the effects of a particular hormone on the neural                     
              mechanisms underlying the auditory response behavior.  This work on            
              an accessible, novel model system will provide important                       
              comparisons with other hormonally-modulated communication, and                 
              provides groundwork for examining the molecular mechanisms for                 
              these modulating actions.  The impact of this work will be not only            
              on auditory neuroscience, but on work relating neural mechanisms to            
              behavioral plasticity and development in general, and on                       
              understanding breeding in insect populations.
