Title       : Affinity Labeling of Nucleotide Sites in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9423108

Award Number: 9423108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta F. Colman rfcolman@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9423108  Colman  Nucleotides have a multi-functional role in cellular
              metabolism.   For example, they are directly involved in kinase involved in 
              kinase reactions, they participate in dehydrogenase reactions as  part of the
              coenzyme molecule, they function as regulators of many  allosteric enzymes,
              they are involved (through the effects  of cyclic AMP) in the action of several
              hormones, and they  contribute to the aggregation of platelets. The aim of this
              study  is to develop the tools which will allow a systematic exploration  of
              the amino acid residues in the nucleotide sites of proteins. The  general
              approach of affinity labeling will be used based on  reagents previously
              synthesized in this laboratory as well as on  new reagents which incorporate,
              at various positions of the purine  or ribose ring alkylating agents capable of
              reacting covalently  with the protein; the nucleotide moiety will thus provide
              the  specificity for chemical modification of the proteins within the  binding
              sites. The effects of these nucleotide alkylating agents on  adenylosuccinate
              synthetase, as well as on adenylosuccinate lyase,  will be examined. Further,
              the reactions of cAMP derivatives with  platelet cAMP phosphodiesterases will
              be explored. The aggregation  of blood platelets is induced by ADP, presumably
              by binding to  receptor sites on the platelet surface membrane. Affinity
              labeling  with the purine nucleotide analogues will be used to characterize 
              the ADP receptor protein of platelet membranes.  For each protein, the kinetics
              of the affinity labeling reaction  will be examined, the extent of reagent
              incorporation will be  determined and radioactive peptides will be isolated
              from  proteolytic digests of labeled enzyme to identify the modified  residue.
              The catalytic and ligand binding properties as well as  the conformational
              characteristics of the modified enzyme will be  evaluated. The first class of
              nucleotide analogues which we  described, the fluorosulfonylbenzoyl
              nucleosides, has already been  used  to react at specific sites of more than 50
              proteins; it is  likely that the newer compounds which we develop will
              similarly  have broad applicability in the labeling of nucleotide sites  in
              proteins and that these studies will serve as prototypes for the  use of these
              compounds to probe other enzymes. In addition, these  nucleotide analogues will
              have applications in the biotechnology  industry where they can be used to
              detect expression of cloned  nucleotide binding proteins, and to provide the
              knowledge base for  rational design of drugs functioning as specific inhibitors
               targeted to particular nucleotide-requiring enzymes.  %%%  Nucleotides have a
              multifunctional role in cellular metabolism.   For example, nucleotides
              participate directly in numerous enzymatic  reactions, they function as
              activatos or inhibitors of many  regulatory enzymes, and the"second messenger"
              cyclic AMP carries  out the action of several hormones.  The aim of this study
              is to  develop the tools which will allow a systematic exploration of the 
              region of an enzyme which binds nucleotides.  The general approach  of
              "affinity labeling" will be used in which we attach to a natural  nucleotide a
              reactive portion (called an alkylating agent) which is  capable of forming a
              permanent link to a protein.  The nucleotide  moiety of the new reagent will
              direct the compound to a specific  binding site on the protein, and the
              reactive portion will make the  binding irreversible so that the binding site
              can be isolated and  characterized.  We will now study the effects of these
              nucleotide  alkylating agents ontwo enzymes ctitical for purine nucleotide 
              biiosynthesis and on an enzyme important in the degradation of the  regulatory
              nucleotide cyclic AMP.  The first class of nucleotide  analogues which we
              described, the fluorosulfonylbenzoyl  nucleosides, has aleady been used to
              react at specific sites of  more than 50 proteins; it is likely that the newer
              compounds which  we develop will similarly have b road applicability in the lab
              eling  of nucleotide sites in proteins and that these studies will serve  as
              prototypes for the use of these compounds to probe other  enzymes.  In
              addition, these nucleotide analogues will hve  applications in the
              biotechnology industry where they can be used  to detect expression of cloned
              nucleotide binding proteins, and to  provide the knowledge base for rational
              design of drugs functioning  as specific inhibitors targeted to particular
              nucleotide-requiring  enzymes.  ***
