Title       : Auxin and Cytokinin Interactions in Tomato
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 2,  1999   
File        : a9423651

Award Number: 9423651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309310             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri L. Lomax lomaxt@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9423651  Lomax  Plant responses to developmental and environmental signals  are
              controlled by a complex set of interactions between  plant hormones and other
              growth regulators.  The occurrence  and relative ratio of the plant hormones
              auxin and cytokinin  coordinate plant growth and differentiation, as well as 
              environmental responses.  There is a long history of  research in this area,
              however, questions remain as to how  the ratio of the two hormones is detected
              by the plant, as  well as the molecular mechanisms of action of the hormones, 
              either singly or in combination.  Mutants can provide a  powerful toml for
              dissecting physiological, biochemical, and  molecular responses.  The
              diageotropica (dgt) mutant of  tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.)  is a
              single gene,  recessive mutant previously characterized as auxin-  insensitive,
              as it neither grows nor produces ethylene in  response to applied auxin. 
              Although isolated on the basis  of its reduced gravitropic response, the dgt
              lesion results  in a complex pleiotropic phenotype involving many aspects of 
              plant form and function.  Many of these characteristics are  better associated
              with plants overexpressing cytokinin and  it has been shown that much of the
              dgt phenotype can be  mimicked in wild type tomato plants with exogenously- 
              supplied cytokinin.    The studies proposed here are designed to test that 
              hypothesis and to establish whether the apparent increase in  cytokinin
              sensitivity in dgt plants is the result of auxin  insensitivity, altered
              cytokinin homeostasis, or alteration  of some signal transduction component
              which controls or  integrates the response to both hormones.  Results from 
              these studies will shed light on the regulation of auxin  sensitivity as well
              as on cytokinin responsiveness in  plants.  The information gained will aid in
              our  understanding of hormonal regulation of plant function, as  well as in the
              elucidation of the molecular and cellular  mechanisms of action for cytokinin
              and auxin.
