Title       : Mathematical Science: General Methods for the Numerical Solution of Nonlinear
               DAEs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1997   
File        : a9423705

Award Number: 9423705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Campbell slc@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1039,9139,9146,9263,CVIS,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A differential algebraic equation  (DAE) is composed of both differential  and
              algebraic relationships.   Many physical problems are most naturally initially
              described by a DAE.  DAEs arise in a variety of  physical problems including
              flight control, robotics, chemical process control, and contact or  constrained
              problems in mechanics.  In addition, DAEs occur in the solution of partial
              differential  equations by the method of lines and in many circuit models.
              Computer generated mathematical models  for physical processes are often DAEs. 
              Existing numerical codes, while very useful, require special  problem structure
              and do not handle many problems of interest.  In addition, many of these
              methods  require the  potential user not only to recognize the mathematical
              structure of the problem, but also  to explicitly exploit this structure.  
              This restricts both the number of users and the complexity of  the problems 
              that can be solved. This project will develop numerical methods for general 
              nonlinear  DAEs. Theoretical analysis, computational   implementation, and
              applications will all be  considered.  The long range goal of the proposed
              research is for scientists and engineers to be able to work  directly with the
              original implicit model thus reducing design and simulation time as well as 
              facilitating the consideration of more complex problems.  The building of
              physical prototypes is  time  consuming, expensive, and restricts the number of
              ideas that can be tried out.  Computer simulation is  becoming increasingly
              essential for both design and evaluation.  In  many areas of technology, the 
              equations that the computer must solve are most easily set up as a mixture of
              differential and  algebraic equations or a DAE.  DAEs are not the kinds of
              equations that classical numerical methods  and mathematical theory were
              designed for.  Converting a DAE into another type of mathematical problem is
              often difficult and time consuming.  Sometimes this conversion requires
              considering a simpler  mathematical equation which does not do as good a job of
              predicting what the real physical system will  do.  This has led to a world
              wide effort to develop numerical methods for solving DAEs.  There have  been
              notable successes and some of this effort has resulted in software, such as
              DASSL, that is used  in many industries and laboratories.  However, many
              important classes of DAEs are still difficult, or  impossible, to solve
              directly with existing software.  This project will develop numerical methods 
              that can be used to solve important additional types of DAEs.  While DAEs arise
              in many areas, this  project will focus on constrained mechanical systems
              including the simulation and control of robotic  manipulators, simulation and
              control of vehicular systems, and the simulation, control, and optimization of
              chemical manufacturing processes.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
