Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Measurement Error and Statistical Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9423706

Award Number: 9423706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard A. Stefanski Stefansk@stat.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1306,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research develops new methods of statistical inference for  data measured  
              with error. The methods exploit the availability of high-speed  computing to  
              simulate the effects of measurement error on a data set. The  results of such  
              simulation experiments form the basis of a method of inference  called  
              simulation extrapolation. The first component of the research  adapts the
              method   of simulation extrapolation estimation to situations in which 
              replicate   measurements are made on the variables measured with error. The 
              second   component of the research uses the complex-variable formulation  of
              simulation   extrapolation to bypass the extrapolation step. This is 
              accomplished by   performing a simulation experiment using complex pseudo
              random  variables to   compute unbiased estimating equations for the parameters
              of  interest. The third   component of the research focuses on two-sample
              hypothesis  testing problems,   developing tests that are asymptotically valid
              when data from one  sample are   measured with error.     The presence of
              measurement error in data can affect the validity  of   conclusions drawn from
              statistical analyses of such data. For  example,   measurement error in risk
              factors such as blood pressure or  cholesterol level   affects statistical
              determination of the relationship of heart  disease to such   risk factors,
              usually resulting in underestimation of the  beneficial effects of  
              controlling these risk factors. Similarly, statistical  determination of the  
              relationship of ecosystem health to ecosystem stressers  (pollutants, for  
              example) can be obscured by the inability to accurately measure  stresser  
              levels. This research develops statistical theory and methods for  making valid
                inferences from data that are measured with error. The fact that  errors of  
              measurement occur in many areas of science (survey methodology,  environmental 
               studies, epidemiology, medicine for example) means that the  research is
              widely   applicable. The research uses novel  computer simulation methods  to
              simulate the   effects of measurement error on a data set and on the
              conclusions  drawn from   such data. The information obtained from the
              simulation studies  is then used to   make valid inferences from the data that
              are free from the  biasing effects of   measurement error.
