Title       : The Study of Radicals Using a Pulsed Beam Fourier Transform Microwave
               Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9423355

Award Number: 9423355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stewart E. Novick snovick@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Professor Stewart Novick of the Chemistry Department of   Wesleyan University
              will conduct a series of investigations on the   structures of transient free
              radicals by means of pulsed-jet Fabry-Perot   Fourier-transform microwave
              spectroscopy using a new instrument   constructed at Wesleyan University. 
              Among the species to be studied are   those of chemical as well as
              astro-chemical interest.  Some   radical-containing van der Waals complexes
              will also be investigated.  A free radical may defined as a reactive transient
              molecular species in   the gas phase.  A more conventional definition is that
              of a molecule, or   molecular fragment, with one or more unpaired electrons. 
              These species   are highly reactive, elusive, hard to produce, and usually
              difficult to   study.  However, these radicals are extremely important, both as
                intermediates in chemical reactions and as a species in their own right.   
              Many of the interstellar molecules that have been discovered by radio  
              astronomy  are, in fact, radicals.  Other radicals which can be produced  
              under laboratory conditions play a role as intermediates in organic   chemical
              reactions or, for example, as intermediates in commercial   deposition of thin
              metallic films.  The research conducted in this   project will provide
              information on the structure and ground state   electronic properties of an
              important group of radicals and thus provide   better understanding for their
              possible use in chemical processes.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
