Title       : Industrial Policy and Applied Science in France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1995  
File        : a9423037

Award Number: 9423037
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Butrica   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              "Industrial policy" has been one of the foci of political debate in the United
              States over the past several decades.  Advocates of a national industrial
              policy cite the spectacular success of the Japanese government in pushing
              forward major industries (electronics, for example) in order to expand the
              Japanese trade position in the world.  These advocates urge agencies like NIST
              and NSF to take lead roles in promoting development in areas where US
              industries can benefit. Opponents of industrial policy believe that the
              marketplace is far more efficient at deciding on how funds should be allocated.
               They cite the recent failures of Japanese industrial policy including the
              Japanese "fifth generation computer" crash program that has failed to overcome
              US leadership in advanced computer technology.  While this debate continues, it
              is important to look at the historical record of the effects of national
              industrial policy.  Dr. Butrica is examining one of the longest running
              industrial policies,  viz., that of France as exemplified in its "Society for
              the Promotion of  National Industry" (SEIN after the French).    SEIN was a
              private organization with public functions begun in 1801 to formulate and
              implement French industrial policy through the application of science to
              national industrial ends.  Dr. Butrica is examining the widely diverse
              activities of SEIN.  The policies promoted by SEIN highlighted key industrial
              sectors and focused on capital-intensive, large-scale enterprises.  Its
              execution involved four broad strategies:  1)  the diffusion of useful
              information through a journal;  2)  annual prize programs to stimulate
              specified industrial improvements in key industrial sectors;  3) the bestowal
              of medals to reward unanticipated inventions and innovations in all industrial
              sectors;  and 4) special programs.  These latter were either sustained
              endeavors such as industrial research or standardization ventures or the
              foundations to help unfortunate workers and inventors, or exceptional steps
              taken t o address a single issue such as patent reform.    At each stage in his
              history of  SEIN, Dr. Butrica is relating its industrial policy to the larger
              pattern of French industrialization and is exploring the relationship between
              SEIN and the state.  Because the stated goal of  SEIN was to promote industry
              through the application of science, the analysis also comprises the role of
              scientists and engineers in the formulation of industrial policy.
