Title       : Analytical Model of Superscalar Processor Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1995      
File        : a9423272

Award Number: 9423272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239999             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Shen shen@ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 Trace-driven simulators (TDS) are widely used by processor  architects to
              accurately assess the expected performance of a  processor design.  While
              necessary and useful, TDS have some  shortcomings.  Traces of realistic 
              programs are usually very  large and expensive to store, and simulation of 
              traces can very  time consuming.  Furthermore, simulation does not yield a 
              characterization of the factors that determine performance, and  hence can not 
              recommend specific changes to enhance performance.    The two-fold objectives
              of  this research are (1) to investigate  alternatives to TDS for accurately 
              quantifying processor  performance; and (2) to seek to characterize factors
              that  determine superscalar processor performance.  The effort will  involve 
              developing an analytical model of machine behavior, based  on which processor 
              performance can be computed without requiring  tedious trace-driven simulation.
               It is hoped that the same  analytical model, in addition to providing a useful
               tool, will  also provide a characterization of superscalar processor 
              performance.  This characterization can potentially reveal  fundamental laws 
              governing processor performance that can be  mathematically formulated.    In 
              this research project, processor performance is modeled as a  composition of 
              program parallelism and machine parallelism.  Program parallelism is
              represented  by two distribution functions  that are derived from the execution
              trace of  benchmark and  captures the control and data dependencies in the
              program.  This  derivation is analogous to performing a type of transform on
              the  execution  trace from the time domain to the transformed domain. 
              Consequently the two  distribution functions can be viewed as  concise spectral
              representation of the  program parallelism.  Machine parallelism represents the
              resources available in  the  processor for the concurrent processing of
              instructions. A  machine is  modelled as a network, or circuit, of primitive 
              components, e.g. buffers and  scalar pipelines.  Macro models of  the
              components and the model for their  serial and parallel  interconnections will
              be developed.  With such a circuit of  model  microarchitectures, complex
              superscalar processors can be  effectively  and rigorously modeled.    While
              the research appears somewhat theoretical in  nature, a  great deal of
              experimentation is required and expected.  The plan  is  to work with realistic
              programs with extremely long traces as  well as a wide  range of
              state-of-the-art implementations of real  instruction set  architectures.  The
              Alpha 21164 and the Power PC  620 designs and the SPEC92  Shen  benchmark
              suites are used as the  primary experimentation vehicles.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
