Title       : Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment for the R/V Weatherbird II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9423376

Award Number: 9423376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard W. West                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124505             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis A. Hansell   (Principal Investigator current)
              C. Lee Black  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 5416      SHIPBOARD SCIENTIFIC SUPP EQUI
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423376  HANSELL    This project will supply shipboard scientific support
              equipment   for the research vessel WEATHERBIRD II, operated by the Bermuda 
              Biological Station for Research, Inc, and dedicated to use in  support of ocean
              science research.          The Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program
              provides funds  for ship equipment deemed essential to the proper and safe    
              conduct of ocean science research. This Program provides support   for such
              items as deck equipment including winch systems for the   deployment and
              retrieval of scientific instruments, navigational   equipment such as radars,
              gyroscopes and earth qatellite     receivers to pin point the location of
              research sites,     communication equipment including radio transceivers and   
               satellite transceivers for voice and scientific data     communications and
              other equipment such as motorized workboats    for transporting scientists to
              and from data retrieval sites.        The Project Director, Dennis A. Hansell
              is fully qualified to    direct this project having had considerable experience
              in    overseeing the acquisition and installation of shipboard    equipment.   
                 This project will allow the institution to replace an undersized  crane,
              obtain a spare CTD winch drum, rehabilitate a hydro winch,  replace an old
              radar and refrigerator and install an oily water  separator, an MSD and a
              navtex receiver.  ***
