Title       : Theoretical and Computational Studies of Molecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9423162

Award Number: 9423162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel M. Bowman bowman@euch4e.chem.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1318,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Joel M. Bowman at the Department of Chemistry, Emory   University, is
              supported by a grant from the Theoretical and   Computational Chemistry Program
              at NSF for the computational study of the   reaction dynamics for gas phase
              molecules. Four specific molecular   processes are being studied under this
              grant. An important aspect of much   of the work is that it involves the
              interaction of light with free   molecules; in particular, the processes of
              photodissociation and   photodetachment are being examined. Another special and
              quite valuable   aspect of the work is that a major part of it is being carried
              out in   close interaction with an expert, at the same university, in
              electronic   structure theory. The result of this interaction is that Professor
              Bowman   is able to study reaction dynamics with potential energy surfaces
              which   are based on accurate treatments of the atomic interaction energies.  
              Since the accuracy of theoretical studies of the the reaction dynamics is  
              often limited by the accuracy of the potential energy surfaces,    Professor
              Bowman's access to accurate surfaces substantially reduces the   uncertainties
              in the results obtained from the work supported under this   grant.     The
              long term goal of the work being carried out is to predict and   explain
              important gas phase chemical processes, especially those which   occur in the
              atmosphere and in combustion processes. In the present work,   one of the
              photodissociation reaction processes examined is for a   molecule which
              contains chlorine and this reaction is believed to be   involved in the ozone
              depletion of the polar atmospheres. The results   obtained from this particular
              study are likely to be of immediate   importance for the Environmental
              Sciences.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
