Title       : Exploring New Constructs in Computational Type Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1999   
File        : a9423687

Award Number: 9423687
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Constable rc@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 Computer science has become increasingly concerned with the  concept of type.
              From the 60's onward this notion has  demonstrated its value as  an effective
              organizing  concept_first in programming and programming languages,  then  in
              knowledge representation, in automated reasoning, in  formal methods,  and now
              perhaps in computer algebra systems.  Previous NSF-supported research  has led
              to a coherent family  of constructive type theories and to the  implementation
              of  them in the Nuprl system from Cornell and related systems  elsewhere.   
              The plan of the investigation is to find the right concepts  to  explain the
              use of types in computer algebra systems and  in formalizations of  abstract
              computational mathematics  (especially algebra). It is conjectured that  in
              some cases  the right concepts are generalizations of algebraic data  types  to
              higher-order ADT's. In other cases, new type  constructors may be necessary, 
              such as the very dependent  types. These concepts are expected  to clarify 
              both pragmatic issues and foundational questions.  Moreover,  the  method of
              investigation seeks to formalize the object  oriented features of  algebra
              systems and generalize them to  other programming environments.    The  result
              of this research enables the design of a new  generation of computer  system
              that integrates subsystems  (such as compilers, concrete and symbolic 
              evaluators,  transformation systems, provers, and data base managers)  around a
               rich notion of type used to specify and verify the  linking protocols. 
              Investigation of computational  type theory also deepens  understanding of the 
              foundations of computer science and its links to  mathematics  and
              computational science.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
