Title       : High-speed Panamanian Telecommunications Network for Global Change Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9423750

Award Number: 9423750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony G. Coates   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      750 9th Street N.W.
	      Washington, DC  205600903    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1513      REGIONAL INST-GLOBAL CHNGE,ATM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 1314,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Coates   Currently, all regional electronic traffic from Panama, El Salvador,
              Nicaragua, Honduras and Guatemala is channeled through Costa Rica, using a 128
              cubs satellite link to the Internet.  The Smithsonian Tropical Research
              Institute (STRI) and the Panamanian Academic Network (RAP) are linked to the
              Internet through Costa Rica via a 19.2 cubs land line.  This small-bandwidth
              land line is inadequate for the needs of the research community of Panama, and
              is notoriously unstable.    In order to address the needs of the researchers at
              STRI, the Smithsonian Institution (SI) has installed a satellite dish at STRI's
              Tivoli/Tupper facility.  STRI has offered half of the bandwidth of its newly
              installed satellite link to RAP.  This satellite link will be initially
              installed to handle traffic of 128 cubs, but the link can be expanded up to a
              full T1 connection (24 x 64) cubs) should the need arise.   Following
              laboratory facilities will be connected to the Tivoli/Tupper satellite dish
              after the planned installation is completed:  1.  Within Tivoli/Tupper itself,
              over 100 workstations on an existing Local Area Network (LAN) will be connected
              to the satellite dish link.  2.  An existing 20 station LAN at the STRI Naos
              marine research laboratory, 3.5 km distant, will be augmented by a server and
              connected via a spread-spectrum wireless link to Tivoli/Tupper.  STRI will
              supply an additional 30 workstations for the Naos Laboratory, and connect these
              machines to the LAN.  3.  An existing LAN at Barro Colorado. Island (BCI),
              STRI's principal terrestrial research site, over 30 km distant, is currently
              connected to Tivoli/Tupper by a microwave link to the Panama Canal Commission's
              fiber optic cable.   SI plans to fund a major expansion of the LAN within  BCI,
              and STRI has requested support from NSF for the upgrading of the microwave link
              to support this expansion.  4.  An existing Wide  Area Network linking the
              members of the RAP (the Technological University of Panama (UTP), the
              University of Panama (UP), th e University of Santa  Mar a Antigua (USMA)) will
              be connected using a spread spectrum wireless link to Tivoli/Tupper.  5.  The
              LAN at the National  Institute for Renewable Natural Resources (INRENARE)
              currently has no link to the Internet, and the 20 km distance to Tivoli/Tupper
              will require the use of two high-capacity modems over two dedicated INTEL
              telephone lines.  The Internet link to the LAN at INRANARE will also require a
              4 Mb server, a router, a transceiver, and a UPS   The incremental equipment
              requested in this proposal will allow the global change research community at
              the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute  (STRI) in Panama to participate
              fully in the electronic exchange of data and information crucial to a
              successful and cutting-edge research program.   STRI has many data sets of the
              first scientific quality that would be difficult to access any other way.  STRI
              operates on  of the best documented sites within the Center for Tropical Forest
              Science's global system of 50-hectare plots, and has over forty years of data
              from its coral reef monitoring program.  In addition to STRI, several other
              research institutions will benefit from this improved service, all members of
              the Panamanian Academic Research Network (RAP):  the Technological University
              of Panama (UTP), as well as the National Institute for Renewable Natural
              Resources (INRENARE).  Panama is a Member State of the inter-American Institute
              for Global Change Research (IAI), a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative
              research on global change issues among the scientific institutions of the
              Americas.   The National  Science Foundation is the U.S.Government agency
              designated by the White House to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the
              IAI.
