Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogeny and the Evolution of Host Use and Host
               Specialization in the Endophagous Moth Genus Papaipema (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1995     
File        : a9423516

Award Number: 9423516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Wagner dwagner@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              WAGNER  9423516  This project will examine the relationships among species for
              one of North America's largest native groups of moths, the genus Papaipema
              (Lepidoptera: Noctuidae). Papaipema is unique among large genera of North
              American moths in containing both widespread agricultural pest species and
              highly specialized species (the majority) that feed on only one or a few
              plants, occur in a very restricted geographical area, or both.  Although the
              morphology, taxonomy, and life history of Papaipema species are well-understood
              relative to other large moth genera, no one has yet attempted to reconstruct
              the phylogeny or address relationships among the species in this genus.  This
              project will utilize molecular DNA sequence data to construct a cladogram or
              phylogenetic pattern of relationships.  Once the relationships among the
              various species have been resolved as much as possible, the cladogram will be
              used to test hypotheses concerning the generalist/pest/outbreak life style and
              its converse, extreme specialization on particular host plants.  Specifically,
              the following questions will be asked:  Did specialization precede the more
              generalized "pest" habit or vice versa?  To what degree can the nature of plant
              use in this group be explained by similarities in chemical compounds occurring
              in the plants versus the relationships among the plants themselves or the
              habitats in which they occur?  %%%  This project will contribute to our basic
              knowledge of biodiversity in this group of North American moths.  It will also
              contribute important information about how insects form host plant associations
              and how pest species originate.  This knowledge holds promise for developing
              strategies for controlling agricultural, forest and nursery crop pests.  ***
