Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Bandwidth Selection in Semiparametric Regression Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1995       
File        : a9423247

Award Number: 9423247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Naisyin Wang nwang@stat.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423247 Wang  Abstract      This project  investigates bootstrap bandwidth
              selection procedures in semiparametric regression models. As pointed out in
              Hsieh and Manski (1987), the performance of the estimated regression parameter
              in a semiparametric regression model could be rather sensitive to the choice of
              bandwidth. The traditional plug-in method often requires estimating elements
              within a complicated second order expansion of the estimated regression
              parameter. The fact that the properly chosen bootstrap procedure could estimate
              these complicated terms in an automatic fashion makes this procedure especially
              appealing. Two classes of semiparametric regression models are considered here:
              (i) semiparametric heteroscedastic regression models, and (ii) semiparametric
              measurement error regression models.  Different resampling strategies from
              those in the parametric and nonparametric regressions have to be pursued due to
              the different semiparametric structure. Resampling strategies for the
              aforementioned two semiparametric settings are proposed.  Properties of the
              proposed bandwidth estimators are investigated theoretically as well as
              numerically.     The availability of high-speed computing has allowed
              researchers to use "semiparametric modeling," a new mathematical development
              which, for most scientific explorations, is preferable to its traditional
              parametric rivals because of much greater flexibility. Some recent applications
              of semiparametric modeling include studies which compare the effects of high
              versus low AZT treatments on the survival of AIDS patients,  the investigation
              of effects of saturated fat on breast cancer based on self-support food
              questionnaires and on detailed food records,  the relationship between a
              patient's age at the time of bone-marrow transplant and the incidence of
              chronic graft versus host disease (GVHD) afterwards. One of the major
              difficulties in semiparametric modeling is to properly choose a so-called
              "bandwidth" which controls the amount of data going into the  model
              simultaneously.. Poor choice can result in loss of information or loss of
              accuracy. This project investigates bandwidth selection procedures which would
              be theoretically sound and practically feasible.  The main approach emphasizes
              taking advantage of modern computing power to help users to avoid complicated 
              mathematical derivations. Success of this project will certainly further
              promote the applications of semiparametric modeling in many other fields.
