Title       : U-Pb Analysis of Detrital Zircons in Late Proterozoic Rocks of Arctic Alaska:
               Implications for Tectonic Evolution of the Canada Basin and Adjacent Polar
               Margins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1995       
File        : a9423534

Award Number: 9423534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131452             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. McClelland   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian E. Patrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    This award supports a project to study the tectonic evolution of 
              the Arctic by providing paleogeographic constraints on mechanical  models
              proposed for the opening of the Canada Basin. Current  geophysical and
              geological data upon which these models are based  typically lack the required
              detail and resolution (e.g.,  geophysical data), do not provide unique
              solutions (e.g.,  stratigraphic and basin axis correlations), or remain 
              interpretive due to overprinting during younger orogenesis (e.g.,  structural
              relationships). The two models that best fit the  meager data base invoke (1)
              rifting of Arctic Alaska-Chukotka  from the Lomonosov Ridge followed by
              sinistral translation along  the Canadian Arctic Island margin or (2) rifting
              and rotation of  Arctic Alaska from the Canadian Arctic Islands. These models 
              differ in the assumed pre-Cretaceous paleogeographic position of  northern
              Alaska. Thus isotopic studies designed to constrain the  paleogeographic origin
              of Arctic Alaska could potentially provide  significant insights into the
              evolution of the Canada Basin.    Nd isotopic analyses have been successfully
              utilized to provide  general constraints on paleogeographic models. Combining
              Nd data  with U-Pb isotopic analysis of single detrital zircons, which  allow
              discrimination of specific age populations, provides a  powerful tool for
              correlation of displaced stratal sequences and  their source regions.  This
              research will involve a U/Pb detrital  zircon study of Proterozoic metaclastic
              rocks at 4 localities  across Arctic Alaska in an effort to provide additional 
              constraints on its paleogeographic origin.  Proterozoic rocks  will be targeted
              in order to determine the primary cratonal  signature and establish a baseline
              for similar detrital studies  in Paleozoic and younger strata of the Arctic
              Alaska region.  Comparison of the resultant isotopic data with known detrital 
              signatures from the Canadian Arctic and Cordilleran margins will  bear directly
              on critical evaluation of current  models for the  tectonic evolution of the
              Canada Basin. In addition, results of  this study will address the presence or
              absence of pre-  Mississippian terranes, the significance of 2.0 Ga Nd model
              age  reported for Proterozoic rocks in northern Alaska in terms of  homogeneous
              source versus multicomponent mixing, depositional  ages of the Proterozoic
              clastic rocks sampled, and potential  correlation of Arctic Alaska with crustal
              fragments (Yukon-Tanana  and Ruby terranes) presently outboard of the
              Cordilleran  miogeocline.
