Title       : Structural Studies of Inorganic Phosphates, US-Morocco Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9423322

Award Number: 9423322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Holt chememh@osucc  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0201000   Agriculture                             
              12        Chemistry                               
              13        Physics                                 
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This project is to support collaborative research by Dr.
              Elizabeth Holt, Chemistry Department, Oklahoma State University, and Dr.A.
              Boukhari, Laboratoire de Chemie du Solide Appliquee, Faculte des Sciences de
              Rabat, Universite Mohammed V, in Rabat, Morocco.  The research will focus on
              alteration of the structures of AIBIIP2O7 complexes with the aim of producing
              new materials with commercial properties.  The physical properties of many
              known complexes of this family arise from the behavior of the B atom.  Thus
              various methods of altering the environment of the B atom will be explored. 
              Included are: the preparation of ferromagnetic diphosphate complexes of form
              MIMIIP2O7, substitution of two AI atoms for a single AII atom in AIIBIIP2O7 and
              exploration of mixed valence materials, (BIIBIII)P2O7.  These types of changes
              are expected to lead to systems with increased metal to metal interaction, and
              thus interesting physical properties.    Scope: This project is to fund visits
              by two Moroccan M.S. and Ph.D. students from the Universite Mohammed V to the
              crystallographic laboratories at Oklahoma State U. ,each year, to carry out
              materials structural research. It also supports visits by the two senior
              scientists to each other laboratories.  The project allows the collaboration of
              the Moroccan group, with experience in sample preparation and analytical
              studies, with the US scientist who has considerable experience in experimental
              chemistry, especially in crystallography.  The bulk of the synthetic work will
              be done in Morocco, a country with the largest phosphate mines in the world,
              while the structural characterization will be done at Dr. Holt's laboratory
              under her supervision.  Dr. Holt has had a very successful collaboration
              recently with Dr. Boukhari which resulted in several publications.  This
              project will build on this relationship, and will expand the collaboration by
              including additional students from Morocco.  The project fits well with the
              objectives of the Division of International Programs.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
