Title       : The Physiology and Biochemistry of Organic Osmolytes in Arctic Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9423920

Award Number: 9423920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148220             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Raymond raymond@nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423920  Raymond  Freezing resistance in polar fishes is usually attributed to 
              noncolligative peptide antifreezes.  In 1991, it was found that  some arctic
              fishes increase the freezing point depression of their  body fluids by
              producing high concentrations of glycerol in  winter.  Subsequent studies of
              this phenomenon have led to a  realization that other inorganic ions and
              organic osmolytes have  important roles in freezing resistance in many polar
              fishes, and  possibly other roles as well.  Prominent among these solutes are 
              trimethylamine oxide (TMAO) and urea, which are more widely  distributed in
              polar fishes than glycerol.  These studies have  lead to several unusual
              findings concerning the synthesis, roles,   conservation and distribution of
              these osmolytes. Therefope, the  overall objective of this study is to better
              understand the  biochemistry and physiology of glycerol, TMAO and urea in
              arctic  fishes. Previous studies have shown that significant glycerol  losses
              occur in smelt and that these losses are compensated for by  a synthetic
              pathway (via pyruvate) that appears to differ from  that in other cold-hardy,
              glycerol-producing animals.  New studies  will focus on various amino acid
              substrates that may be involved  in this pathway, and the seasonal variation in
              activity of three  key enzymes that are also thought to be involved. The
              unexpected  occurrence of high serum TMAO levels in many arctic fishes also 
              raises several questions.  TMAO is usually acquired by teleosts  through the
              diet, but in the smelt family, it appears to be  synthesized in response to
              cold.  TMAO synthesis will be tested by  an assay for TMAO oxidase in warm and
              cold-acclimated fishes.   Inorganic ion concentrations in polar fishes are high
              enough to  interfere with intracellular processes, such as enzyme activities.  
              The possibility that TMAO may partially counteract this salt  inhibition--for
              which there is some preliminary evidence--will be  investigated.  A possible
              role of TMAO in reducing epithelial   membrane permeabilities to low molecular
              weight osmolytes will  also be investigated.  Preliminary evidence that TMAO
              itself is  conserved, rather than excreted as it is in most fishes, will be 
              further tested in smelt and other arctic species.  Conservation of  TMAO would
              provide further evidence that it has a physiological  role. Urea synthesis in
              teleosts is normally accomplished through  the purine pathway, but in fishes
              with high urea levels (including  a few teleosts), it can occur by the
              ornithine cycle.  Both  pathways will be assayed in the smelt to determine if
              their high  urea levels are also the result of an ornithine cycle.
