Title       : Mechanisms of Patch Maintenance in Old-Growth Hemlock-Hardwood Forests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9423065

Award Number: 9423065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297264             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Reich   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee E. Frelich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klaus J. Puettmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Walters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              le for toolbar execution Show multiple pages Toggle zoom-in zoom-out mode
              Toggles full screen2Attempts to make the document fit on one less page Moves to
              the next table cell Moves to the previous tablecell*Moves to the first cell in
              the current row)Moves 9423065 Reich  Mono-dominant patches of eastern hemlock
              and sugar maple may persist for millennia in a stable forest mosaic pattern.
              This study will explore the mechanisms underlying the maintenance of this
              patchy mosaic, focusing primarily on feedbacks and the functional underpinnings
              for recruitment success. Working in mesic forests in Michigan and Wisconsin,
              the study will determine whether stable patch structure may be maintained by
              positive feedbacks between canopy properties, resource availability,
              differences in species  ecophysiology, and population dynamics. Specifically
              this study will determine if these factors result  in success of sugar maple
              recruitment beneath sugar maple, but not hemlock canopies, and of hemlock 
              recruitment beneath hemlock, but not sugar maple. The study will also test the
              resource reduction/  tolerance hypothesis of community dynamics under a
              multiple resource, light and nitrogen scenario.  In  a series of field and
              greenhouse studies, the following hypotheses will be tested: (1) light and N 
              availability is lower on average beneath hemlock than sugar maple canopies. (2)
               Small-seeded hemlock  will establish beneath hemlock overstories on suitable
              microsites and persist due to great tolerance  of combined low light and N
              levels. In contrast, seedlings of large seeded sugar maple can establish 
              beneath hemlock overstories, but fail to maintain positive growth rates due to
              low N and light  availability. (3) Hemlock seedling recruitment will fail
              beneath sugar maple canopies because of dense  leaf litter and lack of suitable
              nurse logs. In contrast, greater N availability beneath sugar maple  canopies
              enables sugar maple seedlings to maintain positive growth rates under deep
              shade. (4) Yellow  birch will fail to establish in deep shade in either patch
              type and will regenerate in high resource  conditions only on suitable
              microsites. (5) Seedling survival is a function of relative growth rate,  which
              in turn is a function of light and N availability and of variation in seedling
              metabolism and  allocation.  The minimum light needed for survival is
              influenced by N availability, most in yellow  birch, less in sugar maple, and
              least in hemlock.  %%%  The combination of field observations, field
              manipulations, and greenhouse experiments will yield a superb combination of
              detail to more fully understand the natural dynamics of northern forests. This
              project is unique in its excellent attempt to link ecosystem processes,
              physiological ecology and community dynamics. The results also will have direct
              bearing on the physiological attributes of commercially valuable tree species,
              such as sugar maple.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
