Title       : Basic Research for the Future: Opportunities in Microbiologyfor the Coming
               Decade, March 1-3, 1996 in Daytona Beach, FL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9423342

Award Number: 9423342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Payne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Soc For Microbiology
	      1752 N Street
	      Washington, DC  200362804    202/737-3600

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9423342  Payne  The American Academy of Microbiology will convene a colloquium
              of leading scientists to deliberate on one of the most difficult challenges
              facing research in the United States: identification of the most promising
              research areas in microbiology, particularly those that offer the greatest
              potential form long-term benefits and opportunities.  A white paper report will
              be prepared to disseminate this in-depth set of analyses and recommendations to
              the broad microbiological community, to industry, to policy makers who have
              concerns about microbiological research and to appropriate federal agencies. 
              The final report will also be made available to the lay public.  Microbiology
              has contributed significantly to more productive agriculture, to sustaining the
              quality of the environment and to improving human health.  With modern
              technological advances, the field is now positioned to provide the public with
              optimal return for its scientific research investment.  The availability of
              powerful new analytical techniques--such as the polymerase chain reaction
              (PCR), development of DNA probes, gene insertion by transposons, scanning
              tunneling microscopy, and membrane-inlet mass spectrometry--enriches the
              prospects lying ahead in microbiology.   However, as significant as research
              has been over the past decade, it is critical that the microbiological
              community identify those scientific areas that present the promise to solve our
              most critical problems in the environment, in development of alternative
              biodegradable materials, and in improving the human condition over the next
              decade.  This Award is made by the NSF Directorate for Biosciences, funded
              jointly by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Division
              of Environmental Biology.    %%%  The American Academy of Microbiology will
              convene a group of leading scientists from both academic and industrial
              pursuits to communicate to the group their vision of where the science in their
              areas is now and where it will go to in the fut ure.  They will produce a
              document outlining where the exciting areas in microbiological research are
              that can be utilized for the benefit of humankind, and the understanding of how
              bacteria exploit their unique places in the world where they exist.  This
              meeting will benefit governmental agencies that are interested in bacterial
              activities, scientists, and the general public.  ***
