Title       : X-Ray Studies of the Statistical Physics of Surface Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9423641

Award Number: 9423641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon G. J. Mochrie simon@lindy.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9423641  Mochrie  Surface  morphology  is  key to a number of technologically 
              important  processes, including for example, corrosion, catalysis, and 
              epitaxial  growth.  In  addition, there remain basic scientific  questions, 
              most  especially concerning the nature of instantaneous correlations between 
              different  points  in the interface, and the correlation  between  the 
              interfacial position at different times. These fundamental issues will  be 
              addressed in the proposed research. Specifically, studies  of  the  equilibrium
              properties of crystal surfaces will be made to investigate  equilibrium surface
              morphology. In addition, the kinetics  of  changes  in  surface morphology
              following rapid temperature changes, and during  growth,  will be investigated.
              This research will lead to an  improved  understanding   of  what  determines 
              surface  morphology.   Such   an  understanding  may  eventually allow for the 
              introduction  of  simple  processing  strategies  for  tailoring  surface 
              morphology  to   suit  technological  needs.  The experimental technique 
              employed  in  these  studies   is   high-resolution  synchrotron   x-ray  
              scattering,   in  conjunction   with   a  proven,  state-of-the-art  ultra-high
                vacuum  apparatus.  %%%  The  form and structure of solid surfaces are the
              keys to a number  of  technologically important processes, including for
              example,  corrsion,  catalysis,  and  the growth of one crystalline solid  on 
              another.  In  addition,  there are basic scientific questions, especially
              concerning  the  nature of instantaneous correlations between different points 
              in  an  interface  (as when a crystal surface grows) and  the  correlation 
              between the interfacial position at different times. To address  these  issues,
              studies of the equilibrium properties of crystal surfaces will  be  made  to 
              investigate the equilibrium form and  structure  of  the  surface. The rate at
              which changes in surface form and structure occur  following rapid temperature
              changes, and during gro wth, will  also  be  investigated. This research will
              lead to an improved understanding  of  what  determines  the form and structure
              of a solid surface,  and  may  eventually  allow for the introducton of simple
              processing  strategies  for  tailoring surface form and structure to suit
              technological needs.  The   experimental  technique  employed  in  these 
              studies  is  high-  resolution x-ray scattering  combined with state-of-the-art
              ultra-high  vacuum apparatus.  ***
