Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: The Theory of Assessment and
               Decision making by Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1995      
File        : a9423691

Award Number: 9423691
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45503              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mace A. Hack   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423691      Hack      This award is under the International Junior Investigator
               and Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S.  scientists and engineers
              to conduct three to twelve months  of research abroad at research centers of
              proven excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint 
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities,  expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Mace A. Hack to work with Dr. Geoffrey A. 
              Parker at the University of Liverpool on the theory of  assessment and decision
              making by animals.    Their collaboration will focus on the development of a
              new  type of contest model based on repeated encounters between  opponents, the
              primary goal being a better understanding of  the strategies animals use to
              settle contests in a fitness  optimizing manner.  The second goal is for Dr.
              Hack to  acquire the skills necessary to build complex game theoretic  models
              which he may then apply to appropriate problems in  future research.  Decision
              making under conditions of  uncertainty is not only fundamental to assessment
              during  contests but is also critical in other behavioral contexts,  including
              foraging optimally in a variable environment,  selecting a mate of high quality
              and distinguishing reliable  cooperators. ***
