Title       : Disertation Research: Nitrogen-Plant-Insect Interactions: Integrating Via a Net
               Effects Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9423316

Award Number: 9423316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6048               (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel J. McNaughton  (Principal Investigator former)
              Clive G. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9423316  Coleman    Nitrogen fertilization is well known to both increase  plant
               productivity and insect herbivore damage. Certain levels and  rates   of  
              fertilization  may  negatively   affect   plant  productivity by increasing the
              amount of damage by  insects.  This  research  will examine the net impact  of 
              two  insect  herbivores   on  two  plant  species  grown  under   various 
              fertilization  regimes.   It  is  designed  specifically  to  understand  the 
              consequences of  fertilization  and  insect  herbivory   in  combination  on 
              plant  productivity.    Two  economically  and ecologically important tree 
              species  (oak  and cottonwood) with contrasting life history traits and two 
              economically  detrimental insect herbivore species  are  the  subjects. 
              Fertilization experiments will be carried out  in  both  a  planted field plot
              and, for control and  comparison  purposes,  in  a greenhouse.  Samples of each
               tree  species  will be exposed to differing fertilization schedules in  the 
              presence  and absence of insect herbivores, and  effects  on  plant  growth, 
              tissue chemistry, and herbivore  performance  will  be measured.  The results
              of this study should improve  understanding  of  the  impact  on  plant 
              productivity   of  fertilization levels and rates of addition, in the  presence
               and  absence  of  insect herbivores. They will  reveal  when  tradeoffs occur
              between positive effects of fertilization on  plant  growth and negative
              effects of fertilization  through  stimulation  of  insect feeding on plants.  
              The  long  term  result   may   include  the  formulation  of   fertilization 
              practices  that  optimize net productivity  of  plants,  yet  reduce fertilizer
              and pesticide requirements.
