Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9423746

Award Number: 9423746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Beals beals@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald R. Coifman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                DMS-9423746  PI: R. Beals, R. R. Coifman, P. W. Jones    Abstract    The
              principal investigators will continuing their work in a number   of related
              areas of analysis: harmonic analysis, nonlinear Fourier   analysis, and partial
              differential equations, with applications   to complex analysis, physical
              problems, and numerical work.  Beals   and collaborators will make more use
              their methods from Hamiltonian   mechanics to investigate fundamental solutions
              for subelliptic   laplacians.  Beals will also continue joint work on the
              quantized   three-wave interaction and on geophysical inverse problems.   
              Coifman and Meyer will continue to investigate nonlinear Fourier   analysis and
              applications to homogenization and nonlinear   dependence.  Coifman will also
              continue to develop adapted wave   form analysis to obtain geometric and
              numerical understanding of   oscillatory operators.  Jones will continue his
              work on the fine   properties of harmonic measure and level lines of Green's
              function,   as well as work on singular integrals and d-bar problems related to
                corona problems and analytic capacity. Jones also plans further  
              investigations in quasiconformal mappings and problems relating   Sobolev
              spaces and geometry of sets.    Analysis is the area of mathematics that has
              grown directly from   the invention of calculus and differential equations.  It
              provides   a framework for attacking problems that range from the purely  
              mathematical and geometrical to the most concrete scientific and   technical
              questions.  In turn, these problems have provided the   motivation for the
              continued refinement of the subject and, not   incidentally, its continued
              utility.  Thus there is no precise   dividing line between pure theory and
              potential or actual   application.  For example, in little more than a decade  
              sophisticated techniques of pure harmonic analysis have emerged   in practice
              as wavelet analysis and have enormously extended the   possibilities for
              analysis and storage of digital data.  The   sub jects to be investigated in
              this proposal reflect the full   range of analysis as well as the actual and
              potential interplay   between "pure" and "applied."  Some have a history of a
              century   or more and come from classical analysis and geometry, others   have
              a history of decades and are motivated by physics and   geophysics, others have
              arisen in the last decade and are   connected with signal processing and the
              concrete use of   computers in science and technology.
