Title       : Collaborative Research on Responses of Fluvial, Estuarine, and Barrier-Island
               Systems to Climate and Sea-Level Change on the Central Texas Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9423650

Award Number: 9423650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99434              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Ricklis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Morton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Hester  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423650  RICKLIS       Considerable attention has been devoted to understanding
              the  contemporary dynamics of different facets of the Earth system.  Of
              particular concern have been the analysis of interconnections  among
              terrestrial, atmospheric, and ocean systems related to  climatic change and
              sea-level rise.  A growing number of  scientists are turning their attention to
              analyses of past  changes in order to better understand present and future
              changes.  By enhancing the empirical record of conditions during the 
              Pleistocene and Holocene epochs, expanded knowledge of the  dynamics of change
              and of the consequences of those changes can  be used to validate mmdels of
              contemporary processes and to  improve predictions of the impacts of future
              changes.  This  collaborative research project will examine the development of 
              fluvial, estuarine, and barrier-island systems along the central  Texas coast
              in response to late Pleistocene and Holocene climate  and sea-level changes. 
              The primary goals of this project are  (1) to develop a chronologically
              controlled general stratigraphic  framework for different environments over the
              last 10,000 to  20,000 years; (2) to compare this framework with independently 
              defined records of climate and environmental change for central  Texas and the
              Gulf of Mexico; (3) to refine the record of  Holocene sea-level change as a
              potential analog for future  events; and (4) to evaluate the effects of
              sea-level change on  fluvial, estuarine, and barrier-island systems as possible
               analogs for future changes.  A diverse set of geomorphological, 
              sedimentological, geophysical, micropaleontological, and  archeological
              techniques will be used to gather data used in this  study.  The archeological
              work will focus on examining changes in  human use of estuarine resources in
              order to ascertain possible  future changes in productivity of fisheries
              resources when  natural systems undergo human-induced and natural change.      
              This project will provide new information about differe nt  facets of
              Pleistocene and Holocene change in coastal  environments.  Analyses of these
              and other data will provide  valuable new insights into the timing and
              character of change in  fluvial, estuarine, and barrier-island systems.  This
              project  also will help determine the degree to which historically based 
              models can be used to predict future changes.
