Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Pacific Northwest Forest Dispute Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1995      
File        : a9423134

Award Number: 9423134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy M. Lutz nlutz@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423134  Lutz  This research analyzes dispute processes in Washington state
              bearing on the Pacific Northwest forest dispute in the United States.  It will
              reveal who are the participants in the dispute, what are the sociolegal
              strategies they employ, how their differing definitions of community generate
              differing sociolegal  strategies, and how their language shapes and is shaped
              by these processes.  The project will last for twelve months.  It involves
              field research in four settings, each of which involved distinct processes: 
              community council meetings, regional forest activist meetings, state
              legislation, and federal adjudication.  The research will be ethnographic;  it
              will include participant observation, audio taping of public speech events, and
              personal interviews.  Conversation analysis will be used to analyze fully the
              interactions of participants.  The research will contribute to sociocultural
              understanding of a contemporary political issue and its public policy
              implications by focusing on participant perceptions and understandings of one
              another, institutional settings, and dispute processes.  %%%  This research
              analyzes dispute processes in Washington state bearing on the Pacific Northwest
              forest dispute in the United States.  The Northwest forest dispute has arisen
              because of conflicting views of the definition and use of the region's forest
              resources and over the social and biological consequences of forest
              redefinition.  At the federal level, the dispute is guided by litigation
              challenging the adequacy of environmental protections in federal forest
              policies.  Litigation over this issue has existed and continues to exist as
              policy makers, activists, and local community members struggle over what are
              appropriate environmental protection policies.  At the state level, the dispute
              is guided by the needs of timber areas that would be negatively affected by
              environmental protection regulations.  At the community level, diverse groups
              have involved themselves in the dispute.  It will re veal who are the
              participants in the dispute, what are the sociolegal strategies they employ,
              how their differing definitions of community generate differing sociolegal 
              strategies, and how their language shapes and is shaped by these processes.   
              ***
