Title       : Neuroendocrine Regulation of Prolactin Secretion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1995       
File        : a9423926

Award Number: 9423926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126130             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori L. Badura badura@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423926  Badura    Prolactin, a protein hormone secreted by the anterior 
              pituitary gland, is involved in a large number of  physiological and behavioral
              processes in mammals, including  estrus cyclicity, immune system activation,
              stress, milk  production, and maternal behavior.  While this hormone is 
              clearly involved in many different physiological systems,  the precise
              mechanism of action and the ways in which  prolactin secretion is controlled
              remains to be resolved.  It is difficult to study not only because of its
              multiple  modes of action but because prolactin surges and chronic  secretions
              appear to be differently regulated.  Dr. Badura  is using a clever model system
              to examine the neuroendocrine  regulation of prolactin release.  She is taking
              advantage of  the fact that prolactin shows a marked annual fluctuation  that
              corresponds with changes in photoperiod, most likely  daylength.  Dr. Badura
              will incorporate photoperiodic cues  to examine the factors the underlie the
              regulation of  prolactin secretion.  She will be concentrating on two 
              neuropeptides, vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and  oxytocin.  These peptides
              hormones are likely modulatory  factors since they are located in the
              paraventricular  nucleus of the hypothalamus, a brain region that she has 
              previously shown to play an important role in the  stimulatory modulation of
              basal prolactin release.  Using  state-of-the-art neuroanatomical procedures, 
              Dr. Badura  will identify the sites of action and the relative  contributions
              of  modulatory factors in the expression of  photoperiodic changes in the
              neuroendocrine control of this  physiologically relevant hormone.  Dissecting
              the mechanisms  by which prolactin regulates apparently unrelated 
              physiological systems will increase our understanding of the  adaptive
              significance of evolving hormonal systems that  possess multiple targets and
              functions.  ***
