Title       : Curatorial Improvements to the Entomological Collection, Bernice P. Bishop
               Museum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9423814

Award Number: 9423814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $545709             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon M. Nishida  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bernice P Bishop Museum
	      1525 Bernice Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968172704    808/847-3511

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9423814  Miller   The Bishop Museum arthropod collections are a unique
              assemblage of specimens mainly from the Pacific and its source areas.  The
              collections experienced enormous growth in the last 40 years as over 13 million
              specimens were added almost entirely by project-based collecting.  The
              collections now rank among the three largest entomological collections in the
              U.S..  This project will complete the improvements to collections begun in 1986
              with the installation of 60% of a compactor system and consolidation of the
              scattered collections onto a single floor.  A second phase included the
              elevation of curatorial levels to loanable units for the Coleoptera, Diptera
              and Lepidoptera.  This project will complete the elevation of curatorial levels
              for the remainder of the collection, focusing on the Hymenoptera, Heteroptera,
              Homoptera, Orthopteroidea and the smaller orders and groups (Mallophaga and 
              Thrchoptera), and including the subclasses Acari.  Visiting scientists will
              curate the collections to loanable units (Smithsonian curatiorial level 3). 
              Before the visit of the specialist, the technical staff of Bishop will
              consolidate the group and presort the specimens.  During the specialist's visit
              a technician will help the specialist as well as complete any tasks remaining
              after the specialist leaves.  This strategy saves the visitor's time and
              provides for a more efficient visit.  Another fund-extending strategy that has
              worked will and one also proposed for use here, is taking advantage of travel
              schedules to piggyback a Honolulu visit.  In some cases, exceptional curators
              were able to work on the collections by timing their visits with their travel
              schedules, supporting a Honolulu leg to their trip, for example.  The
              completion of the proposed project has long term cost benefits as staff and
              visitors will not have to sift through multiple drawers of specimens looking
              for members of the group of their interest.  Collections management tasks will
              be streamlined.  Over time, as the studied m aterials are returned, the
              collection as a whole will become a much stronger reference collection
              permitting speedier and better identifications.  Properly organized collections
              set the stage for the use of computers in their management and for the
              dissemination and manipulation of data associated with the specimens.  All
              leading to much better documentation and understanding of the biodiversity of
              the region.
