Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site: Chemical and Biochemical
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1997    
File        : a9423989

Award Number: 9423989
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163763             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Murhammer murham@engineering.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor G. J. Rodgers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9423989  Murhammer   The Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at
              The University of Iowa support for a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
              (REU) Site, with ten students per year from selected universities and colleges
              throughout the United States, with an emphasis on recruitment from six
              Historically Black Colleges and Universities and four small liberal arts
              colleges to conduct research for an 8 week summer period.  These students will
              be matched with one of seven faculty advisors in order that they can conduct
              research in an area most closely related to their interests.  The individual
              projects will be in research areas of expertise of the supervising REU faculty
              to ensure direct scientific interaction between the REU students and the
              graduate students of each research group.  A close student-faculty interaction
              will be developed during daily discussions about the progpess of the particular
              project and other research related issues.  In addition, weekly seminars on
              research-related issues and many social events will be held.  The summer's
              program will conclude with an "in-house" research conference during which the
              REU students will present their research results.  It is expected that
              significant guidance by the REU advisor will be necessary during the early
              stages of the research.  As the research progresses, the REU advisor will
              gradually decrease the level of guidance in order to move the student toward as
              much independence as his/her ability warrants.  All of these programs and
              activities are planned to achieve the goal of making undergraduate students
              more aware of graduate research opportunities in chemical and biochemical
              engineering.  ***
