Title       : Ecophysical Limits to Northern Breeding Distributions of Arctic Sandpipers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9423522

Award Number: 9423522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Odile de la Beaujardiere                
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Ricklefs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9423522  Ricklefs  The environment of the high arctic imposes two critical
              limits to   the existence of many forms of life.  One includes the extreme 
              physical conditions of the environment:  cold temperatures, high  wind
              velocities, and low precipitation.  The other is the  briefness of the growing
              season.  This environment is especially  stringent for sandpipers
              (Scolopacidae), which occupy their arctic  breeding grounds for as little as
              two months, and whose chicks are  among the smallest of warm-blooded animals. 
              This research project  will utilize detailed measurements of the growth and
              development,  energetics, thermal environment, food supply, and parental care
              of  scolopacid chicks to discover how these birds exploit the arctic 
              environment so successfully.  Cold temperatures require a high  capacity for
              generating metabolic heat; short breeding seasons  require rapid growth.
              Therefore, the combined stresses of low  temperature and short season would
              seem to push small homeotherms   to the limit in the high arctic.  The problem
              of resolving  compromises between the conflicting functions of growth rate and 
              heat generation is an excellent model for understanding how the  design of the
              organism relates to its environmental setting. Field  and laboratory
              measurements will be used to determine the forms of  relationships and quantify
              the coefficients in a mathematical  model of the scolopacid chick.  The
              essential elements of the  model encompass the internal organization of the
              chick and the  relationship of the chick to its environment. The model changes 
              continuously as the chick grows, and growth is simulated by  expressions
              relating growth rate to functional capacity of tissues  and functional capacity
              to the proportion of adult size achieved.   Laboratory and field work will
              provide data to evaluate the  scolopacid chick model.  Laboratory investigation
              will focus on  components of energy budgets, capacity of chicks to generate
              heat   in response to cold stress, loss of heat from the b ody, including  
              that caused by evaporation from the respiratory surfaces, and  tolerance of
              body cooling. Observations of free-ranging chicks in   natural family groups,
              using radio-tagged individuals where  practical, will help to validate the
              results from penned birds.   Conditions of the thermal environment and the
              availability of food  items will be monitored continuously to provide data on
              the range   and temporal variability of these factors.
