Title       : Isolation of an Xist Gene cDNA From The Marsupial Monodelphis Domestica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1994   
File        : a9423850

Award Number: 9423850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. McCarrey johnmc@darwin.sfbr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Fdn for Biomed
	      P.O.Box 760549
	      San Antonio, TX  78245    210/258-9544

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              McCarrey  94-23850  Abstract   In the embryo proper of eutherians X-chromosome
              inactivation is  random with respect to whether the maternally- or paternally- 
              derived chromosome becomes inactivated, whereas in marsupials it is 
              exclusively the paternal X chromosome. However, in eutherians X  chromosome
              inactivation is non-random in the extra-embryonic  membranes and occurs earlier
              than in the embryo proper. A second  difference is that whereas X chromosome
              inactivation is stable and  can remain so for over 100 years, reactivation of
              the previously  inactivated X chromosome occurs routinely with age in a tissue-
               specific manner in marsupials. These differences predict that much  could be
              learned of the mechanism of X inactivation as well as the  mechanism of
              maintenance of inactivation if the gene(s) involved  could be compared in
              structure as well as function. A candidate  gene has been isolated and
              sequenced from humans and mice, the Xist  gene. Neither seems to encode a
              protein and both have high degrees  of homology in the non-codine regions.
              However, the homology  consist of tandem direct repeats which are not
              particularly useful  for isolating homologues from other species. An attempt
              will be  made to isolate the Xist homologue from the marsupial, Monodelphis 
              domestica using PCR and the small regions of homology. Although  this is not a
              routine cloning exercise and the risks are high, the  isolation of the Xist
              homologue from a marsupial would make  possible approaches leading to an
              understanding of one of the  fundamental mechanisms of eukaryotic genetics. 
              %%%  The mouse Xist gene will be used in an attempt to isolate the  marsupial
              homologue. The successful cloning and characterization of  this gene will allow
              a comparative approach to understanding the  differences and similarities
              between X chromosome inactivation in  placental animals (eutharians) and
              non-placental animals   (metherians).  ***
