Title       : Dissertation Research: Did Lungs and Intracardiac Shunting Evolve to Oxygenate
               the Heart?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1995  
File        : a9423297

Award Number: 9423297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Jackson Donald Jackson@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9423297  Jackson    An adequate supply of oxygen to heart muscle is essential to
               normal  cardiac function.  In mammals, the coronary arteries  carry 
              well-oxygenated  blood to the  heart  muscle.   Their  importance  is 
              illustrated by the  fact  that  insufficient  oxygenation  of  heart  muscle
              due  to  obstruction  of  the  coronary  arteries is a leading cause of  death 
              in  humans.  Oxygenation  of  heart  muscle is also  important  for  non- 
              mammalian  animals, and may have had a major impact  on  the  evolution  of 
              the  vertebrate  cardiovascular  system.   In  contrast  to  mammals,  the
              hearts of fish,  amphibians  and  reptiles  have no arterial circulation to the
              heart  muscle.  Instead,  venous  blood flowing through the  heart  chambers 
              supplies  the  oxygen  needs of the spongy  cardiac  muscle.  This  poses a
              problem during exercise, which both  increases  cardiac oxygen demand and
              decreases oxygen levels in  venous  blood  returning to the heart.  This
              research will test  the  hypothesis  that  selection for maintaining  cardiac 
              oxygen  supply  and performance led to two major innovations in  the 
              cardiovascular systems of vertebrates: 1) the  evolution  of  lungs  and  2) 
              the persistence in terrestrial reptiles  and  amphibians  of the intracardiac
              shunt, which permits  mixing  of  oxygenated  blood from the lungs with poorly 
              oxygenated  blood  returning  from  the  tissues.   This  research  will 
              establish  the  oxygen requirements of the hearts  of  lower  vertebrates  and
              determine the relative importance  of  lung  ventilation, intracardiac shunting
              and coronary  circulation  as  mechanisms to meet those requirements.  If  the 
              central  hypothesis  is correct, it will lead to a new  paradigm  for  the 
              evolution of lungs and help explain the persistence  of  the    complex  
              cardiovascular   systems   of   ectothermic  vertebrates.   The  outcome may
              alter the  traditional  view  that the cardiac anatomy of modern animals has
              resulted from  selection for innovations  that improve nutrient delivery  to 
              the   systemic  circulation,  without  recognition  of   the  importance of
              nutrient delivery to the heart itself.
