Title       : SGER: An Experimental Investigation of Distributed Computing Approaches for
               Resolving Production Scheduling Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1995       
File        : a9423694

Award Number: 9423694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Georgia-Ann Klutke                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Davis robert.davis@eng.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas K. Keyser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9423694  Davis   This research explores the feasibility and the effectiveness of
              using parallel algorithms for solving production scheduling and other related
              problems is a distributed control manufacturing environment.  Under a parallel,
              distributed control architecture, a problem is partitioned and solved
              simultaneously by several processors, with each processor contributing only a
              portion of the total time to the total solution time.  A mixed integer
              programming formulation of the job shop scheduling program is used as the
              general model structure for the research.  The model is then transformed
              through parameter adjustments into other scheduling scenarios (e.g., flow shop
              problem).  The emphasis is on permutation schedules.  A set of permutation
              schedules is formulated using an n-ary structure.  The branching variable in
              the n-ary tree is the position of each job in the sequence.  This structure is
              common to many branch and bound solutions for sequencing and scheduling
              problems.  Using a depth first search rule through the n-ary tree, all job
              sequences are implicitly evaluated to solve the problem.  Several sample
              problems will be solved.  Using the results from the sample problems, the
              behavior of parallel algorithms in a distributed control architecture will be
              characterized in terms of  algorithmic solution time, communication overhead
              due to data exchanges between processors, and other algorithmic overheads due
              to start up, search, and wind down.   As earlier research has established,
              scheduling problems of practical sizes are very computationally intensive and
              when left to a single processor, can take an extremely large amount of time to
              solve, especially if exact solution approaches are employed.  Parallel
              programming offers some promise in reducing the computational load on a
              processor to solve a problem.  Therefore, any insights gained in solving this
              class of problem will offer some economic benefits to several sectors of the
              economy given that scheduling problems are encountered in  several areas of
              life.  In addition, there are several other classes of problems that behave
              alike and are similar to scheduling and sequencing problems.  These classes of
              problems stand to gain if  progress is made in solving scheduling problems.
