Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows: Micromechanics of Ferroelectric Material and
               Electronic Packaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1997        
File        : a9423964

Award Number: 9423964
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yonggang Y. Huang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5912,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9423964  Huang      The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral 
              Fellows Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to  conduct three to
              twenty-four months of research abroad. The  program's awards provide
              opportunities for joint research,  and the use of unique or complementary
              facilities, expertise  and experimental conditions abroad.    This award will
              support a five-month postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Yonggang Young Huang
              to work with Drs. Wei Yang  and Keh-Chih Hwang of Tsinghua University in the
              People's  Republic of China.  Funding for this project will come from  the East
              Asia-Pacific Program.    This collaboration between Dr. Huang and Tsinghua
              University  is designed to increase our fundamental understanding of 
              micromechanics issues in electronic packaging and in  constitutive modeling of
              "intelligent materials," plus  advance the optimum design of reliable
              electronic packaging.  The specific objectives of the project are:  1) To study
              the  failure mechanisms of conductive adhesives over the full  temperature
              range, with emphasis on highly constrained  failure; 2) To study the interface
              degradation mechanisms of  conductive adhesives due to thermal fatigue, with
              emphasis  on defect evolution under thermal cycling; and 3) To model 
              ferroelectric materials, with special focus on the relation  between microscale
              phenomena and macroscopic properties. ***
