Title       : A Workstation Cluster for High Performance Computing in Structural Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9423827

Award Number: 9423827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270032             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus J. Schulten kschulte@ks.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Wand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Wolynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9184,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to continue the development of  a network of
              high performance workstations coupled through an  Asynchronous Transfer Mode
              (ATM) switch for effective utilization  in computational structural biology. 
              The funds requested will  complement (matching) funds to be obtained from
              Hewlett-Packard  Comp. to build a cluster of sixteen (8 to be funded through
              NSF)  Hewlett-Packard workstations based on PA-RISC 7200 processors, to 
              acquire a communication backbone for this cluster (based either  on an ATM or
              on fibre channel technology, which will be decided  at the time of purchase),
              and to upgrade the ATM switch of an  existing cluster of 16 workstations.   
              The two clusters will be used: (1) for ongoing collaborative  projects with
              experimental laboratories which involve very large  scale modeling of
              supramolecular systems (membranes, phopspho  lipase A2 - membrane complexes,
              polymerization of G-actin to  F-actin and association of gene V protein with
              single stranded  DNA, complexes of nuclear receptor proteins with DNA, light 
              harvesting systems, and others); (2) for NMR protein  structure/function
              studies; (3) for studies of electron transfer  paths in redox proteins and for
              the prediction of protein  structures (protein folding).  One of the clusters
              will allow  users to pool small numbers of workstations (1-4), the other will 
              allow a pooling of 8-16 workstations.  The peak power of a 16  workstation
              cluster will also be utilized for real time modeling.    For effective parallel
              computing across the clusters molecular  dynamics programs (namd, vmd) have
              been developed and are being  further improved.  The effort is funded through
              an NIH Resource  grant and through an NSF Grand Challenge Applications Group 
              grant. Real time modeling will be based on a new graphics program  (vmd) for
              large screen stereo projections and 3D interactive  devices.    Besides the
              three principle investigators, sixteen experimental  investigators will benefit
              from the computational resources   sought in this proposal.  Two computer
              science faculty members  collaborate with us on molecular dynamics algorithms
              and parallel  computing software.  The computational work is partially funded 
              through a grant from the Carver Charitable Trust which has  provided six
              graduate students and two postdoctoral positions for  projects between the
              computational group operating the clusters  and experimental laboratories.
