Title       : Theory and Application of Computation in Statistical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0242402

Award Number: 0242402
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan Machta machta@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The broad theme of this award is to understand complex systems in statistical
              physics using a combination of computational and theoretical tools.  The
              research has three related components: the random field Ising model; the
              development of new algorithms; and, the analysis of physical systems from the
              standpoint of computational complexity.

Informed by new hypotheses and
              recent results, the phase transition of the random field Ising model will be
              studied using a replica exchange, i.e., parallel tempering, algorithm, a
              push-relabel algorithm, to find ground states, and real-space renormalization
              group techniques.  The objective is to understand the nature of phase
              transition and particularly the singularities in the specific heat.  Phase
              transitions in long-ranged correlated pore spaces, e.g., aerogels, will be
              considered.  This work will potentially answer some long-standing theoretical
              questions concerning phase transitions in the presence of quenched disorder. 
              The random field Ising model is believed to describe the phase transitions in
              fluids absorbed in porous materials and the results of this research should
              impact chemical physics and chemical engineering. 

In order to advance
              computational studies of spin systems, research is planned on the development
              and analysis of algorithms with an emphasis on replica exchange and cluster
              methods.  Replica exchange methods are among the most powerful tools available
              for studying complex systems with competing interactions.   Developing this
              class of algorithms has an importance that goes beyond the present study and
              may be relevant to problems ranging from protein folding to combinatorial
              optimization.  In addition to providing algorithmic support for the random
              field Ising model study, one goal of this research is to develop cluster
              algorithms for dynamical problems.

The third topic is a study of the
              parallel computational complexity of simulating systems in statistical physics.
               Efficient parallel algorithms will be constructed and analyzed for various
              systems including diffusion limited aggregation and growing networks.  Based on
              insights gained from examining various models, general results will be sought
              relating structural properties and parallel computational complexity.  For
              example, it is conjectured that, under relatively unrestrictive conditions, the
              absence of long-range correlations implies the existence of a fast parallel
              sampling algorithm.  Investigations at the interface of theoretical computer
              science and statistical physics have the potential for yielding profound
              insights in both fields.  Computational complexity provides a robust, formal
              way to measure history dependence in statistical physics and will sharpen our
              understanding of how and why physically complex systems sometimes emerge from
              simple rules and randomness.

Besides the usual broader impacts associated
              with the research, this project will involve undergraduate physics students in
              computer simulations, especially in the third topical area. 
%%%
The broad
              theme of this award is to understand complex systems in statistical physics
              using a combination of computational and theoretical tools.  The research has
              three related components: the random field Ising model; the development of new
              algorithms; and, the analysis of physical systems from the standpoint of
              computational complexity.

What is particularly interesting about this
              research program is that the work is at the interface between statistical
              physics and theoretical computer science.  There have been a number of recent
              examples where statistical physics has contributed to computer science.  This
              research will continue to focus on this fertile interface.  Students working on
              these projects will be well positioned to contribute to both condensed matter
              physics and computational science.
***

