Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identity and Conquest: Population History of the
               Chachapoyas from Northern Perú
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0242941

Award Number: 0242941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11931              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. Buikstra buikstra@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Jane E. Buikstra, Mr. Kenneth Nystrom will complete
              the data collection necessary to finish his doctoral dissertation.  His
              research involves the generation of skeletal data from several samples from
              throughout the Chachapoyas regions of northern Peru.  With the growing exposure
              and knowledge of the Chachapoyas region, fundamental questions concerning the
              population history of the inhabitants of the area can begin to be addressed.   
              Sparked by the discovery of the Laguna de los Condores, this research seeks to
              understand the growth and development of the people that came to be known as
              the Chachapoyas.  Working under the assumption that biological interactions
              reflect social interactions, morphological characteristics of the skeleton can
              be used to discuss changes in population structure and cultural processes.  The
              Relethford-Blangero model of within-group heterogeneity quantifies the presence
              of gene flow from an external source, allowing discussion of cultural and
              biological consequences of conquest.  Further, with the inclusion of both
              ethnohistorical and archaeological data, it will be possible to discuss the
              development of Chachapoyas identity, both before and after their subjugation by
              the Inka.

At a broader scale, one of anthropology's primary goals is the
              study of how groups of people interact, not only with other groups, but also
              with the natural and supernatural worlds that surround them.  This research
              addresses fundamental concepts concerning the expression of group identity
              within the archaeological record.  Previous archaeological research has
              concentrated upon the distribution of material artifacts to distinguish between
              cultures and to characterize the contact and articulation between groups.  With
              the growing interest in pursuing the issue of ethnicity from a
              bioarchaeological perspective, a more nuanced discussion of the archaeological
              examination of ethnicity is possible.  
	

