Title       : Conjugated Diruthenium Metallaynes: Monomers, Dimers and Oligomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0242623

Award Number: 0242623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tong Ren tren@miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7202,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program supports the
              research of Tong Ren, Department of Chemistry, University of Miami,
              investigating highly conjugated oligomeric diruthenium metallaynes. These
              consist of diruthenium "paddle wheels" alternating with polyalkynes. The
              diruthenium unit is supported by bridging ligands such as 2-anilinopyridinate,
              N,N'diarylformamidinate, or N, N'-dimethylbenzamidinate. These dimers are
              linked by two, four, or six carbon bridges. The ruthenium units may improve
              electronic communication and delocalization in the oligomer. The multiple redox
              states accessible by these metal-metal bonded species allows interesting
              magnetic, electrophoric and chromophoric properties. Ren is also investigating
              the use of terminally functionalized oligomers that serve as molecular
              "alligator clips", making a nanoscale electrical connection.

These compounds
              are being studied as potential "molecular wires", single molecules that can
              conduct electricity in a nanosized electronic circuit. Fundamental studies of
              electronic communication and conductance in these molecules may lead to
              molecular electronic devices. Scientists working on this project will learn
              modern synthetic and characterization skills as well as nanopatterning and
              nanojunction techniques. 

