Title       : Addressing the Problems of Spatial Resolution and Adequate Sampling in Clustered
               Clouds and Rain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0242418

Award Number: 0242418
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur R. Jameson jameson@rjhsci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RJH Scientific Incorporate
	      1594 Hilltop Drive
	      El Cajon, CA  92020    619/442-1407

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The concentrations of raindrops and cloud droplets in the atmosphere may be
              regarded as random variables that fluctuate with time and location.  Recent
              work by Jameson and Kostinski has shown that these concentrations have
              probability distributions that deviate from the theoretical Poisson law that
              applies to purely random distributions.  The deviations are caused by the
              tendency of drops to concentrate in clumps or patches.  This clustering of
              drops complicates the problem of distinguishing between actual time and space
              variability of quantities such as the rainfall rate and the drop-size
              distribution, and the variability arising naturally from samples containing
              small numbers of drops.  The main objective of this project is to develop new
              sampling criteria for counting drops and estimating their concentration that
              will identify real meteorological variability and avoid the artifacts arising
              from small samples.  Another objective is to devise new data analysis
              techniques to sample clouds that are clumpy in structure and to characterize
              their structure.  Attention will also be given to developing sampling criteria
              for the proper description of drop-size distributions.  The approach is a
              combination of (1) analysis of data from various instruments that measure drop
              sizes and concentrations and (2) theoretical investigations based on Monte
              Carlo simulation.  The work will contribute fundamentally to cloud physics by
              defining accurate methods for measuring and describing the spatial and temporal
              structure of rain and clouds.
