Title       : Measurements of the Coupled Development of the Surface Wave Field and Marine
               Atmospheric Boundary Layer with Fetch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0242083

Award Number: 0242083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Theresa Paluszkiewicz                   
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1668975            (Estimated)
Investigator: W K. Melville kmelville@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI/Institution:  Melville / SIO 		Proposal No:  OCE-0242083

The
              coupled development of the wind-generated wave field and the marine atmospheric
              boundary layer as a function of fetch remains a fundamental problem in air-sea
              interaction. While simple power-law expressions for the dimensionless wave
              height and peak frequency have been obtained in terms of the dimensionless
              fetch, predictions of the evolution of the wave directional spectrum still
              depend on assumptions about the wind input, nonlinear wave-wave interactions
              and dissipation by breaking. Similar uncertainties exist in the modeling of the
              marine atmospheric boundary layer. The evolution of the boundary layer and the
              wave field are coupled, with the momentum, heat and moisture fluxes depending
              on the sea state, and especially on wave breaking. While the details of these
              processes may be averaged out, or relegated to subgrid-scale status in meso-
              and basin-scale models of air-sea interaction, improved models of small-scale
              air-sea fluxes are required to improve predictions under moderate wind and wave
              conditions. Moreover, first-order uncertainties remain at high winds. It is
              well known that much of the momentum flux from winds to currents (or the drag
              on the atmospheric boundary layer) first passes through the wave field. The
              primary mechanism for transferring that momentum flux to currents is wave
              breaking. Breaking is an important source of turbulence (that enhances heat and
              mass transfer), and of entrained bubbles and marine aerosols. Marine spray and
              aerosols are of particular importance for biogeochemisty, for cloud physics,
              and for the Earth's radiation balance. This proposal describes a program of
              airborne measurements of the evolution of the air-sea fluxes, the atmospheric
              boundary layer and the surface wave field as a function of fetch in moderate to
              high winds. Airborne experiments will be conducted from the NCAR C-130 in the
              Gulf of Tehuantepec, of the Pacific coast of Mexico during winter when
              northerly mountain-gap winds blow at up to 40 knots or more for several days
              out over the Pacific. Using modern remote imaging, ranging, mapping and
              positioning techniques, we will make detailed measurements of the wave field
              with fetch as winds blow offshore. Using modern airborne atmospheric turbulence
              and flux measurement techniques, we will measure the evolution of the
              atmospheric boundary layer and investigate the coupling with the wave field.
              Using air-deployable expendable dropsondes and AXBTs we will profile the
              development of the marine atmospheric boundary layer and the ocean mixed layer
              with fetch. Measurements will be compared with coupled models of air-sea fluxes
              and wind-wave evolution. We will develop fetch-dependent models of the
              atmospheric boundary layer and more detailed fetch-dependent models of
              surface-wave processes; especially breaking. This project will have a broader
              impact on science and society through a variety of mechanisms. The research is
              motivated by basic questions in small-scale air-sea interaction, but the
              results will find application in economically-important coupled
              ocean-atmosphere models for improved weather and climate prediction. The
              results of this research will be directly incorporated into classes at SIO/UCSD
              and UCI, and the equipment and techniques developed in this project will be
              used in graduate education and research across a variety of fields at both
              institutions. The project will provide research opportunities for summer
              undergraduate research fellows from diverse /underrepresented groups at both
              SIO/UCSD and UCI, and opportunities for undergraduate assistants will be
              provided during the school year. The project will be used to educate K-12
              students in science, and career opportunities in science, at both institutions.
              A project web site will be established at SIO to broadly disseminate the
              results of the research.


