Title       : Line Shape for Water Vapor and Other Atmospheric Asymmetric Rotor Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0242537

Award Number: 0242537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218821             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Gamache Robert_Gamache@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1312,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project involves developing a theoretical framework for calculating
              spectroscopic parameters (pressure-broadened half-widths and pressure-induced
              line shifts) for trace gases in the terrestrial atmosphere.  Accurate
              half-widths are needed for interpreting remote sensing data and in line-
              by-line models used to calculate radiative forcing from greenhouse gases.  The
              inclusion of the line shift in profile retrievals also reduces errors in these
              retrievals.  Data for thousands of ro-vibrational transitions are needed.  A
              theoretical model is needed that is computationally efficient and capable of
              determining the desired parameters accurately.

The complex Robert-Bonamy
              (CRB) formalism is the basis of the theoretical approach.  The calculations use
              realistic molecular dynamics, all relevant terms in the interaction potential,
              and no cutoff procedure.  The effects of explicit velocity averaging on the
              half-width and line shift will be studied.  The intermolecular potential and
              the dependence of the half-width and line shift on the parameters describing
              this potential will be investigated.  The potentials will be optimized by
              nonlinear least-squares fits to experimental and theoretical data.  Initial
              calculations will be done for species for which there are experimental
              measurements of both parameters for several vibrational bands to compare with,
              such as water and ozone perturbed by molecular nitrogen and oxygen.  The theory
              will also be extended to consider self-broadening and shifting of these species
              and other developments of the wavefunctions.  The vibrational state, rotational
              state, and temperature dependence of these collision-induced parameters will be
              investigated.
   
This work will improve our confidence in spectroscopic
              remote sensing results and allow a better determination of the radiative
              forcing of greenhouse gases.  Research experiences for undergraduate students
              will be provided.  This award is supported jointly by the Atmospheric Chemistry
              Program (Division of Atmospheric Sciences/Directorate of Geosciences) and
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program (Division of Chemistry/Directorate of
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences).
