Title       : Cryptic density dependence: the effects of spatial, ontogenetic, and individual
               variation in reef fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0242312

Award Number: 0242312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $697461             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig W. Osenberg osenberg@zoology.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin M. Bolker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Colette M. St. Mary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ecologists have long been interested in the factors that drive spatial and
              temporal variability in population density and structure. In marine reef
              systems, attention has focused on the role of settlement-the transition of
              pelagic larvae to a benthic stage-and on density-dependent processes affecting
              recently settled juveniles. Recent data suggest that co-variance in settlement
              and subsequent density-dependent survival can obscure the patterns of density
              dependence at larger scales, a phenomenon called cryptic density dependence.
              This research will explore the mechanisms that underlie the spatial covariance
              of settlement and site quality - a process that has received little attention
              in the standard paradigm. These mechanistic studies of cryptic density
              dependence will facilitate the development of new frameworks for fish
              population dynamics that incorporate larval ecology, habitat quality, density
              dependence, life history, and the patterns and implications of spatial
              covariance among these factors. More generally, the work provides a specific
              empirical context, and a general theoretical treatment, of cryptic
              heterogeneity (hidden individual variation in demographic rates). 
	Training
              in this project will involve undergraduate and graduate students in
              quantitative and experimental marine ecology.  Additionally, undergraduates
              will be involved through supervised research courses.   Students will be
              trained in field and lab techniques; they will also have the opportunity to
              work with collaborators from Australia and New Zealand.
	This project has
              broader implications for the management of marine fisheries, including
              harvested food fisheries (which can seldom be studied experimentally and thus
              probably exhibit cryptic density dependence) and marine ornamentals (fish and
              invertebrates harvested for the aquarium trade) which can be studied well but
              for which there is a significant divide between science and management and
              policy. 



