Title       : Studies in Noncommutative Geometry and Index Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0242780

Award Number: 0242780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40028              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Gorokhovsky gorokhov@euclid.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Gorokhovsky

This proposal belongs to the area of noncommutative
              geometry. It is devoted to three projects.  The goal of the first project is to
              obtain construction of characteristic classes for the important class of
              noncommutative spaces, arising naturally in the contexts of discrete group
              actions on manifolds and foliations. The approach is based on the recently
              developed by A. Connes and H. Moscovici theory of cyclic cohomology of Hopf 
              algebras. The goal of the second project (joint work with R. Nest and A. Uribe)
              is to obtain index theorem for algebras of Fourier integral operators, and
              study applications of these results.  The third project (joint work with J.
              Lott) is devoted to the proof of the local version of Connes' index theorem for
              etale groupoids, as well as various extensions of this theorem.  Noncommutative
              geometry is a field of mathematics situated on the crossroads between analysis,
              geometry, and mathematical physics. Discovery of quantum mechanics has shown
              that the classical principles of geometry are not applicable to the world of
              microscopic particles. Noncommutative geometry unifies geometry with analysis
              for the solution of the problems of quantum mechanics. Different parts of the
              present work deals both  with solving internal problems of noncommutative
              geometry and with applying methods of noncommutative geometry to other parts of
              mathematics and mathematical physics.

