Title       : Tracers of Biological Productivity and Gas Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0242139

Award Number: 0242139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $724993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Emerson emerson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0242139

The export of carbon from the surface of the ocean is
              one of the processes controlling the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2)
              of the atmosphere, which greatly influences the climate of the Earth. Changes
              in atmospheric pCO2 over glacial time scales are often interpreted as a
              response to changes in the ocean's biological carbon pump.  Models of the
              carbon pump are limited by our understanding of mechanisms that control it in
              different areas of the ocean.  Satellite color images hold great promise for
              determining the biological pump globally, but only if the images can be ground
              truthed by field measurements.  To date this calibration has been achieved in
              only four places in the ocean: the long-term time series locations and parts of
              the Equator.  

In this project, researchers at the University of Washington
              will develop experimental methods of improving our knowledge of the ocean.s
              biological carbon pump.  The research program is twofold.  First they will
              deploy four oxygen sensors and a GTD on the new mooring at HOT to measure a
              profile of O2 in the euphotic zone and the surface concentrations of N2.  They
              believe that this will be sufficient to determine the net biological oxygen
              production.  Two methods will be tested for calibrating the oxygen sensors in
              situ.  This research will develop methods to determine the oxygen mass balance
              (and hence biological carbon pump) on moorings at other locations in the
              ocean.

The second, and much smaller, aspect of the project builds on the
              research team's analytical ability to determine N2, Ar and Ne in seawater. 
              They will conduct a field program to study the concentrations of these gases as
              a function of wind speed on several short cruises in the Drake Passage of the
              Southern Ocean.  The goal is to develop a correlation between bubble flux and
              wind speed.  This knowledge could be used to characterize the bubble process in
              locations where it is not possible to measure these gases and to improve
              estimates of the biologically produced oxygen flux from the ocean using
              climatological surface ocean oxygen concentrations.

Broader impacts of this
              proposal include the benefits to society that will result from understanding
              the marine biological pump well enough to incorporate it into ocean-atmosphere
              models that will be used to predict future climate.  The proposal also promotes
              education of a graduate student who will work on the project.  

