Title       : Laboratory Measurements of Heat and Salt Fluxes in Double-Diffusive Interleaving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0242535

Award Number: 0242535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruby E. Krishnamurti ruby@gfdi.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0242535

Two classes of experiments on doubly diffusive
              intrusions will be conducted in the laboratory.  The first is the intrusive
              interleaving produced in the classical arrangement of property discontinuity
              when a sluice-gate is withdrawn which had separated salt-stratified water from
              sugar-stratified water.  (Salt in the laboratory experiment is used as a proxy
              for cold in the ocean, slow-diffusing sugar as a proxy for ocean salt.).  The
              second is a new arrangement in which a continuous horizontal gradient of
              salinity is density-compensated by an opposing continuous horizontal gradient
              of sugar, and interleaving intrusions grow everywhere simultaneously.  These
              experiments will be performed for doudbly-stable, for salt-fingering, and for
              diffusive stratification.  For both classes of flows modern quantitative
              measurements techniques such as particle-Image Velocimetry for horizontal and
              vertical components, color polarimetry and synthetic Schlieren for sugar
              concentration and density field will be used to determine the horizontal and
              vertical fluxes of temperature (T) and salt (S), as they vary with imposed
              gradients.  The anticipated results of this study are (1) a determination of
              flux laws relating fluxes of T and S to imposed gradients; (2) a determination
              of relationship of horizontal to vertical fluxes and (3) a diagnosis of
              instability mechanisms and test of linear stability theories.

The discovery
              of flux laws which can be scaled up to determine the magnitude of horizontal
              mixing in oceanic fronts is anticipated.  Since the resulting modified waters
              participate in the global thermohaline circulation, the degree of mixing
              modifies the poleward transport of heat which is a crucial component of the
              consequences of global warming.  Teaching and training will be promoted through
              the integration of research results and use of the laboratory facilities in
              many layers of teaching, including graduate students and undergraduate Honors
              Science Seminar students projects and an international partnership with the
              Dept. of Environmental Engineering, University of Genoa.

