Title       : Evolving University-Industry Relationships from the Perspective of the Firm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0242817

Award Number: 0242817
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Bercovitz janetb@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While universities have long served as a source of scientific and technical
              knowledge for industry, there has been a significant rise in both the level and
              the formalization of knowledge transfer activities at the university-industry
              interface.  For the most part, however, recent research explores
              university-industry interactions from the perspective of the university.  Few
              studies examine the firm's perspective.  As a result, understanding of the
              motivations of firms in technology-transfer and the ways in which
              industry-university interaction fits into the larger U.S. system of innovation
              is limited.  This study seeks to address this gap.  Leveraging organizational
              theory and contract theory, hypotheses are developed to explore:  How the
              firm's internal R&D organization and innovation strategy affect its propensity
              to interact with universities; how the firm's internal R&D organization and
              innovation strategy affect the mode of university-industry interactions
              selected.  (Does the firm pursue limited transactions or long-term
              relationships?); and how the firm's internal R&D organization and innovation
              strategy affect expectations for, and satisfaction with, the university
              interactions.  To conduct this study, data will be collected through a survey
              of the large R&D performers, both public and private, in the U.S. economy. 
              Empirical testing of hypotheses will contribute an understanding of how
              university interaction fits within the firm's R&D strategy and examine the
              effect of firm strategy and organizational structure on the types of
              technology-transfer mechanisms employed by the firm and the ultimate
              relationship the firm maintains with the university.  Besides contributing to
              the existing knowledge base, the study will provide useful comparative
              information for industry R&D managers.  One or two PhD students will also be
              involved in this research, and outcomes will contribute to classes in
              entrepreneurship, strategy, and science policy.

