Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of Prehistoric Cultural and Natural
               Processes on Waterbirds in the Pacific Northwest Coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0242632

Award Number: 0242632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Grayson grayson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Donald K. Grayson, Ms. Kristine M. Bovy will collect
              data for her doctoral dissertation.  She is identifying and analyzing bird
              bones from three large, previously excavated archaeological sites in the
              Pacific Northwest Coast of North America: Watmough Bay (San Juan Islands, WA),
              Minard (Washington Coast) and Umpqua/Eden (Oregon Coast).  Previous work
              suggests these sites were occupied during the past 1,000- 3,000 years.  Ms.
              Bovy plans to obtain additional radiocarbon dates in order to better determine
              the ages of the bones recovered.  Her goal is to evaluate how the kinds of
              birds represented at these sites has changed through time, and why these
              changes occurred.  Assuming that significant change is discovered (and
              preliminary research suggests that such change did occur), the research will
              focus on three prime factors to explain those changes: human hunting, climate
              change and earthquake events.

Ms. Bovy's research is interdisciplinary and
              will contribute to both archaeological and biological questions.  For instance,
              her work will provide information on the history of the interaction between
              people and birds in the Pacific Northwest Coast.  Early anthropologists and
              Euro-American explorers in this region describe the many effective methods that
              native peoples had for hunting birds.  In particular, they used a number of
              different kinds of nets to catch large numbers of feeding and flying waterfowl,
              including submerged and large hanging nets.  However, the antiquity and impact
              of such practices is unknown.  Were bird nets used early on or only later when
              other food resources had been depleted due to increasing human populations? 
              This research may also contribute to the debate about how and when social
              inequality developed among native Northwest Coast peoples.  One hypothesis
              suggests that inequalities evolved, in part, because many food resources in
              this region are localized in time and space and therefore could be owned and
              defended by individuals or families (e.g., salmon returning to spawn). 
              However, no one has considered the role that birds, which are at times hunted
              in localized and defensible spots on the landscape, could have played in this
              setting, nor has anyone considered the impact that such hunting may have had on
              the birds themselves.

This research is also important because it will
              provide much needed long-term data on waterbird populations in the Pacific
              Northwest Coast.  Systematic observations of birds are limited to the past
              50-100 years, and many ornithologists and ecologists are realizing that
              longer-term studies are needed to better understand and manage these
              populations.  Knowing how natural processes such as climatic change,
              earthquakes and sea-level rise affected birds in the past, could help us
              predict their responses to similar events in the future, such as global
              warming.


