Title       : Sharing the Harvest? The Uncertain Fruits of Public/Private Collaboration in
               Plant Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0242971

Award Number: 0242971
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter W. Powell woodyp@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The distinction between basic and applied science is eroding in the life
              sciences, as fundamental discoveries at the molecular level prove immediately
              relevant to applied problems of medicine and agriculture. This transformation,
              together with increased intellectual property protection, motivates firms to
              perform, collaborate, and fund more basic science. On the public side, this
              transformation encourages universities and research institutes to commercialize
              their discoveries. This project examines how public and private funds and
              public and private values combine in support of collaborative discoveries, and
              investigates whose interests - those of the general public or private
              companies-are served. The research focuses on the case of plant biotechnology,
              mapping the relationships among scientists and the public, private, and
              nonprofit organizations involved in research on the genetic model organism
              Arabidopsis thaliana. In this setting, the research specifically seeks to
              answer three questions: What is the influence of company funding on 1) the
              focus of scientific research; 2) the applications and the spread of scientific
              ideas and techniques; and 3) the research activities and careers of scientists?
              In answering these questions, the project evaluates how a basic research
              program can take on an applied orientation. The project also traces the
              application of Arabidopsis discoveries beyond the scientists, organizations,
              sectors and countries from which they originate to new generations of basic
              bioscience and applied biotechnology. The project tracks these discoveries by
              following the trail of publications and patents that cite Arabidopsis research,
              and by following ideas and techniques across publications and patent texts. In
              addition, the research investigates how the association of firms with
              university science shapes the scientific patenting and publishing activities
              within universities and firms. This focus on interacting institutions and
              values at the frontiers of science and commerce will inform policy makers and
              philanthropists trying to assess the impact of science funding, and offer
              scientists insight into the uses of their work and the potential institutional
              conflicts that may constrain them. More broadly, this research will provide a
              map of the ways that knowledge spills across the public, private, and nonprofit
              sectors in the co-evolution of science and industry. 
