Title       : Improvements in Drift Tube Reaction Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0242922

Award Number: 0242922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric P. Grimsrud grimsrud@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter B. Knighton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professors Eric P. Grimsrud and Walter B. Knighton are funded by the Analytical
              and Surface Chemistry program for work on drift tube reaction mass
              spectrometry.  The PI's seek to improve the performance of mass spectrometry
              for rapid trace measurement of volatile components in the atmosphere.  An
              effective strategy for creating ions of trace components without saturating the
              mass spectrometer with an oxygen or nitrogen gas signal is ionization with the
              hydronium cation in a flow or drift tube before the mass spectrometer.  In this
              proton transfer gas phase reaction, most trace components can be selectively
              and quantitatively ionized.  However, the hydronium cation ion source is not
              without problems, principally water cluster formation and excessive
              fragmentation of the trace component.  For these reasons, additional work is
              proposed on interrelated instrument parameters of drift tube pressure, flow
              velocity, and pressure as well as reaction rate studies for proton transfer
              from the hydronium ion to various trace components. 

Drift tube reaction
              mass spectrometry is a general technique by which the volatile organic
              compounds present in ambient air or human breath can be directly determined in
              real time without the time lag associated with more conventional methods of
              analysis.  Improved methods such as these are needed for applications ranging
              from medicine to national security.

