Title       : Real-Time Electron Dynamics in Nanoscale Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0242907

Award Number: 0242907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander J. Rimberg rimberg@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,7203,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Nanoscale electrical structures exhibit numerous interesting phenomena such as
              the Coulomb blockade or quantum coherence.  Such phenomena have traditionally
              been studied using dc or quasi-dc measurement techniques, even though the
              underlying electron dynamics take place on much shorter time scales.  While
              such measurements provide a tremendous amount of information, much more could
              be accessed by studying the dynamics of individual electrons.  For instance,
              temporal correlations in electron tunneling are expected in transport through
              Coulomb blockade nanostructures, but have never been observed directly.   This
              Individual Investigator Award supports a project that addresses such issues by
              using a radio-frequency single-electron transistor to study the motion of
              individual electrons in a quantum dot.  Doing so will ultimately allow
              investigation of electronic correlations and quantum coherence on time scales
              of tens to hundreds of nanoseconds.  A series of experiments on both single and
              double quantum dots will be undertaken, with the goal of studying electron
              correlations by means of their counting statistics and probing quantum coherent
              phenomena on their intrinsic time scales.  The techniques used in these
              experiments are also relevant to the qubit readout problem in quantum
              computation, and are expected to shed light on the quantum measurement problem
              in general.  This effort involves use of cutting-edge techniques in
              nanofabrication and radio-frequency characterization, as well as cryogenic and
              low noise techniques, providing the students involved with skills valuable in
              either academia or industry.

For many nanoscale structures (whose physical
              dimensions are measured in billionths of a meter), the motion of individual
              electrons plays an important role in their electrical characteristics.  While
              the roles of individual electrons and the interactions between them have long
              been recognized, electrical transport in nanostructures is usually probed by
              measuring the average conductance.  Although such measurements have provided a
              tremendous amount of information, much more could be accessed by studying the
              dynamics of individual electrons.  This Individual Investigator Award supports
              a project that addresses such issues by using a fast and very sensitive
              electrometer known as a radio-frequency single electron transistor to study the
              motion of individual electrons on a semiconductor quantum dot.  By observing
              the motion of individual electrons in a current driven through the dot, for
              instance, it will be possible to extract additional information about how
              electrons interact in nanostructures.  Because electrons are quantum-mechanical
              objects, the research will also focus on how the process of observing the
              electron motion affects the motion itself.  This problem, which is also
              important for measurement of a qubit in quantum computation, is related to the
              question of how quantum mechanical objects lose their wave-like properties
              (their quantum coherence) when affected by a macroscopic object.  The ability
              to measure individual electrons on short time scales (millionths of a second or
              less) should shed new light on such issues. This effort involves use of
              cutting-edge techniques in nanofabrication and radio-frequency
              characterization, as well as cryogenic and low noise techniques, providing the
              students involved with skills valuable in either academia or industry.

