Title       : Workshop: Assembling the Tree of Life - the European Dimension ( in Paris,
               France in Setember 18-21 2002)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2002  
File        : a0242492

Award Number: 0242492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diana L. Lipscomb                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24379              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ward C. Wheeler wheeler@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Ward Wheeler of the American Museum of Natural History has received a grant
              to conduct a workshop on coordinating US and European efforts to reconstruct
              the phylogenetic history of life on earth.  One of the most profound ideas to
              emerge from modern science is the realization that all of life, from the
              smallest microorganism to the largest vertebrate, is connected through genetic
              relatedness in a vast evolutionary tree.  This tree of life provides the
              framework for much of our modern understanding of biology because it shows the
              diversity of life as well as the historical basis for similarity and
              differences among organisms. Organizing biological knowledge according to
              phylogenetic relationships and their parallel classificatory hierarchies has
              become increasingly important for both science and society. These taxonomic
              groupings, for example, underlie all comparative biology and are increasingly
              used to organize biological and biomedical databases. Phylogenetic hypotheses
              of organisms, or of their genes or gene products, are being used to search for
              and identify new emerging diseases, trace the historical pathways of infections
              among individuals or to understand their geographic spread, search for
              potentially new pharmaceuticals, identify invasive pests of crops and other
              agricultural lands such as forests and develop control programs, and solve
              numerous other questions in applied biology.   It is recognized that
              reconstructing the tree of life must be a large, international venture and that
              ultimate success will depend on scientific expertise and resources, collections
              and funding from many nations.  Therefore, we must begin the process of
              coordinating our efforts and internationalizing the tree of life and other
              systematic biology activities.
This workshop will bring together approximately
              20 leading European systematic biologists, representatives of European funding
              agencies, and representatives of NASA, USDA and Smithsonian Institution and NSF
              observers. The workshop will:  (1) familiarize European researchers and funding
              officials with progress to date and plans for the US Assembling the Tree of
              Life effort;  (2) update European researchers on US plans for invigorating
              revisionary systematics;  (3) develop a vision for the challenge of an
              international Tree of Life effort;  (4) discuss what is needed in terms of
              scientific expertise and infrastructure and in terms of international
              organization; and (5) produce a report that summarizes the discussions and that
              makes as many recommendations toward international cooperation as possible.  

              

