Title       : A Research Agenda-Setting Workshop on Engineering Ethics and the Impact of
               Technology on Society ( April 2003)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0242274

Award Number: 0242274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Kastenberg kastenbe@nuc.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hubert L. Dreyfus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The changing nature of engineering and the newest technologies emerging from it
              require the engineering profession to expand its approach to addressing ethical
              and technical issues. The objective of this workshop project is to create a
              research agenda aimed at including contemporary contextual ethics, exhibiting
              concern with effects on the entire ecology of life, and integrating
              "micro-ethics" (individual and professional ethics), "meso-ethics" (the ethics
              of business and government), and "macro-ethics" (societal ethics).  The
              approach brings together scholars, practitioners and professionals from diverse
              fields in a facilitated planning session and a workshop to develop a research
              agenda for advancing knowledge and understanding in the field of engineering
              ethics and helping to incorporate contemporary contextual ethical theories into
              the education and practice of the engineering profession. The three-step
              process requires a planning session to crystallize the issues to be addressed
              in the research agenda-setting workshop, to consider how they might fit
              together and to finalize the list of invitees. The second step is the workshop
              itself, a two-day event that will be based on four main themes: (a) emerging
              ethical issues in technology, (b) current understanding of contemporary ethics
              as it applies to the development of technology, (c) research needs for
              addressing these contemporary ethical issues, and (d) research needs for the
              design and implementation of courses, seminars and curricula nation-wide, as
              well as the harmonization of professional codes of conduct with this
              curriculum. The third step will be the development and dissemination of the
              workshop proceedings. A Workshop Web Site will publicize the progress of the
              workshop, including the planning, the agenda, the participation, and the final
              proceedings. 
