Title       : Citizen Learning, Deliberation, and Reasoning in Internet-Mediated Technology
               Policy Forums
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0242994

Award Number: 0242994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325068             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Macoubrie jane_mac@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Cobb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn R. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick W. Hamlett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Public participation in technology policy decision-making is both controversial
              and desirable.  It is controversial because of questions about the capabilities
              of citizens to understand and evaluate these complex issues; it is desirable
              because democratic participation is a measure of civic engagement and may
              improve decisions and their outcomes.   Identification and development of more
              effective modes of citizen participation will play an important part in
              enabling citizens to participate effectively.

This project has several
              goals:  1) to develop improved vehicles for effective public involvement in
              technology policy, 2) to create basic knowledge of how citizens' trust in
              regulators, scientists, and corporations; self-efficacy; and learning are
              affected by participation in these processes, and 3) to inform development of
              effective internet-mediated models for national technology policy
              participation.  The research team, composed of faculty in rhetoric of science,
              group decision-making, and political science, will conduct two mixed-mode and
              six internet-mediated consensus conferences, based on the Danish model.  These
              conferences will involve 120 citizens; each panel of 15 citizens will be
              representative of the local population and will deliberate to reach consensus
              recommendations on a prominent technology issue.  The research includes testing
              an innovative measure of democratic deliberation developed by one of the team. 
              The project will also test political science theory, by investigating
              relationships between gender, ethnicity, lower socio-economic status and
              increases in efficacy and trust in regulators, as outcomes of modes of
              participation.  

The project has national-level impact, broadens
              participation of underrepresented groups, and develops new participation
              approaches using information technology.  The project will also involve
              undergraduates and graduate students in research; results will be distributed
              broadly, including publicizing the results and citizen recommendations to
              policy makers and the media.

