Title       : Proxy development and paleoclimate of El'gygytgyn Crater Lake, NE Siberia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0242324

Award Number: 0242324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99317              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Brigham-Grette juliebg@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will be funded by the Arctic Natural Sciences Program and the
              Paleoclimate Program in the Division of Atmospheric Sciences.  This is a
              collaborative proposal by the Principal Investigator at the University of
              Massachusetts, with Russian colleagues in Magadan, St. Petersburg, and
              Vladivostok, and German colleagues at the Alfred Wegener Institute and
              University of Leipzeg.   Lake El'gygytgyn is located within an 18 km wide
              meteorite impact crater that formed 3.6 million years ago in a remote part of
              northeastern Siberia (Chukotka) and in a region of situated between two robust
              atmospheric features, the Siberian High and Aleutian Low.  The strength of the
              Aleutian Low is intimately linked to systematic changes in the tropics as
              reflected by analyses of variations in the robust Pacific-North American
              pattern (PNA).  The systematics that produce the PNA pattern are believed to
              have robust linkages over long time scales with global circulation, allowing an
              evaluation of inter-hemispheric teleconnections under variable boundary
              conditions.
In 1998, a 300,000-year sediment-core climate-record was retrieved
              from Lake El'gygytgyn, the oldest terrestrial Arctic record yet recovered. 
              This record reveals reversals between oxic and anoxic lake-bottom conditions,
              conceivably driven by the presence or absence of permanent ice cover through
              summer and linked to changing regional atmospheric conditions.  Therefore, it
              is important to understand the dynamics of the lake ice, specifically
              determining the environmental conditions in which it forms and melts and its
              effects on lake circulation.  
This research project will provide an
              understanding the post-depositional modification of the sediments and controls
              on a number of proxies yielding a climatic signal of hemispheric significance. 
              Future field programs will incorporate the acquisition of new gravity cores for
              study of the sedimentology and mineralogy along with the biogeochemistry of the
              organic matter, and the isotopic geochemistry of the lake waters and sediment
              porewaters.  These modern to recent process linkages will then be compared to
              the paleorecord to better quantify reliable core proxies of lake
              biogeochemistry at time of deposition. One of the primary goals of this project
              is to confirm or revise the proxy geochemistry from the lake record to consider
              why shifts in atmospheric circulation (as inferred from some matches with the
              Greenland Ice core record) persist long enough that they are recorded in a lake
              in Siberia.  One does not expect the entire Arctic to respond in synchroneity,
              so it is important that records from different parts of the Arctic be compared
              to more fully understand how changes in one part of the Earth system impact
              other parts of the system.


