Title       : US-India Workshop: Recent Advances in Organometallic Catalysis and Olefin
               Polymerization, Pondicherry, India, December 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0242938

Award Number: 0242938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Coughlin coughlin@mail.pse.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0242938
Coughlin

This award provides travel support for a delegation of ten
              US scientists to participate in the US-India Workshop: Recent Advances in
              Organometallic Catalysis and Olefin Polymerization, Pondicherry, India,
              December 2003.  Professors Edward B. Coughlin, University of Massachusetts, and
              G. Sundararajan, Indian Institute of Technology, Chennai are the organizers of
              the workshop in a discipline that has come to hold a special position in
              research and development by virtue of the applications in organic and polymer
              syntheses.  India has many active researchers in the field, but the
              multi-disciplinary aspects of organometallic chemistry have not been evaluated.
               The workshop will unite academicians and industrial scientists in the field of
              organometallic catalysis and olefin polymerization, and will identify specific
              research areas for future collaboration such as the synthesis of organometallic
              catalysts, single-site catalysts in the olefin polymerization reactions, and
              applications in the field of catalytic organic synthesis.  

Organometallic
              chemistry is a thrust area identified by the Government of India Department of
              Science and Technology (DST).  While in India the number of chemists involved
              in this research area is growing, only a handful of groups are involved in
              research on olefin polymerization using single-site catalysts.  The fruits of
              this research are not yet realized by Indian industry.  This  workshop will
              bring to focus the requirement for active research in this area.  The
              proceedings will be brought out in CD format and then published as a special
              issue to commemorate the workshop.  The DST jointly supports this activity.    
              




This award provides travel funds for ten American participants at the
              US-India Workshop: Recent Advances in Organometallic Catalysis and Olefin
              Polymerization, to be held in Pondicherry, India on December 2003.  Professors
              E. Bryan Coughlin, University of Massachusetts Amherst and G. Sundararajan,
              Indian Institute of Technology, Madras are the organizers of the workshop on
              this important topic in the area of catalysis chemistry and polymer synthesis. 
              The US delegates are a high-powered team recognized for research related
              interactions between academia and industry and they will ensure the success of
              the workshop.  The Indian participants represent a broad range of interests
              from academia, industry, and government.  The composition of US and Indian
              scientists at this workshop is likely to initiate new collaborative activities.
               The US PI is a very promising young investigator with significant industrial
              experience and commendable outreach activities; the US delegation includes
              younger scientists and representatives of underrepresented groups.  This
              workshop will be supported by the Government of India's Department of Science &
              Technology (DST).   

