Title       : The Seafloor Bio-Fuel Cell: Long-Term Power and Effects on Sedimentary Organic
               Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0242048

Award Number: 0242048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510261             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare E. Reimers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              P.I. Reimers, Clare (OSU)	Proposal #: 0242048

Proposal Title: The Seafloor
              Bio-fuel Cell: Long-term Power and Effects on Sedimentary Organic
              Matter

Project Summary
	The long-term goal of this research is to fully
              develop seafloor bio-fuel cells so they may outperform batteries as the power
              source for many forms of autonomous marine instrumentation. Electrochemical
              devices placed across the sediment-water interface can harvest low- levels of
              power for long periods of time by using natural, continually renewed, chemical
              resources in sediment as fuel and dissolved seawater oxygen as oxidant. This
              new technology functions much like a microbial fuel cell, taking advantage of
              the voltage gradient that occurs in the top few centimeters of the sediment
              column. Bacteria that ordinarily shuttle electrons to substrates such as FeOOH
              or S0 have been shown to attach to the buried electrode (anode) as a biofilm.
              These microorganisms are suspected to generate electricity by direct reduction
              of the anode. 
	In this proposal the PI outlines engineering and science goals
              to advance the seafloor bio-fuel cell closer to future applications.
              Specifically the goals are to: (1) assemble a surface-ship-deployable prototype
              that will lead to devices that are both a power source and bottom weight for a
              sensor mooring, (2) run both short and long-term performance tests of
              prototypes in environments targeted for ocean observatory science, (3) evaluate
              the effects of continuous versus cyclic energy harvesting on performance during
              tests, and (4) understand linkages between performance, microbial enrichments
              and organic matter oxidation. An underlying assumption that will determine the
              ultimate utility of these power sources is that seafloor bio-fuel cells can tap
              nearly all the chemical energy stored as organic matter in anoxic sediments. In
              other words, seafloor bio-fuel cells should generate the same degree of organic
              matter remineralization as chemical oceanographers have termed the oxygen
              effect. To test this premise and accomplish these goals, the PIs propose two
              cruises to stations on the Oregon continental shelf and rise. During each
              cruise measurements necessary to quantify background sedimentary organic matter
              remineralization processes and oxygen-exposure history will be performed. Four
              bio-fuel cell devices will be deployed, recovered after 3-day tests then
              redeployed for up to one year at each site. Sediments will also be collected
              for laboratory experiments with two-chambered bio-fuel cells. 


