Title       : Dependent Preferences and Over-Time Instability in Survey Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0242255

Award Number: 0242255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean P. Lacy dlacy+@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              People frequently give different answers at different times when asked their
              opinions on important political issues. This tendency of the public to offer
              unstable survey responses has led many public opinion researchers to conclude
              that "Large portions of an electorate simply do not have meaningful beliefs,
              even on issues that have formed the basis for intense political controversy
              among elites for substantial periods of time" The reach of  this conclusion
              extends beyond public opinion polls, market research, and election surveys. If
              so many people know so little about issues, the very foundations of democratic
              government are called into question. Survey responses may be unstable over time
              due to an inability of surveys as currently constructed to capture the
              complexity of people's preferences. The investigator has found in a set of
              limited  surveys that many people have dependent preferences on a host of
              policy issues. A person has dependent preferences when her preference on one
              issue depends on the outcome of other issues. Yet most of the research in
              public opinion assumes that people have independent preferences, or that their
              preference on one issue is not linked to the outcome of other issues. The
              researcher proposes a national, three-wave panel survey of 1200 adult US
              citizens. The survey includes new questions to detect dependent preferences,
              revealing the connections that people see across issues. The investigator 
              hypothesizes that respondents who have dependent preferences in the first wave
              of the survey will be the most likely to change their survey responses
              over-time as they react to a changing world. Two survey waves will occur before
              the November 2004 national elections; one survey wave, after. The survey data
              will reveal which people have dependent preferences, and for which issues. The
              investigator also works on new statistical models to classify changes in survey
              responses as random or systematic. As the researcher has shown in previous
              research, unstable survey responses may be due to dependent preferences among
              respondents. Even if dependent preferences are reasonable, well-formed, and
              stable, they may compel people to exhibit survey responses that appear
              irrational, ill-formed, and unstable. Third, uncovering dependent preferences
              opens a new set of questions for survey researchers to explore. Who has
              dependent preferences, and why? If this proposal is funded, the data gathered
              will be available to the general public and scientific community, along with
              data on respondents' demographic characteristics, information levels, attention
              to politics and the media, political predispositions, and vote intention and
              vote choice in a presidential election. These data may provide answers to many
              puzzles in the literature on voting behavior, public opinion, and election
              campaigns.
