Title       : Affinity Interactions in Capillary Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0242440

Award Number: 0242440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Kennedy rtkenn@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9184,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
              Professor Robert Kennedy and co-workers at the University of Florida will
              develop novel analytical methods that allow proteins to be detected and
              quantified based on their affinity for natural binding partners.  In the
              methods, fluorescently-labeled ligands for classes of proteins will be added to
              samples and the resulting complexes will be separated by capillary
              electrophoresis and detected with laser-induced fluorescence.  Binding systems
              that will be investigated include labeled GTP to detect G-proteins, NADH to
              detect dehydrogenases, labeled phosphopeptides to detect proteins containing
              src homology 2 domains, and src homology 2 domains to detect phosphorylated
              proteins.  The method is expected to provide high sensitivity (attomole
              detection limits are expected), high speed (analysis on the second to minute
              time scale are possible) and facile automation.  The methods are expected to be
              useful for tracking the expression level of proteins or for discovery of novel
              proteins and binding partners of proteins.  As signal transduction in
              biological systems relies extensively on molecular recognition, these affinity
              methods are expected to be especially useful in experiments aimed at uncovering
              the regulation of receptor-mediated changes in cells.  The methods will be
              tested on pancreatic beta-cells where they may ultimately be useful in
              developing a better understanding of insulin secretion  

The sequencing of
              the genome has provided a blueprint for life.  The blueprint is actually the
              code for all of the proteins that are made in a cell.  Cells are not readily
              defined however even by all of the proteins that they make.  What are the
              functions of the proteins? How do they interact with each other? How are the
              interactions and functions controlled?  A short answer to these questions is
              that proteins are controlled by their affinity i.e., ability to bind selected
              targets or partners within the cell.  In this project, a method is sought that
              allows proteins to be rapidly and sensitively detected based on their affinity
              for a particular molecule.  Importantly, the method will allow all the proteins
              with a given affinity to be separated and detected.   The new method will be at
              least 1000 times as sensitive as existing methods and can be performed in
              seconds or minutes rather than hours.  This new method will allow new proteins
              or protein mixtures to be rapidly screened for certain binding properties or
              functions.  It will also allow classes of known proteins to be rapidly assayed.
               The speed and sensitivity of the assays will enable applications in diverse
              fields such as drug discovery, signal transduction (i.e., understanding
              intracellular chemical communication), and biotechnology.  


