Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: Sequencing of Plasmids from the Bacillus Cereus
               Group-Mapping the Evolution of B. Anthracis Virulence Plasmids px01 and px02
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0242162

Award Number: 0242162
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $998715             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Read tread@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1629      BE: Non-Announcement Research
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to make a comprehensive survey of complete sequences
              of large plasmids from the Bacillus cereus group of bacteria, which are
              ubiquitous constituents of natural soil environments, endosymbionts of insects,
              and animal pathogens. Perhaps the most well known member of the group is the
              organism, B. anthracis.  In a theme common to the B. cereus group, key
              virulence genes, encoding lethal toxin and poly-glutamic acid capsule, that are
              responsible for the unique pathogenicity profile of B. anthracis are found on
              large plasmids (pXO1 and pXO2).  Because plasmids play a major role in the
              biology of anthrax, a survey of large plasmids in up to 24 B. cereus group
              strains is proposed to answer specific questions about plasmids with and
              without known homologies to pXO1 and pXO2.  These questions include: can
              evolutionary events that led to the creation of pXO1 and pXO2 be reconstructed
              and can sources for some of the genes on these plasmids be found in other B.
              cereus group organisms? To what extent does gene exchange between replicons
              occur and what are the mechanisms?  Which pXO genes are unique in B. anthracis?
              Plasmids will be isolated from pulsed-field gels of genomic DNA and sequenced
              by whole-genome shotgun methods to produce finished, high-quality sequence. 
              This project will significantly add to knowledge of how extrachromsomal
              elements influence key phenotypes of these important microorganisms.  This is a
              Genome Sequencing Award funded through a collaborative program between the
              National Science Foundation and the Department of Agriculture.
