Title       : An Immuno-Mimetic Sensor-Actuator using Novel Polymeric Vesicles as Artificial
               Lymphocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0242647

Award Number: 0242647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292633             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria M. Santore santore@mail.pse.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1648,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An Immuno-Mimetic Sensor-Actuator using Novel Polymeric Vesicles as Artificial
              Lymphocytes

In this program the principal investigator will develop a
              breakthrough sensor-actuator, mimicking the immune system to identify, amplify
              signal from, and respond to low levels of multiple target compounds in
a wet
              environment. This compact (and potentially chip-based), smart system will
              continuously
monitor a test space and provide independent real time chemical
              feedback to multiple stimuli.
Microelectronics could be integrated into this
              stand-alone device for added functions.
The proposed technology exploits novel
              polymeric vesicles that will act as artificial
lymphocytes, a type of white
              blood cell. The polymeric vesicles are a new invention, made of
tough
              membranes that will encapsulate amplification or response molecules. Different
              surface
receptors on different vesicles will code for target compounds that,
              when present in the testing
environment, will activate particular vesicles.
              The test solution flows through an amplification
cascade (a rough mimic of
              bone marrow) to replicate only the activated vesicles. Replicated
vesicles (a
              crude mimic of plasma cells) will return to the test space to release response
              compounds
such as drugs or inhibitors to counteract the target compound(s)
              detected.
The replicator cascade is like a photomultiplier tube (PMT), with
              amplification occurring on
each of several stages. The proposed device is,
              however, more advanced because, of the many
target compounds cataloged, only
              those in the test space will be amplified. In the device, specific
adhesive
              interactions facilitate separation of activated vesicles from those not yet
              activated. While
the latter are recycled, activated vesicles are lyzed to
              release each test compound (or analog
thereof), at a concentration higher than
              that at the stage inlet. This solution passes to the next stage
where the
              process repeats, giving a powerlaw dependence of amplification on the stage
              number.
This program will conduct the science and device development necessary
              to form the basis
of a single stage that later could be combined with others
              to produce the cascade. At the stage
level, the goal is to maximize
              amplification, maintaining selectivity for activated vesicles (not
triggering
              the non-activated ones.) To accomplish this, the scientific investigation will
              address
how adhesive interactions between receptors on vesicle and separator
              surfaces could be tuned
through receptor placement and macroscopic parameters.
              Fundamental adhesive behavior will be
assessed using micropipette aspiration
              methods (paralleling studies of cell adhesion) and compared
with adhesive
              performance in device prototypes. Results will be interpreted using
              formalisms
established for cell adhesion, appropriate for specific adhesive
              groups on a membrane capsule in a
flowing solution.
The specialized vesicles
              and their replication cascade form a sensor-actuator system whose
end
              applications bridge a number of industries, from biomedical uses to chemical
              process control
and environmental monitoring (closed bodies of water) and
              response. The proposed scientific
investigation targets designs that meet the
              constraints for a robust technology that will be
implantable or submersible.
              The scientific team bridges academic disciplines and specialty areas
              to
combine expertise in polymer interfaces, biomimetics, adhesion, and MEMS.
              Graduate and
undergraduate students from different engineering and scientific
              backgrounds will benefit from this
synergistic approach to research, which
              preserves fundamental rigor and emphasizes engineering
creativity.
