Title       : Workshop: The Construction of Social Reality: The Case of Land
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0242145

Award Number: 0242145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25546              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Mark dmark@geog.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Isaac Ehrlich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1352,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It is a challenge to define the ontology of social and institutional reality
              within a framework which does justice to the surrounding physical environment
              of society and its institutions. This award will support a workshop on land,
              property and social ontology that will advance our knowledge and understanding
              of social processes and their outcomes. It is rooted in the idea that the
              transformation of land into property is a fundamental social process that has
              been hitherto neglected in the sciences of society, and that land and land
              ownership play a vital role in the establishment of capitalism and in economic
              development, especially in less-developed countries. The workshop will bring
              philosopher John Searle and economist Hernando De Soto together with a
              multidisciplinary group of leading experts on the topic, to discuss current
              developments in our understanding of social institutions and economic
              development in the particular context of land. Searle and De Soto have both
              recently authored books that have had broad impact within and outside of
              academia. Searle's The Construction of Social Reality has advanced a new way of
              understanding human society and its institutions, while de Soto's The Mystery
              of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else has
              caused a small revolution in thinking about land, capital, and development.
              Searle is an internationally prominent philosopher whose works have had
              considerable impact also in disciplines such as linguistics, computer science,
              and the social sciences. De Soto is President of the Institute for Liberty and
              Democracy based in Lima. He works as a consultant to governments throughout
              Latin America and (currently) in the Middle East. While Searle and de Soto are
              personally acquainted, and while de Soto's Mystery of Capital was itself in
              part influenced by Searle's ideas on social ontology, the two have never
              appeared together in public. The present workshop will bring these two highly
              creative individuals together in such a way as to provide an open forum for
              examining the implications of their views for our understanding of economic
              development and of the ways in which different social institutions may hinder
              or facilitate such development. Additional experts have been invited to
              contribute their views on these questions and to develop contributions to the
              new social ontology which, through the work of Searle and de Soto, is currently
              in process of being established. 

The workshop will provide valuable
              perspectives on the role of land information systems in the establishment of
              working market institutions and in the nurturing of economic and legal rights
              in less developed countries. Explicit formal accounts of the ontology of a
              domain are a critical foundation for adequate tools for information management
              systems, and this meeting will contribute to the development of such an
              ontology for the domain of land, the cadaster, and property law in general. The
              workshop also will contribute to the development of an ontology of other
              aspects of social reality at geographic scales. An edited book consisting of
              papers prepared for and presented at the meeting will promote the broader
              impact of the project.  Early career scholars from several disciplines will
              benefit directly from their participation. On the last day, there will be
              sessions to identify priorities for future research on the topic. Lastly, the
              project will make efforts to promote the practical application of the results
              in Latin America and elsewhere.

