Title       : High-Resolution 3-D Simulations of the Thermospheric Response to Magnetic
               Storms, Substorm Surges and the Diffuse Aurora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0242292

Award Number: 0242292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264519             (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen F. Parish helen@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence R. Lyons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will study the response of the E region neutral thermosphere
              to enhanced auroral forcing. In particular, the aim is to explain and
              understand phenomena observed within the dawn and dusk recovery phase diffuse
              aurora, and the thermospheric response to expansion phase surges and new
              phenomena observed during large magnetic storms. These topics involve areas
              that are of importance to the space physics and aeronomy community where
              knowledge is limited. Previous work entailed the simulation of thermospheric
              response to the dawn sector diffuse aurora using a 3-dimensional (3-D), high
              resolution, non-hydrostatic, composition-dependent model. The model was able to
              reproduce the very strong shears in the region of the dawn sector diffuse
              aurora and unstable regions below the shears, within the same altitude range as
              those found in the ARIA (Atmospheric Response in Aurora) rocket measurements.
              The results of the previous research project suggested that propagating tidal
              modes play an important role in producing the observed structure, in addition
              to geomagnetic forcing. In this study, the investigators will model the effects
              of enhanced auroral forcing on the region of the dawn and dusk sector diffuse
              aurora, for a series of rocket campaigns, using the 3-D high resolution model.
              The model will be used to determine the mechanisms responsible for producing
              the observed structures in both the dawn and dusk diffuse aurora, how and why
              the dusk response differs from the dawn response, the effects of changes in the
              interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) on wind magnitudes and structures, and the
              sensitivity to changes in conditions of solar and geomagnetic activity and
              tidal forcing. The investigators will also determine the dynamical, thermal,
              and compositional response of the E region thermosphere to the intense
              precipitation associated with expansion phase auroral surges, as well as the
              thermospheric response to recently observed large magnetic storms which show
              characteristics inconsistent with the effects of substorms. The results of the
              research will be made available to the scientific community, and will include
              systematic details of the response of the winds, composition and temperature in
              the E region thermosphere to the enhanced auroral forcing associated with
              magnetic storms and substorms for varying solar and geomagnetic activity, IMF
              orientation, and tidal forcing. The model will also be made available for use
              in collaborative research projects and for research and teaching studies
              involving graduate and undergraduate students.
