Title       : An autonomous bottom-transecting instrument for making long time-series
               measurements of phytopigment fluorescence and acoustically detectable sediment
               structure to abyssal depths
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0242472

Award Number: 0242472
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1061360            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Smith ksmith@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI proposes to develop an autonomous bottom-transecting instrument, ROVER II
              capable of making long time-series estimates of fresh phytodetritus arriving on
              the sea floor. In addition, this instrument will concurrently monitor the
              structural features of the sediment that influence spatial and temporal
              heterogeneity in sediment community activity, ultimately affecting the signal
              to noise ratio and resolution of measurements on biogeochemical processes in
              the sediments. ROVER II will be capable of conducting non-invasive time-series
              measurements of phytopigment fluorescence as an indicator of fresh
              phytodetritus on the sediment surface, while imaging the same sediments
              acoustically to provide 3-dimensional profiles of structural features (e.g.
              burrows and animals). Sediment community metabolism measurements (e.g. sediment
              community oxygen consumption) coupled with 2-dimensional oxygen imaging
              studies, will be conducted on the same sediments along transects including up
              to 50 sites without docking, recharging, and data download. The critical
              questions that will be addressed with this instrument will help answer
              significant questions regarding pelagic-benthic coupling in the context of
              biogeochemical cycling. These questions include: 1) what is the quality and
              quantity of phytodetritus reaching the sea floor, 2) how important is
              irrigation (nondiffusive transport) in measuring mineralization in sediments
              and 3) what responses are elicited in the sediment community by the arrival of
              fresh detritus on the sea floor?
