Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Wave Propagation in Multi-Layered Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0242772

Award Number: 0242772
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian W. Hall hall@me.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5940,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0242772
Hall

Description: This award is for support of a joint research
              project between Dr. Ian Hall, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University
              of Delaware, Newark, Delaware and Dr. Mustafa Guden, Department of Mechanical
              Engineering, Izmir Institute of Technology, Izmir, Turkey. They plan to study
              the propagation of elastic, plastic and shock waves through combinations of
              solids (engineering, structural or geological materials) through a program
              consisting of modeling and experiments.  The goal is to develop computational
              tools to facilitate the design of material systems in which the passage of
              waves can be manipulated to achieve a variety of desired effects.  The
              particular application behind this research concerns wave propagation in
              materials consisting of ceramic tiles attached to thick-section polymer
              composites, such as may be used in armors.  It has been observed that even when
              subjected to an initially compressive wave, to which its resistance is good,
              the ceramic soon experiences a tensile reflected wave to which its resistance
              is very poor and rapid failure occurs.  Interposing a third material, with
              different properties, between the two principal constituents has been shown to
              affect the behavior beneficially.  The systematic study of the extent to which
              the behavior may potentially be affected by deliberately choosing the
              materials' relative dimensions, impedances and other properties is a focus of
              this research activity. 
  
Scope:  This award is for a US scientist to
              collaborate with a Turkish scientist in a research project in an important
              scientific area.  The collaboration will take the form of six-month reciprocal
              visits by the U.S. principal investigator and his Turkish collaborator.  The
              collaboration will include joint advisement of graduate students, and
              reciprocal visits by U.S. and Turkish graduate students.  This project is
              jointly funded by the Office of International Science and Engineering and the
              Division of Civil and Mechanical Systems.

