Title       : Microbial Genome Sequencing: Genome Sequence of Phytophthora Sojae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0242131

Award Number: 0242131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett M. Tyler bmtyler@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey L. Boore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruno W. S. Sobral  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7187,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Drs. Brett Tyler and Bruno Sobral of Virginia Tech., in collaboration with Dr
              Jeff Boore of the DOE Joint Genome Institute have been awarded a grant to
              create a rough draft of the entire DNA sequence of the soybean pathogen
              Phytophthora sojae.  Plant pathogens from the genus Phytophthora cause
              destructive diseases of an enormous variety of crop plant species as well as
              forests and native ecosystems.  The potato pathogen P. infestans was
              responsible for the Irish potato famine, and is still a destructive pathogen of
              concern for biosecurity.  Superficially, Phytophthora pathogens resemble fungi,
              but they in fact belong to a group called Stramenopiles that are most closely
              related to algae such as kelp and diatoms.  Hence conventional fungus control
              measures often fail against these pathogens. P. sojae has been chosen for the
              project because it is relatively easy to genetically manipulate.  This project
              will be tightly integrated with a project funded by the DOE to determine a
              draft sequence of the oak sudden death pathogen P. ramorum.

The broader
              impact of the project will include direct training of postdoctoral fellows and
              undergraduates, and visiting researchers from minority institutions in a
              multidisciplinary, team-oriented environment that emphasizes development of the
              communications skills required for synergistic interactions between
              experimental and computational biology. The community annotation platform will
              provide a multi-disciplinary training environment for researchers world-wide.
              This research will advance the microbial genome research infrastructure by
              developing and making publicly available, the first in-depth genomic resource
              for a pathogen from the Stramenopile kingdom. This resource will provide a
              basis for new control measures against a group of pathogens which have major
              impacts on global ecosystems, food security and agricultural production.
              

This is a Microbial Genome Sequencing Award funded through a collaborative
              program between the National Science Foundation and the Department of
              Agriculture.


