Title       : Collaborative Research: An Observational, Modeling, and Climatological Study of
               Sierra Rotors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0242886

Award Number: 0242886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vanda Grubisic grubisic@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on a study of mountain-wave induced rotors in the lee
              of the Sierra Nevada.  Rotors are intense low-level horizontal vortices that
              form along an axis parallel to and downstream of a mountain crest.  While they
              are known to be very hazardous to aviation, there have been few quantitative
              observational and theoretical studies of this phenomenon.  As a result,
              understanding of rotor structure and rotor dynamics is relatively incomplete,
              and the ability to forecast rotors shows little skill.

This study will be
              conducted using observations and numerical simulations.  The observations will
              be collected in and upstream of the Owens Valley, which lies directly to the
              east of the southern Sierra Nevada.  The eastern slopes of the southern Sierra
              Nevada are the tallest, steepest quasi-linear topographic barrier in the
              contiguous United States.  The westerly winds that blow across the Sierra
              Nevada frequently generate large-amplitude mountain waves and strong rotors
              over the Owens Valley.

Two major objectives of this project are to: (1)
              establish quantitative characteristics of the rotor behavior including the
              location and the frequency distribution of the rotor-inducing mountain-wave
              events, and (2) evaluate the extent to which current operational mesoscale
              models can reliably forecast the occurrence of rotors.  The first major
              objective will be accomplished with a small field experiment involving the
              installation of an array of automatic weather stations and wind profilers in
              the Owens Valley and radiosonde launches to sample the upstream flow.  The
              numerical modeling effort in support of the second objective is designed to
              determine whether deficiencies in the model forecasts (as revealed by
              comparison with the observational data) are due to an inadequate representation
              of the large-scale flow striking the mountains or to difficulties in the
              detailed computation of the mountain waves and rotors themselves.

The
              results of this project will serve as a basis or improving the forecasting
              capability of numerical models applied to steep topography.  One consequence of
              such improvement would be to provide better forecasts of severe aviation
              hazards in mountainous terrain.
