Title       : Growth, Capital Shares, and A New Production Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0242000

Award Number: 0242000
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233373             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles I. Jones chad@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
PROPOSAL NUMBER:		0242000
INSTITUTION:			University of California at
              Berkeley
NSF PROGRAM:			ECONOMICS
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:	Jones, Charles
              I
PROPOSAL TITLE:	Growth, Capital Shares, and A New Production Function
Four
              stylized facts, taken together, constitute a puzzle in modem growth theory: (1)
              some countries can grow at a relatively stable average rate for a long time,
              (2) contrary to conventional wisdom, factor payments as a share of GDP are not
              constant over time in most countries and typically exhibit large trends for
              several decades, (3) estimates of the elasticity of substitution between
              capital and labor are often less than unity, (4) the price of capital equipment
              relative to that of consumption is falling, suggesting that some technical
              change is embodied in equipment capital, a phenomenon often called
              investment-specific technical change. For a neoclassical growth model to
              exhibit a steady state, either technical change must be entirely labor
              augmenting in the long run, or the production function must be Cobb-Douglas. To
              get steady growth in the presence investment-specific technical change, the
              production function should be Cobb-Douglas; however, this is inconsistent with
              Facts 2 and 3. 

This research consists of three projects that document and
              resolve this puzzle. The first project will create a new dataset on factor
              payments to capital and labor for a large number of countries, both at the
              aggregate and industry levels, over as long a time as possible. This is
              important because Fact 2 runs counter to the conventional wisdom: it is
              commonly accepted that capital shares are relatively constant over time.  The
              second project proposes a new production function that is consistent with all
              four stylized facts. Factor shares and estimates of the elasticity of
              substitution are driven by short-run properties of the production function.
              However, requirements for steady-state growth involve the shape of the long-run
              production function. The production function proposed here exploits this
              difference. The short-run elasticity of substitution responsible for factor
              pricing is less than one. In the long run, additional substitution
              possibilities arise and production occurs with a Cobb-Douglas structure.
              

The third project explores the microfoundations for this new production
              function. A production technique, with a low elasticity of substitution, may be
              appropriate for a given input mix. To produce with a very different input mix,
              a new production technique may be required. The shape of a given technique
              governs the short-run elasticity of substition, while the long- run elasticity
              of substitution is determined by the distribution of newly discovered
              techniques. A necessary condition for steady growth is that new techniques are
              distributed according to a Pareto distribution. This same distributional
              assumption generates a long-run production function that takes the Cobb-Douglas
              form. This research will resolve some of pressing puzzles in growth theories
              that seem to be inconsistent with the observed facts.
 

 

