Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research on the U.S. Supreme Court's Selection of
               Petitions In Forma Pauperis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0242379

Award Number: 0242379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8458               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Baum baum.4@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves statistical analysis of the U.S. Supreme Court's selection
              of both paid and unpaid petitions for review.  The goal of the study is to
              determine whether, in what ways, and to what extent the Court's selection of
              unpaid cases differs from its selection of paid cases. Numerous empirical
              studies have considered which case characteristics increase the likelihood that
              the Supreme Court will select a petition for review, and scholars have used the
              results of those studies to reach conclusions about the Court's decision making
              process and bases for decision in selecting cases for full review.  Those
              studies, however, have limited their analysis to paid petitions, to the
              exclusion of those petitions filed by indigent litigants, the petitions in
              forma pauperis or IFP petitions.  Examining whether the same case
              characteristics have the same influence on the probability of accepting unpaid
              petitions illuminates the Court's decision making process and criteria for
              selection, and thus adds significantly to the wealth of scholarship on the
              Supreme Court's agenda-setting function.  The study also explores the
              accessibility of the Court to the poor and the Court's attention to issues
              affecting low- income people, issues with important normative implications. In
              addition to expanding upon the scholarship on political decision making, the
              Court's agenda-setting function, and equal access to the Court, this study
              involves the creation of a dataset from primary sources, containing information
              on the IFP docket.
