Title       : Determinants of Women's Support for Political Conflict in Latin America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0242269

Award Number: 0242269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49475              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorraine Bayard de Volo lbdv@KU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0242269
Lorraine Bayard de Volo
University of Kansas

This project
              examines the role of gendered discourse in the mobilization of women in Latin
              American wars of the last half-century.  Historically and across many cultures
              men have been the most likely participants in wars of all kinds (e.g., civil,
              guerrilla, international) and other large-scale civil and international
              conflicts.  Research findings document a fairly consistent "gender gap" in
              support for war, with men much more likely to support and participate in war
              than women.  Researchers note that official and informal appeals for male
              participants in wars tend to focus on masculinist values such as honor,
              patriotism, virility, and defense of home and territory.  This project examines
              the other side of the gender coin:  what are the conditions under which women
              will support and participate in wars?  This study examines variations in
              women's support of state-sponsored and/or guerrilla wars in four Latin American
              countries (Argentina, Colombia, Mexico, and Nicaragua) chosen for variations in
              the engagement and support of women in conflicts and focuses on the kinds of
              appeals and arguments made by governments, guerrilla organizations, and
              mobilized women's groups to garner women's support and participation in war as
              well as several other national-level factors:  feminism (national and
              transnational); regime type (mobilizing, exclusionary, or repressive regime);
              and war type (internal vs. external war; "manpower" needs of the military).
              Archival, interview, and field data will be used to address the following
              questions. How are women mobilized for and against war?  What explains changes
              over time in the methods and mobilization frames?  Why do gender imagery and
              attempts to mobilize women figure more prominently in some wars than others? 
              How might we explain discursive changes such as that of the shift in guerrilla
              rhetoric from Che Guevara's "New Man" to the Zapatistas' feminist-friendly
              rhetoric?  
 

