Title       : Estimating Demand with Consumer Heterogeneity: an Application to Wholesale Price
               Regulation in Retail Gasoline Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0242112

Award Number: 0242112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149774             (Estimated)
Investigator: Justine S. Hastings Justine.S.Hastings@Dartmouth.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The purpose of this research program is two-fold. The first purpose is to
              contribute to the current literature on the specification of consumer
              preferences in discrete choice models of consumer demand.  The research program
              develops a random coefficients discrete choice model of demand for retail
              gasoline that allows for heterogeneous consumer types with correlated
              preferences across product characteristics. This flexibility will allow for
              preference patterns such as brand-loyalty in the demand estimation - a
              preference pattern that is incompatible with an assumption of independently and
              identically distributed idiosyncratic consumer preferences. This research
              program will then use discrete changes in the brand identities of retail
              stations in Southern California to test which modeling assumptions are able to
              more accurately predict actual changes in equilibrium prices resulting from
              exogenous changes to brand identities. 

The second purpose of this study is
              to provide a framework for analyzing the potential impacts of wholesale price
              regulation and competition in the gasoline industry. Policy makers at the state
              and federal levels have proposed wholesale price regulation as a means to
              restore 'competitive' retail price patterns in retail gasoline markets. Fair
              Wholesale Price legislation (FWP) would prevent wholesale gasoline suppliers
              from price discriminating between retail stations. Instead of charging
              different wholesale prices to different stations, as is currently the practice,
              refiners would be required to charge the same price to all retailers. This
              research project will use the results from the discrete choice demand
              estimation developed above to simulate the impact of FWP legislation. This
              simulation exercise will be used to answer the following pressing
              policy-relevant questions: Would average retail prices increase or decrease as
              a result of FWP? What market factors influence the direction and magnitude of
              the estimated effect? Is FWP a regressive or progressive policy - will it lead
              to higher or lower prices in disadvantaged socioeconomic communities? Is there
              an alternative policy might increase competition in retail gasoline markets,
              leading to lower prices and decreased price dispersion? This detailed and
              rigorous empirical estimation of the effects of FWP legislation will guide
              policy makers at the state and federal level as they consider legislation aimed
              at increasing competition in retail gasoline markets.



