Title       : Understanding the Worldviews of the Saudi Arabian Public
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0242861

Award Number: 0242861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99486              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansoor Moaddel SOC_moaddel@online.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to understand and analyze the worldviews of the citizens of
              Saudi Arabia. To this end, it carries out a comprehensive survey of the
              attitudes and value orientations of a representative national sample of 1500
              adult Saudis, using face-to-face interviews. The survey instrument is a
              close-ended 19-page questionnaire that covers such issues as those related to
              family, parent-child expectations, women and gender relations, interpersonal
              trust, religion, politics, individual and national identity, the relationship
              with the outside world, modern education, economic development, and religious
              and social tolerance.  Saudi Arabia is host to two of the holiest cites in
              Islam, Mecca and Medina, the world's major producer of crude petroleum, a
              moderate Arab country, and a U.S. ally.  Thus, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
              plays a vital role in the world economy, politics, and culture. In the context
              of the comparative value survey data collected from several other Islamic
              countries in recent years, this study helps to illuminate and explain how such
              diverse factors, as the country's stewardship of the holy cites and centrality
              in the world of Islam, the specific religious, tribal, and political dynamics
              of the Saudi Kingdom, and the oil-driven rentier economy, have shaped the value
              orientations of the Saudi public toward work, family, women, politics, religion
              and religious practices, and other significant social and cultural issues. By
              attempting to understand the worldviews of the Saudi public, this project will
              not only contribute to the social scientific study of this significant Muslim
              nation, but will promote inter-cultural understanding and a peaceful
              relationship between U.S. and Saudi publics as well.
