Title       : Conference: Number Theory and Combinatorics in Physics; March 21-23, 2003;
               Gainesville, FL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0242148

Award Number: 0242148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: F. G. Garvan frank@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Khandker A. Muttalib  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators together with the University of Florida are hosting a
              Conference, ``Number Theory and Combinatorics in Physics.''  The  main topics
              of the conference are q-hypergeometric functions, Rogers-Ramanujan identities,
              exactly integrable models and quantum field theory; alternating sign matrices
              and determinants; quantum computing; and the Riemann zeta-function, random
              matrices and quantum correlators.  Each of these topics has been enriched by
              interactions between mathematics and physics. For example, deeper understanding
              of the alternating sign matrix conjecture of combinatorics was recently found
              when it was connected with the XXZ spin 1/2 model (on an odd number of sites)
              from statistical mechanics.  In another recent example, Di Francesco and
              collaborators were able to exactly compute meander configuration exponents
              using methods of conformal field theory.  The main goal of the conference is to
              bring mathematicians and physicists together to discuss and learn recent
              developments in these current topics. This interaction should help foster new
              developments in both mathematics and physics. There are eleven plenary
              speakers: George E. Andrews, Robert Calderbank,  Philippe Di Francesco, Daniel
              Gottesman, Michio Jimbo, Barry McCoy, Tetsuji Miwa, James Propp, Michael
              Rubinstein, Xavier G. Viennot, and F.Y. Wu. There are thirteen 20 minute
              speakers. A number of graduate students and recent Ph.D.'s are participating.
              

Number Theory is concerned with properties of integers and is one of the
              oldest branches of mathematics. In the last 20 years Number Theory has had 
              important applications to cryptography. The security of some modern
              cryptographic methods depends on the complexity of factoring integers. In 1994,
              Peter Shor showed theoretically how this complexity could be drastically
              reduced using a quantum computer. A quantum computer is based on the principles
              of quantum mechanics and is at present only a theoretical device.  The concept
              of a quantum computer was first introduced by the Nobel prize-winning physicist
              Richard Feynman in his famous course on computation given at Caltech,
              1983-1986. It is believed that in the next 20 years the new generation of
              computers will be quantum computers. This will necessitate synthesis of
              mathematics, quantum field theory and technology. This conference, Number
              Theory and Combinatorics in Physics, hosted at the University of Florida, is a
              forum where progress on such a synthesis can be made.

