Title       : Historical Ecology of the Early Mekong Delta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0242327

Award Number: 0242327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173504             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam T. Stark miriams@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Funding from the National Science Foundation will support Dr. Miriam Stark and
              her colleagues in their research on early state development in the Mekong delta
              (southern Cambodia).  The project brings together Western and Cambodian
              specialists in archaeology, geoarchaeology, geography, and palynology to study
              how complex societies emerged, and their political and economic foundations in
              the first millennium A.D.  During this transition to history, Southeast Asia's
              earliest states emerged in tandem with the appearance of Indic ideologies and
              the development of an international maritime trade network.  Despite strong
              interest in comparative research on early state formation globally, few
              archaeologists have studied early complex societies in mainland Southeast Asia.
              Scholars of Cambodia's Angkorian civilization (c. A.D. 802-A.D. 1432) have long
              suggested that the origins of the Khmer empire lay in the Mekong delta.  No
              systematic archaeological research has been undertaken previously, however, to
              document its origins and emergence.  

This project explores the changing
              organizational structure of complex polities in the Mekong delta between c. 500
              B.C. and c. A.D. 500. Project members evaluate competing models of state
              formation, which differ both in causality and in structure. Assessing these
              models requires an understanding of changing settlement configuration through
              time, of ancient agricultural strategies, and of the potentially changing
              nature of water management systems.  Dynamic relationships between geographical
              factors (variation in soils, availability of fresh water, and potential
              transportation routes) are investigated, as are the roles that ideology,
              politics and economics played in shaping the human and natural landscape of the
              first millennium A.D.  

The project's field methodology combines three
              seasons of archaeological and geoarchaeological research with concomitant
              analyses of remote sensing data.  Project members will collect archaeological,
              art historical, geographical, paleoenvironmental, and epigraphic data to
              understand changes in settlement that were associated with the emergence of one
              of the region's earliest states. Construction of a geographic (GIS) database
              provides the foundation for field research. The GIS database also provides a
              tool for interpreting changing settlement patterns through time, and for
              studying evidence for changing farming strategies that may have included flood
              recession and irrigation-based rice agriculture.  Field seasons combine four
              activities: (1) archaeological survey to document large sites and their
              environs; (2) thermoluminescence dating on collapsed brick monuments on these
              large sites to build a regional chronological sequence; (3) geoarchaeological
              research to identify and date ancient canal segments; and (4)
              paleoenvironmental research (primarily sediment coring) to reconstruct the
              region's changing climatic and vegetational regimes during the last 2500 years.
               

This research is important in several respects. First, it provides new
              data for understanding the emergence of complex societies in an important and
              understudied region of the world.  Second, the project merges interdisciplinary
              approaches to study political, environmental, and economic aspects of ancient
              state formation.  Finally, the project combines research with training for
              Cambodian archaeology students.  Nearly 25 years of civil war decimated the
              Cambodian archaeological community, and damaged its cultural resources. This
              project makes significant contributions to Cambodia's archaeological heritage,
              and also to training the next generation of Cambodian archaeologists.



