Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Experimental and Computational Investigation of
               Wall-Pressure Fluctuation in Shear Layers with Strong and Weak Feedback Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0242991

Award Number: 0242991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28778              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed Naguib naguib@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5944,9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0242991
Naguib

Description: This award supports a joint research project
              between Dr. Ahmed Naguib, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Michigan State
              University (MSU), East Lansing, and Dr. Zakaria Ghoneim and Dr. Mostafa
              Abdelkhalek, Department of Mechanical Power Engineering, Ain Shams University,
              Cairo, Egypt.  They plan to conduct collaborative research on computational
              investigation coordinated with experimental work funded by NSF award CTS
              011690. The investigation will focus on understanding the space-time character
              of the wall-pressure field and its generating flow sources on two different but
              related flow problems. The first of these is associated with the incompressible
              flow over a two-dimensional cavity. This flow has been computed recently by the
              Ain Shams University collaborators using Random Vortex Methods
(RVM). The
              experimental investigation is aimed at verifying the existing computation of
              the cavity flow. The RVM code will be adapted to compute the flow field and
              associated wall pressure for the (second case) flow over an axi-symmetric
              backward-facing step.  These computations will be coordinated with the
              experimental work conducted under the existing award.  It is expected that the
              space-time databases to be compiled here could be used to investigate a host of
              other flow issues. Examples include the development of wall-pressure-based
              low-order models for active flow control, and testing of turbulence models for
              non-equilibrium flows.  The resulting data sets will be published and made
              accessible to interested parties in the wider community of fluid dynamics
              researchers through web and conference-based dissemination.
 
Scope:  This
              project will enhance the existing NSF grant by the generation of time-resolved,
              spatial flow and wall-pressure information from the computations at conditions
              similar to those of the experiment.  The proposed work is mutually beneficial
              as MSU gains the depth of adding a computational component to an experimental
              research project and Ain Shams University gains capability to conduct an
              experimental investigation complementing ongoing computational work.  The
              project will support the travel of a masters degree student from Ain Shams
              University to MSU for three months to work under the supervision of the PI on
              constructing a cavity-flow setup and microphone-array sensor module. This
              hardware will later be used to conduct measurements in a wind tunnel facility
              at Ain Shams University under the supervision of Dr. Ghoneim and in
              coordination with the PI.  This project is jointly funded by the Office of
              International Science and Engineering and the Division of Chemical and
              Transport Systems.

