Title       : RUI-Antiaromaticity of Indenylidene Dications and the
               Aromaticity/Antiaromaticity Continuum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0242227

Award Number: 0242227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy S. Mills nmills@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The concepts of aromaticity and antiaromaticity play central roles in organic
              chemistry. Although somewhat elusive concepts, a combination of experimental
              and calculational tools may be used to assess aromacity and antiaromaticity
              through analysis of magnetic, structural, and energetic criteria. Indenylidene
              dications allow the assessment of magnetic properties through the paratropicity
              of protons on both the five- and six-membered rings, allowing evaluation of the
              antiaromaticity suggested by the nucleus independent chemical shift values.
              Because the cyclopentadienyl ring of the indenylidene cation can respond to
              increased antiaromaticity through deformation, structural properties can be
              assessed. Energetic properties can be assessed by electrochemical oxidation and
              comparison of redox potentials with those of non-antiaromatic model systems. By
              playing the various criteria against each other in aromatic and antiaromatic
              systems, the criteria that most effectively define aromatic/antiaromatic
              systems will be exposed.

Ever since the initial realization that benzene and
              related "aromatic" hydrocarbons display unusually high stability, the factors
              responsible for this stability have been of great interest. "Aromaticity" and
              its counterpoint, antiaromaticity, in which compounds display lower than
              anticipated stability, play central roles in defining organic chemical
              structure and reactivity. With the support of a Research at Undergraduate
              Institutions (RUI) grant from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program,
              Professor Nancy S. Mills, of the Department of Chemistry at Trinity University,
              is exploring new molecular systems expected to display antiaromaticity. Through
              the rational design and synthesis of appropriate organic molecules and analysis
              of their magnetic, structural, and energetic properties, Professor Mills is
              defining the criteria that most effectively define aromaticity and
              antiaromaticity. A large number of undergraduate research assistants will
              participate in these studies, providing them with valuable research experience
              and education in a variety of experimental, instrumental, and theoretical
              techniques.
