Title       : Genetic history of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0242958

Award Number: 0242958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne C. Stone acstone@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beatriz Lizarraga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beatriz Rubin De Celis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Debate about the patterning of genetic diversity in human populations has
              centered on the importance of language, geography, and gene flow. Because of
              the diversity of languages and environments, Peru is an ideal place to
              investigate these issues. For this project, samples are being obtained from
              geographically diverse parts of Peru and from different language and ethnic
              groups, although the project will focus in particular on populations speaking
              Quechua and Aymara languages. The general aim of this research is to examine
              autosomal, mitochondrial DNA, and Y chromosome markers in order to investigate
              the spatial distribution of present-day diversity and the extent of admixture
              between native and non-native peoples. In particular, differences between male
              and female patterns of admixture will be studied. In addition, hypotheses about
              the relationship between genetics, geography and language in the central Andes
              will be tested. This project will investigate the prehistoric migrations into
              South American and the relationship between the language families in Peru and
              other parts of the Americas. This research will be conducted at the Laboratory
              of Molecular Anthropology at the University of New Mexico and in Peru at the
              Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos and Universidad Ricardo Palma. This
              project will also include training of both American and Peruvian students and
              public outreach through Spanish and English versions of a web page about the
              project. 
