Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Child Health and the Proximal Ecology of Stress:
               Scheduling American Family Life
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0242575

Award Number: 0242575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol M. Worthman worthman@emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1698,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	"Stress" and its role in adaptation and health are central to understanding
              human variation within biological anthropology.  We have good measures of the
              effects of stress on the body, and good ecological models of general sources of
              social stress.  Nonetheless, greater attention is needed to the social and
              cognitive mechanisms by which one translates into the other.  The work of
              behavioral ecologists, while largely focused on ultimately evolutionary causes
              and adaptive trade-offs, nonetheless suggests that we might approach this
              through a focus on the deployment of two types of "resources" expended in any
              behavior: time and energy.  Further, amongst developmentalists who focus upon
              ecologic stress in children, there is a tradition of comparing environmental
              "microniches" that set up different developmental ecologies and their
              corresponding outcomes.  Combining these scientific traditions, this study uses
              a natural experimental model to consider how ecologic social stress translates
              into child health.  
	Research suggests that the American "time bind" is
              experienced as a major stressor, and this may be related to changing work and
              living arrangements.  This study will examine in detail the actual usage of
              time within metropolitan Atlanta families and families' perception of their use
              of time.  These data are combined with hormonal markers of stress and arousal,
              and records of functional child health outcomes, including physical,
              psychological, social, and educational outcomes.  The links between these
              outcomes and various characteristics of the daily schedules of families are
              considered, including tension, density, and fragility.  This will extend our
              understanding of the day-to-day workings of "stress" by detailing specific
              biocultural pathways connecting social ecology to physiology and child
              health.
	The research will have a number of broader impacts.  First, it will
              assist in the training of a graduate student in the field of
              biological/physical anthropology.  Second, the information gathered helps us to
              better understand the relationship between "psychosocial stress" and the
              challenge of maintaining an acceptable "work/life balance."  The maintenance of
              "work/life balance" has been of tremendous recent interest inside and outside
              the scientific community, including in business, where this is crucial to
              maintaining a well-functioning and thus productive work force.  Finally, it
              will help us better understand the notion of "stress" itself, which has
              wide-ranging implications, since "stress" has been linked to personal health
              and well-being, and more indirectly to such social phenomena as school
              shootings, divorce, and child abuse, but often without sufficient understanding
              of how stress operates in people's daily lives.

