Title       : US-Jordan Cooperative Research: Nonlinear Energy Exchange Between High-Frequency
               and Low-Frequency Modes in Composite Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0242109

Award Number: 0242109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali H. Nayfeh anayfeh@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1038,5988,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0242109 
Nayfeh

Description: This project supports a cooperative research
              project between Professor Ali Nayfeh, Department of Engineering Sciences and
              Mechanics, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University (Virginia Tech),
              Blacksburg, Virginia and Dr. Khaled Asfar, Department of Mechanical
              Engineering, Jordan University of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan.  They
              plan to conduct experimental and theoretical investigations to study the
              mechanism for the transfer of energy for high-frequency to low-frequency modes
              in composite structures. The mechanism responsible for this energy transfer is
              unique as it is neither an autoparametric resonance, nor an external
              combination resonance, nor a parametric combination resonance.  Composite
              structures to be investigated are mainly beams and plates with various boundary
              conditions.  Analytical and experimental work that was done at Virginia Tech
              revealed such energy exchange in multi-degree-of-freedom systems due to
              combination and internal resonances and interaction between widely-spaced
              modes.  Such energy exchange may alter the behavior of the system leading to
              undesirable consequences. Effects of various composite material parameters on
              the energy exchange will be studied in order to improve the design process of
              such materials.

Scope:  The project involves analytical and experimental
              approaches, and combines the complementary expertise of the US and Jordanian
              scientists.  Dr. Nayfeh has contributed significantly to the understanding of
              various energy transfer mechanisms. The application to composite structures is
              of particular interest. The project would enhance the international exchange of
              ideas and expertise in the general field of nonlinear vibrations, and would
              strengthen the ties between the PI's research group at VPI and the Jordan
              University of Science and Technology.  The research will add the study of
              composite materials to a large volume of research that has been performed in
              the last three decades on nonlinear modal coupling in mechanical structures of
              homogeneous materials.  




