Title       : Tres Zapotes Archaeological Project 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0242555

Award Number: 0242555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194848             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Pool capool0@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Christopher A. Pool and his
              colleagues will conduct a two-year project of excavation and laboratory
              analysis at the archaeological site of Tres Zapotes, Veracruz, Mexico.  With an
              archaeological record that spans the two millennia between 1000 B.C. and A.D.
              1000, Tres Zapotes is the key site for understanding the emergence of Classic
              period civilization from ancient Olmec roots in Mexico's southern Gulf Coast
              lowlands.  Olmec chiefdoms flourished from 1500 to 400 B.C., creating
              Mesoamerica's first great sculptural tradition and establishing social,
              political, and religious patterns found among such later civilizations as the
              Classic Maya.  Such was the impressiveness of Olmec culture and the extent of
              its influence that some scholars regard it as Mesoamerica's "Mother Culture".  
              Research at major sites in the eastern part of the Olmec heartland has long
              emphasized the collapse of this precocious culture around 400 B.C.  Dr. Pool's
              previous research at Tres Zapotes paints a very different picture, however. 
              Far from suffering a decline, this regional Olmec capital grew to cover 2
              square miles (500 ha) between 400 B.C. and A.D. 300, becoming the largest
              center of the succeeding Epi-Olmec culture in the southern Gulf lowlands.  
              Among the significant accomplishments of Epi-Olmec culture were the development
              of one of the earliest and most sophisticated writing systems in the Americas,
              the invention of the equally sophisticated Long Count calendar later employed
              by the Classic Maya, and the formalization of the political institution of
              kingship.   

Dr. Pool and his colleagues will investigate the political and
              economic processes that fostered these cultural developments.  Specifically,
              the project tests a "confederation" model of Tres Zapotes political economy in
              which leaders of competing political factions united to rule the Tres Zapotes
              polity by emphasizing a corporate strategy of reciprocal obligations and
              communal ritual while monopolizing the ideological and economic sources of
              power within their respective factions.  Excavations of Olmec and Epi-Olmec
              contexts in formal civic-ceremonial complexes and craft production areas will
              provide the data to test this model.  Excavations in the formal complexes are
              designed to recover information on the degree to which they were
              contemporaneous, variation in their functions through time, differential access
              to valued resources, and the symbolic content of artifacts and public
              monuments. Excavations in craft production areas, including those attached to
              formal complexes and non-elite households, will assess variation in the
              organization and products of manufacture.   

This research is important
              because it will shed new light on a crucial but poorly understood period of
              ancient Mesoamerican history, and it will contribute to theory on the role of
              political economies in the evolution of complex society and the formation of
              states.  Its broader impacts include the training of Mexican and North American
              students in field and analytical techniques, the fostering of international
              collaboration with Mexican professionals, and it will enhance the local
              infrastructure for future research.

