Title       : US-Pakistan Cooperative Research: Toward a Better Understanding of the Pakistani
               Himalayas: Inferences from Remote Sensing, Field, Age and Isotopic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0242950

Award Number: 0242950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20143              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Douglas Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 1304,5943,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0242950
Walker

Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project between Dr. Shuhab Khan, Department of Geosciences, Idaho State
              University (I.S.U.), Pocatello, Idaho, Dr. J. Douglas Walker, Department of
              Geology, University of Kansas (U. of K.), Lawrence, Kansas and Dr. Mohammed T.
              Shah, Center of Excellence in Geology, University of Peshawar (U. of P.),
              Peshawar, Pakistan.  The investigators plan to: (1) conduct field work in the
              northern Kohistan terrane in the Pakistani Himalayas to map and sample for
              geochemical and isotopic dating (U-Pb) of the Teru volcanics and associated
              rocks from the Teru-Shandur and Teru-Yasin areas; (2) conduct a program of
              geochronologic and isotopic investigations in the area; (3) to run a mapping
              exercise for the Teru volcanics in the entire northern Kohistan terrane by
              using space-borne data and field observations.  The results will improve
              understanding of the age, areal distribution, and isotopic and geochemical
              affinities of the late-stage volcanics and their implications for the evolution
              of the northwest Himalayas, the syn- and post-collisional tectonothermal
              history of northwest Kohistan, and the Andean margin and post-collisional
              history of the Kohistan terrane in particular and the Himalayas in general. 
              The investigators plan to develop and validate techniques for lithologic
              mapping of Kohistan arc sequences by using data from the recently deployed
              space-borne ASTER sensor, which can potentially be used to map vast areas in
              the Himalayas that are largely inaccessible.

Scope:  The proposed research
              program builds on preliminary age, geochemical, and isotopic results in the
              Teru-Shandur area, which were obtained by the investigators, as well as on the
              existing collaborative relationship between the principal investigator and U.
              of P.  The research results will contribute to the broad understanding of
              collisional orogenesis.  The proposed work will have an educational impact both
              at I.S.U. and the U. of P., as graduate students from both universities will be
              involved in the research.  Dr. Khan received his Ph.D. in 2001 and is starting
              an academic and research career at Idaho State University.  He will be
              supported by the excellent technical analytical expertise in Dr. Walker's
              laboratory the U. of K.  A Pakistani scientist will spend two months at I.S.U.
              to help in the processing and interpreting of images and in the preparation of
              a manuscript.

