Title       : Exploring Flow Structures in a 2D Fluid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0242284

Award Number: 0242284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Lun Wu xlwu@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project deals with fluid turbulence, a significant, long-standing problem
              that remains largely unsolved.  A major difficulty is the presence of a large
              number of degrees of freedom that are strongly interacting in a fluid.  The
              proposed research attempts to simplify the problem by studying turbulence in a
              two-dimensional geometry in which motion of each fluid element can be followed
              over a long period of time using a fast video imaging system. Two-dimensional
              fluid motion is realized in a freely suspended thin liquid film, a few microns
              thick, and driven by an electromagnetic field. The research will focus on
              interaction and stability of hydrodynamic coherent structures, such as vortices
              and saddle points in the flow.  It is believed that these coherent structures
              are responsible for energy and angular momentum transfer in turbulence.  The
              experimental results will be compared with statistical models that make
              quantitative predictions about distributions of vortices and saddles in
              two-dimensional turbulence. With a better understanding of how two-dimensional
              turbulence behaves, the research can shed new light on more difficult problems
              of three-dimensional turbulence, which is relevant not only to physics but also
              to engineering and meteorology.  The research will involve both graduate and
              undergraduate students in a dynamic environment where research and education go
              hand in hand.  The students participating in this research use state-of-the-art
              equipment to study a fundamental physical system that is fascinating and
              relevant, preparing them for future challenges, and for the academic, industry,
              and government workforce.

Fluid turbulence is a complex phenomenon,
              affecting all sections of science and engineering.  The complexity of the
              phenomenon is best reflected in our limited ability to predict wealth patterns,
              despite dramatic improvements in the computational power in recent years.  This
              work is aimed at understanding turbulence in a two-dimensional space, where the
              complexity is significantly reduced but yet still retains the most important
              ingredients of three-dimensional turbulence, i.e., strong interaction and
              non-determinism.  To achieve two-dimensional flow, a thin freely suspended
              liquid film, about a few microns in thickness, is used and is driven by an
              electromagnetic field.  Using a state-of-the-art video imaging system, the
              evolution of turbulence in the film will be followed for each fluid element for
              an extended period of time. The focus of the research is to understand how
              hydrodynamic vortices interact with each other and how stable they are under
              different flow conditions.  The newly gained insight would help us to
              understand more difficult three-dimensional turbulent phenomenon.  A flowing
              liquid film is not only valuable for scientific research; it is also a
              wonderful laboratory for teaching physics at all levels.  Students, graduates
              and undergraduates who participate in this work, will receive rigorous training
              in fundamental science (physics), modern imaging processing techniques, and
              computer programming.  This makes them well rounded for a future career in
              academe, industry or government.

