Title       : The Problem of Realism in Defense Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0242138

Award Number: 0242138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon Ghamari-Tabrizi sghamari@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : S, Ghamari-Tabrizi
	      1050 Austin Ave, NE
	      Atlanta, GA  303071916    404/525-2538

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nearly every aspect of American military practice transits through a simulation.
              In the 1990s, modeling and simulation (M&S) acquired a central role in
              individual and crew training, mission rehearsal en route to deployment,
              operational planning, strategic and tactical analyses, testing and evaluation,
              acquisitions and prototype development, and long-range future studies. With the
              advent of M&S in the post-cold war decade, the adequacy of the correspondence
              between the Pentagon's simulations and actual circumstances has been pushed
              sharply into focus. This project is to study the meanings of realism as they
              are understood by simulators in several labs and workplaces. In the course of a
              two-year ethnography of three primary field sites, the project will examine the
              meaning, function, effectiveness, and qualities of the realism in simulations
              or war-games. Specifically, it will investigate how their perception of realism
              shapes their assumptions, their design choices, and guides their interpretation
              of their work. Sources for the information will be technical papers, meetings,
              presentations, work-in-progress, and interviews. Particularly attention will be
              paid to the evaluation of the accomplishments of simulation realism: how they
              elucidate, justify and interpret the effectiveness of their products. Given the
              interdisciplinary nature of the project teams, the project will track will how
              they translate, interpret tacit assumptions across the boundaries of academic
              disciplines, corporate cultures, and federal and individual armed service
              guidelines and regulations. One aim is to evolve a contingent sense of the
              circulation of the many kinds of capital that comprise
              scientific/technical/cultural work; namely, the funds, expertise, authority,
              alliances, as well as consensus and controversial ideas that give life to each
              organization. Accordingly, participants will be asked to draw a map of the
              specific constellation of internal and external interests and substantive
              research problems at their particular site. These maps will orient to the
              organizational culture of each locale and to the multiple allegiances with
              which each production site for defense simulation must necessarily engage. The
              research will add an ethnography of the social world of military R&D to the
              existing literature in science studies. Other interested readers will be new
              media scholars who explore distributed, interactive, and/or immersive cultures.
              These latter typically do not address the scientific or technical apparatus of
              these technologies. Moreover, among culture critics who have focused attention
              on the dangers to civil society of the "cyborg soldier," none have had the
              opportunity to spend months at a time in military laboratories and war-gaming
              installations for intensive observation and reflection. This research will fuse
              the two: providing an ethnographic study of military simulations that the
              simulators are eager to have, while engaging the larger literatures on new
              media, cyberculture, and the anthropology of technoscience. The ideas from the
              project will be shared with the informants through informal talks and briefings
              at my field sites, and through publications.  Lectures on the work will be
              presented to the faculty and students of the three doctoral programs in the US
              in M&S: the Naval Post-Graduate School, the University of Central Florida, and
              Old Dominion University.  An important part of the project is to bring military
              simulators into contact with scholars for face-to-face dialogue. 
