Title       : Disordered Systems, Supersymmetry, and Quantum Hall Effect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0242949

Award Number: 0242949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daryl W. Hess                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Read nicholas.read@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical research and education on low-temperature
              quantum phenomena in condensed matter systems. Areas of focus include the
              quantum Hall regime of an electron gas, and the more recently developed area of
              bosonic atoms in traps (not solely Bose condensates), which at high rotation
              rates are expected to exhibit behavior analogous to the quantum Hall effect.
              The goal is to understand the ground and excited states, and the properties of
              the elementary excitations. Another major focus is on disordered systems, in
              the quantum Hall effect and elsewhere. Here the primary emphasis is on
              noninteracting fermions in two dimensions, where the phase transitions are
              ultimately expected to be tractable. This will be addressed by analytical
              means, using and extending techniques in conformal field theory. New techniques
              and methods will be introduced whenever this can lead to an advance in physical
              understanding. While the work will concentrate on deepening the understanding
              of fundamental properties, connection to experiments will be made wherever
              possible. Concurrently, the PI is teaching Intensive Introductory Physics to
              well-prepared incoming undergraduates, which provides opportunities to
              introduce them to current topics, and writing a book on the Quantum Hall
              Effect, to further disseminate results of the research. This award also
              supports graduate student training in condensed matter theory.
%%%
This award
              supports theoretical research and education on low-temperature quantum
              phenomena in condensed matter systems. Areas of focus include the quantum Hall
              regime of an electron gas practically realized by a two-dimensional electron
              gas trapped in a semiconductor structure and in a high magnetic field, and the
              more recently developed area of (bosonic) atoms in atom traps, which at high
              rotation rates are expected to exhibit behavior analogous to the quantum Hall
              effect. The goal is to understand the quantum mechanical states of these
              systems. Another major focus is on the effect of disorder on quantum Hall
              effect systems and elsewhere. This will be addressed by analytical means, using
              and extending advanced quantum mechanical techniques. New techniques and
              methods will be developed whenever this can lead to an advance in physical
              understanding. While the work will concentrate on deepening the theoretical
              understanding of fundamental properties, connection to experiments will be made
              wherever possible. Concurrently, the PI is teaching Intensive Introductory
              Physics to well-prepared incoming undergraduates, which provides opportunities
              to introduce them to current topics, and writing a book on the Quantum Hall
              Effect, to further disseminate results of the research. This award also
              supports graduate student training in condensed matter theory.
***

