Title       : Solid State Coordination Chemistry of Hybrid Oxide Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0242153

Award Number: 0242153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $374000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon A. Zubieta jazubiet@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,7202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Jon Zubieta, Chemistry Department, Syracuse University, is supported by the
              Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry Division
              for research into the solid state coordination chemistry of hybrid oxide
              materials. The project will focus on the controlled synthesis of metastable but
              persistent extended oxide structures that are formed through the use of organic
              components as structure-directing building blocks.   The research focuses on
              broadly related classes of oxide solids: (i) materials characterized by M/P/O
              (M=V or Mo) inorganic skeletons and (ii) phases with V/O or Mo/O inorganic
              skeletons. In both cases secondary metal-ligand complexes or subunits will be
              incorporated as charge-balancing and structure-directing constituents. The
              synthetic approach involves low temperature self-assembly of polyamine ligands,
              "secondary" metal cations, and the inorganic oxide sources in hydrothermal
              media. The structures of the resulting materials will be determined and methods
              to control their structure-property relationships will be developed.
              

Presently, methods for the rational synthesis of two or three dimensional
              solid state materials are nearly absent.  This is a problem because the
              synthesis of extended structures must be mastered in order to realize the
              objectives of advanced materials science and nanotechnology, which include
              creating materials for catalysis, quantum electronics, optics, photonics,
              chemoselective sensing, and solar energy conversion among others. The
              occurrence of complex inorganic oxides in the geosphere and the biosphere
              suggests that Nature may provide useful guidelines for the preparation of
              synthetic phases and for the modification of oxide microstructures.  Thus, a
              powerful approach to the design of novel oxide materials mimics Nature's use of
              organic molecules to modify inorganic architectures.  This project will use
              selected "molecular building blocks," which include organic compounds known to
              direct the structure of metal complexes, to develop a "Tinker Toy" methodology
              for preparing new materials.   In addition to the potential fundamental and
              practical implications of the research, the activities will impact broadly on
              the training of graduate students, postdoctoral associates and sabbatical
              fellows, in the promoting of  collaborative programs, and in the development of
              course work, tutorials and presentations for various levels of expertise and
              interest.

