Title       : Fast and Accurate Algorithms for Structured Matrix Computations: Applications
               and Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0242518

Award Number: 0242518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 23,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225771             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vadim Olshevsky olshevsky@math.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0098222
Georgia State University 
Olshevsky, Vadim

Numerous
              applications in sciences and engineering, as well as in computational, applied
              and pure mathematics give rise to problems involving matrices with Toeplitz,
              Hankel, Vandermonde,  Cauchy
structures, along with  many other patterns of
              structure. Standard mathematical software tools [e.g., MATLAB, Mathematica,
              MathCad, Maple,  LAPACK], are based on standard [structure-ignoring]
methods,
              and therefore their use is often not appropriate for obtaining a satisfactory
              solution. Here are two major  reasons.  First, ignoring  the structure
              artificially squares the size of the  data, which requires unnecessary storage
              and  an extremely large amount of CPU time. Secondly, many structured matrices
              are
extremely ill-conditioned, which means that all available standard methods
              may fail to produce even one correct digit in the computed solution. The only
              way to overcome these difficulties is to exploit the special structure of such
              matrices, and to design more efficient algorithms.

The objective of this
              project is the study of several known and several new theoretical and
              computational problems related to structured matrices which arise in several
              applied areas, including signal and image processing, system theory, and
              control theory. This research involves the development of new accurate
fast
              and superfast algorithms for several new classes of structured matrices arising
              in rational matrix interpolation and approximation problems with norm
              constraints (passive interpolation). This study will also focus on various
              stability problems for matrix polynomials, and on various problems in
              the
theory of error-correcting codes.

