Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Testing the Neanderthal Replacement Model from
               an Ecological Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0242211

Award Number: 0242211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Whallon whallon@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Robert Whallon, Eugene Morin will collect data for his
              doctoral dissertation. He will continue to analyze faunal material from
              Saint-Cesaire and Quincay, two sites located in southwestern France documenting
              the Middle to Upper Paleolithic transition (roughly between 40,000 and 32,000
              BP), an episode corresponding, according to many, to the replacement of
              Neanderthals by modern humans. Numerous changes, biological as well as
              cultural, occurred during this short time period. In its cultural dimension,
              most notable are the emergence of art and bone technology, an increase of
              stylistic patterning, and the diversification and standardization of stone
              tools. 

Using a set of material predictions based largely on fauna, the
              research examines and tests the presumed replacement of Neanderthals in Western
              Europe. Given the low productivity of the environment in southwestern France
              during this time period, the incursion of early modern humans into an area
              already occupied by Neanderthals would have increased the local population far
              beyond the carrying capacity of the environment and led to overpopulation.
              Based on this argument, it is suggested that the Neanderthals redefined their
              ecological niche in order to avoid direct competition with modern humans. This
              would be reflected, in a predictable manner, in archaeological faunal
              assemblages. Two types of comparisons are carried out to test this hypothesis.
              First, we should observe a decline, as a result of the modern human incursion,
              of high caloric return species (e.g. large herbivores) in late Neanderthal
              assemblages as well as more efficient utilization of carcasses and, possibly an
              increase in scavenging. In sum, compared to early modern human faunal
              assemblages, late Neanderthal assemblages should be characterized by
              significant subsistence stress. Saint-Cesaire and Quincay are ideal sites to
              conduct a detailed study of Neanderthal and modern human adaptation since the
              latter have been carefully excavated and because animal bone is well
              preserved.

This research will contribute to a better understanding of human
              origins, especially in regard of the interaction between the social,
              demographic, and economic aspects involved in the migration of a population. At
              the general level, this project will deepen the anthropological study of
              hunter-gatherers and add to our body of knowledge on speciation processes in
              human evolution. In trying to strictly test a hypothesis derived from the
              replacement model, this kind of study has great potential to contribute in
              resolving the debates on the nature of the Middle/Upper Paleolithic transition
              since its assumptions and bridging arguments are clearly exposed and
              tested.

The grant will also contribute significantly to training a very
              promising young scientist.

	

