Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: A Computational Study of Bubble and Drop
               Dynamics in Inelastic and Viscoelastic Non-Newtonian Fluid Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0242524

Award Number: 0242524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46274              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark M. Sussman sussman@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0242524
Sussman

This award supports a two-year international collaborative
              research project between Professor Mark Sussman at Florida State University and
              Professor Mitsuhiro Ohta of the Muroran Institute of Technology in Hokkaido,
              Japan.  They will undertake a computational study of bubble and drop dynamics
              in inelastic and viscoelastic non-Newtonian fluid systems.  The researchers
              propose to extend numerical methods for complex moving boundary problems in
              Newtonian multi-phase flow to non-Newtonian multi-phase flows, implement the
              methods in software, and conduct computational simulations of the flows in the
              light of relevant experiments.  These problems are important in industry.  For
              example, modeling the break-up of fluids in microscale jetting devices (e.g.
              ink-jet devices), modeling coalescence of bubbles and drops in extraction
              processes, and modeling extrusion processes.  Numerical validation studies and
              comparison with experiments will be used to test the validity of non-Newtonian
              constitutive relations.
   
The project brings together the efforts of two
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The
              U.S. researchers provide expertise in numerical analyses and the Japanese
              researchers provide expertise in the experimental areas.  The full scale, three
              dimensional, direct numerical simulations of jetting and extrusion processes
              will have direct applicability in the design of ink-jet printers and fiber
              spinning apparatus and provide valuable insight into the flow instability and
              interfacial morphology of the non-Newtonian fluids.  The project advances
              international human resources through the participation of a number of graduate
              students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  Results of the research will be disseminated at scientific
              meetings and in scientific journals on scientific computing, non-Newtonian
              fluid mechanics and chemical engineering. 


