Title       : Evolution of Cheaters in an Obligate Mutualism: An Experimental Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a0242778

Award Number: 0242778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 31,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127266             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Olof Pellmyr pellmyr@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0075944
Pellmyr
Mutualistic interactions create resources that are exploited
              by parasites. These parasites sometimes evolve from mutualists and they can
              greatly alter the dynamics of the interactions. Obligate mutualisms, such as
              those between seed-parasitic pollinators and their hosts, make excellent models
              for the study of such reversals because of their simplicity. This study will
              use a recently evolved cheater yucca moth and its pollinating sister species to
              test the first explicit scenario for any obligate mutualism of how it can
              evolve. In this scenario, specific life history traits and ecological context
              are suggested to greatly facilitate this type of diversification. The project
              has three objectives. First, the study will use phylogenetic analysis based on
              mtDNA and morphometric data to test explicit hypotheses about changing
              geographic ranges and history of coexistence between the cheater, two
              pollinators, and their shared host over the last 2-3 million years. Second,
              experiments will be used to test the hypothesis that the pollinator that gave
              rise to the cheater has requisite behavioral plasticity and ovipositor
              morphology to make the shift from pollinator to cheater habit comparatively
              easily. Third, the study will test a hypothesis suggesting that offset
              emergence phenology between coexisting pollinators facilitates the evolution of
              cheating in the later species. Taken together, this project would place a
              multi-species mutualism in its historical biogeographic context, and use a very
              recent case of evolution of cheating within that mutualism as a template to
              experimentally test specific but generalizable hypotheses about this
              ecologically important process of diversification.

