Title       : Novel Electronic Phases in Two Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0242946

Award Number: 0242946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Eisenstein jpe@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will support experimental condensed matter
              physics research aimed at the study of the numerous strongly correlated phases
              that are exhibited by two-dimensional electron systems in semiconductor
              heterostructures.  This field of science has shown remarkable vitality in
              recent years, with a number of very striking discoveries.  For example, a
              system formed of two parallel two-dimensional electron gases can condense into
              an exotic superfluid state if the two layers are close enough together.  This
              "excitonic Bose condensate" will be a focus of the project.  An important
              question to be answered is whether this semiconductor system can exhibit the
              Josephson effect familiar from superconductivity. A second dramatic example of
              the unusual properties of low dimensional semiconductor systems is the recent
              discovery of ferromagnetism in certain manganese-doped compounds.  Experiments
              designed to elucidate the basic physical properties of Mn-doped II-VI
              semiconductor (e.g. ZnCdSe) quantum wells will be undertaken. In particular,
              the spin polarization of such systems will be studied using a novel quantum
              tunneling technique.  This research will contribute greatly to the education of
              graduate and undergraduate students and a postdoctoral associate.  They will
              learn skills that prepare them for academic, industrial, or government research
              careers.

This individual investigator award will support a project at the
              frontier of basic research on advanced semiconductor materials.  The aim of
              this research is to improve the understanding of how large collections of
              electrons behave.  The topics of greatest interest are those in which such
              collective behavior cannot be directly inferred from the detailed understanding
              of the properties of individual electrons that now exists.  The phenomenon of
              superconductivity in certain materials is perhaps the best-known example of
              such an "emergent" phenomenon, but there are many others.  The work supported
              here will concentrate on examples of emergent phenomena in so-called
              "two-dimensional" electron systems in semiconductors.  A particularly
              interesting example, in which two parallel layers of electrons interact to form
              a remarkable new collective phase of matter, will be a main focus of this
              project.  In addition, the properties of magnetic semiconductors will form
              another focus.  There is intense interest in such materials stemming from a
              vision of an advanced new technology called spintronics.  Much of the research
              will be executed by graduate and undergraduate students and a postgraduate
              associate.  Thus this project has a strong educational component and will
              prepare these young scientists for sophisticated jobs within the Nation's
              technological base.

