Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0242842

Award Number: 0242842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98078              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Wells mawells@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Bender  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,9250,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The University of Arizona (UA) will conduct a Research Experiences for
              Undergraduates Program (REU) designed to teach students science by involving
              them in research.  The specific focus of the program is molecular biosciences -
              the application of biochemical and molecular biological techniques to
              biological problems.  

Students recruited nationally will participate in
              summer research on the University of Arizona Campus.  Particular attention will
              be paid to identifying students from ethnic minority groups underrepresented in
              the sciences and those who have little opportunity for research experience at
              their home institution.  Participating students will work for 12 weeks during
              the summer.  REU students will be matched with participating faculty and will
              have a major voice in determining which lab they enter.  In addition to regular
              lab meetings, they will participate in a two day orientation covering lab
              safety and an introduction to research ethics at the beginning of the summer
              followed by weekly REU student group meetings with the project PI and co-PI. 
              The REU group meetings will enable students to develop professional skills,
              such as presentation of research results, and will feature presentations on
              preparing for, applying to, and selecting a graduate program.  In addition,
              students attend seminars by UA and visiting scientists on relevant scientific
              topics.  Field trips to places such as the Biosphere II and the Arizona Sonoran
              Desert Museum will supplement the research experience.  The summer will
              culminate in a poster session at which students share their experimental
              results.

Carol Bender, UBRP Director, is the contact person.  She can be
              reached by phone at:  520-621-9348 and by e-mail at:  bender@email.arizona.edu.
               More information about this site can be found on the Undergraduate Biology
              Research Program (UBRP) website at:  http://www.blc.arizona.edu/ubrp

