Title       : Establishing a Multi-Century, Annual-Resolution Climate Record from the
               Northeastern Caribbean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0242155

Award Number: 0242155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153072             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Orvis orvis@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sally P. Horn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henri D. Grissino-Mayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              At middle and high latitudes, dendrochronology has provided some of the most
              valuable annual-resolution climate records available, most of which
              significantly extend our knowledge of climate back into time well before
              periods with instrumental records.  In contrast, few dendroclimatological
              records from low latitudes exist, because tropical trees rarely produce
              reliable annual rings that allow dendrochronological research.  This research
              project builds on the finding that Pinus occidentalis Swartz, the native pine
              of the Caribbean island of Hispaniola, produces excellent rings that are
              moisture-sensitive.  This species provides a valuable proxy precipitation
              record, but only when it grows at the very highest-elevation and
              moisture-stressed sites within its range, near 3,000 meters in elevation, in
              stabilized blockfields, and on cliffs.  The investigators have collected wood
              samples (cores and a few sections of living trees, plus sections of dead trees
              and remnant wood) from 120 specimens.  Initial work on small subsets shows
              promising potential.  This award supports analyses of these samples through
              surface preparation, computer-measurement of rings under magnification, and
              statistical analysis of the chronologies including comparison with modern
              climate data.  Fire scars are abundant in the stands sampled, and the species'
              fire response will be analyzed to assess the potential of the species to yield
              sub-seasonal fire history information for these Caribbean highlands.  Rare
              pieces of subfossil remnant wood are found in fire-protected bare-rock spots
              within the stands, and the investigators will try to determine the age
              distributions of floating chronologies from such specimens using radiocarbon
              dating in order to estimate the ultimate potential record length from these and
              similar sites.  Finally, the award will help fund ongoing efforts to improve
              public-outreach activities at the University of Tennessee's Laboratory of
              Tree-Ring Science.  These efforts include helping school children and others
              discover the excitement of tree-ring research.

The importance of this
              project stems from the fact that Pinus occidentalis grows at tropical
              latitudes, a region that has not witnessed the development of tree-ring-based
              climate records as have more temperate locales.  In geographic terms, the
              nearest published dendroclimatological record is 1,700 kilometers to the
              northwest in an extra-tropical location.  As awareness of the importance to
              human society of climate and climate change increases, the scientific impetus
              to improve understanding of tropical climate dynamics continues to grow.  This
              project will provide the first terrestrial proxy record of precipitation from a
              tropical region that is closely connected in climatic terms to the North
              American mainland.  It also will enhance educational efforts to inform students
              and the public about the processes and outcomes of tree-ring research.

