Title       : Collaborative Research: Discharge Variability of Ross Ice Streams Over the Last
               Millenium, Deduced by Numerical Simulation of Flow Features in the Ross Ice
               Shelf
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0242465

Award Number: 0242465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Fahnestock mark.fahnestock@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the investigation of the dishcarge variability of Ross Ice
              Streams over the last millenium, using a combination of numerical simulation
              and satellite remote sensing of flow features on the Ross Ice Shelf.  The
              proposed collaborative research will use the Ross Ice Shelf record of flow
              variability to deduce variations in ice stream discharge over the last 1000
              years.  Changes in ice stream discharge disrupt flow of the ice shelf, in both
              profound and subtle ways, distorting flow features and changing creavasse
              patterns.  The result is an integrated record of many changes over the lifetime
              of the ice within the shelf.  Interpretations of flow-trace and crevasse
              geometry already made by Fahnestock and others will be used as a template for
              the design of numerical modeling experiments.  The primary objectives are to
              verify the imagery-derived history and to quantify the volume flux implied by
              that history.  The proposed research will improve existing concepts of ice
              stream discharge variability and will produce new data sets, both of which will
              be of use to the Antarctic glaciology community.  Landsat-7 imagery will be
              used to measure velocity in areas of particular interest where existing data
              are inadequate.  MODIS data, which has better radiometric and spatial
              resolution will be used to improve feature mapping on the ice shelf in
              sensitive areas. 
