Title       : Dynamics of Local Vibrational Modes in Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0242316

Award Number: 0242316
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305786             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunter Luepke luepke@as.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to elucidate the dynamics of local vibrational modes
              (LVMs) in semi-conductors, and to connect the rates and pathways of vibrational
              energy flow to thermally and electronically stimulated defect and impurity
              reactions and migration in semiconductors. The ap-proach is to perform
              high-resolution infrared absorption spectroscopy, transient bleaching and
              photon-echo experiments to measure the vibrational lifetime and dephasing time
              of point defects related to H, B, C, O, and N as a function of dopant
              concentration, temperature, uniaxial stress and isotope substitution. These
              studies will assist evaluation of energy relaxation mechanisms and further
              understanding of the interaction of hydrogen with dopant impurities in
              semiconduc-tors. Materials of interest include doped Si, Ge, and GaX (X = As,
              N, P). Additionally, questions will be addressed regarding vibrational
              relaxation and transfer channels, coupling to bending modes, and the role of
              local structure and crystal site in the vibrational relaxation process. 
%%%
              
The project addresses fundamental research issues associated with electronic
              materials having technological relevance. An important feature of the project
              is the strong emphasis on education, and the integration of research and
              education. A major focus of the project will be the education of graduate and
              undergraduate students in an interdisciplinary field including modern optics,
              ma-terials science and computational modeling.
***  

