Title       : The Thermal-Fluid Behavior of Vortex Tubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0242219

Award Number: 0242219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255447             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Nellis gfnellis@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanford A. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott T. Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy Shedd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The vortex tube is a simple device that is capable of separating a flow into two
              streams with different temperatures.  Despite its simplicity, the thermal-fluid
              behavior of the vortex tube remains a subject of considerable controversy.  The
              recirculating, compressible, highly swirling flow within a vortex tube is
              difficult to model.  Accurate experimental measurements of the internal
              distributions of temperature, pressure, and velocity are not available because
              conventional measurement techniques such as invasive probes or flow
              visualization using seeding particles are not effective in this
              environment.

A non-invasive laser technique that does not require particle
              seeding has been designed.  The technique is based on chromatic analysis of
              laser light scattered by the gas itself.  The focus of this project will be the
              development of this technique.  Initial experimental results will be compared
              with measurements using conventional flow visualization techniques under
              benign, benchmark flow conditions in order to verify the technique.  The
              internal distribution of temperature, pressure, and velocity in a vortex tube
              will subsequently be measured.

This work will produce two significant
              results.  First, the experimental measurements will provide vortex tube data of
              unprecedented detail and accuracy, revealing the processes that govern its
              unique behavior.  Second, a powerful, non-invasive technique for obtaining
              detailed measurements in complex flows will be developed and demonstrated.  The
              measurement technique promises to be useful in other areas such as
              turbomachinery.

The award has been funded by the Thermal Transport and
              Thermal Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems
              Division.



