Title       : Dimensionality and Weak-links Effects at the Superfluid Transition of 4He
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0242246

Award Number: 0242246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356752             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis M. Gasparini fmg@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1676,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This low-temperature physics research project will investigate the superfluid
              transition of confined 4He as a paradigm of critical behavior.  The work is
              intended to test theories of finite-size scaling at a second order phase
              transition.  Here, the thermodynamic behavior should be scaled by the
              correlation length of the unconfined system.  Excepting helium, there are very
              few experimental studies of this problem.  Scaling has come into question from
              earlier experiments with helium confined in a planar geometry.  It has been
              observed that on the superfluid side the expected scaling fails.  This is also
              supported by theoretical calculations of the superfluid fraction.  Other
              theoretical models also point out possible lack of scaling.  The role of the
              lower dimension is also important and will be pursued.  Films, representing
              2-dimensional crossover, might behave quite differently from confinements where
              additional dimensions are made small.  This research, because of the universal
              character of second order transitions, may have implications for critical
              behavior of other systems near a second order phase transition.  The technique
              used in defining the confinement involves silicon lithography, and direct wafer
              bonding to achieve unprecedented uniformity in confinement at the nanometer
              level over cm2 areas.  This is coupled with experimental techniques that allow
              study of very small samples with high accuracy.  Both graduate and
              undergraduates, are involved in this work, and receive training in an unusually
              broad range of fabrication and experimental methods.  This prepares them for
              careers in industry, academia, or government.

This low-temperature physics
              project involves studies of the behavior of a confined fluid near a phase
              transition.  Usually materials do not change their properties with size because
              the largest relevant length scale is of the order of the interatomic spacing. 
              However, near a phase transition an additional length scale emerges, the
              correlation length, which can grow as function of temperature to become quite
              large.  In this case, samples which have dimensions comparable to the
              correlation length behave quite differently.  This study focuses on liquid
              helium at its superfluid transition as a paradigm of what is expected to be a
              general behavior of many other systems.  This is important in the current
              pursuit of nanotechnology, especially for magnetic systems.  Substantial
              technological development is needed to do this work.  A process has been
              developed which involves lithography of silicon wafers, and direct wafer
              bonding to construct exceptionally uniform chambers in which the liquid is
              confined.  Techniques have also been developed for measuring very small
              samples. The present research focuses on the role of dimensionality.  The
              program will investigate the effects of making 1, 2, or all 3 dimensions small.
               Students working in this area, both graduate and undergraduates are trained in
              cryogenic techniques, silicon lithography, wafer bonding, and high-resolution,
              precision measurements using computer controls.  This prepares them for careers
              in academe, industry, and government or for additional study for advanced
              degrees.
