Title       : Workshops for the Rising Generation of Science, Engineering, and Technology
               Policy, Washington, DC, April 2003-2005
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0242955

Award Number: 0242955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38158              (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd M. LaPorte tlaporte@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides partial support for a graduate student conference on science
              and technology policy, for three years, from 2003 through 2005.  The proposed
              activities are to take place in conjunction with but separate from the annual
              AAAS Science and Technology Policy Colloquium usually held in April in
              Washington, DC. Graduate students at Virginia Technological, George Washington
              and George Mason universities develop the themes, prepare and disseminate
              requests for papers, prepare their own substantive papers, select submissions,
              invite keynote speakers, and secure sponsors, which in years past have included
              the American Association for the Advancement of Science, (AAAS), the National
              Academy of Engineering, and General Motors.  AAAS has offered the use of its
              conference facilities on New York Avenue in Washington, DC. 

The proposed
              conferences build on successful conferences conducted in 2000, 2001, and 2002. 
              Students from a dozen universities in the United States attended in these
              years.  George Mason is coordinating the present proposal to NSF, but all three
              universities will share equally in the running of the conferences. 

This
              now-annual event is one of the only U.S. events to focus entirely on graduate
              student work in the science, technology, engineering and policy field.  It is
              designed to bring together students in many different kinds of programs in this
              field, for example science and technology studies, public policy, science and
              technology policy, engineering and public policy.  In addition, combining
              student paper presentations with career and job related discussions that
              involve current practitioners helps prepare students for both academic and
              non-academic careers. Thus the conference contributes to the oft-noted
              objective of broadening career options for students in fields that have, in
              some cases, largely been oriented toward academic work. 

Financial support
              from NSF helps put the conference on a more solid footing, and signals the
              value of student work to key policy institutions.  Graduate students in this
              field often struggle with the lack of clear signals about the professional
              value of their work, and encouragement from major institutions is important.
              Conference participation for students traditionally underrepresented in science
              and technology policy and studies will be especially solicited. 

