Title       : Collaborative Research: Bayesian Approaches For Testing Axioms of Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0242030

Award Number: 0242030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197065             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Karabatsos georgek@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many models of measurement and decision-making can be characterized in terms of
              axioms.  While it is of primary importance to test whether data are in accord
              to such axioms, there is a challenging incompatibility between empirical data
              and the nature of the axioms.  On the one hand, empirical data generally
              contain random error, which is attributable to a number of sources, such as the
              inherent unreliability of human (or animal) behavior, sampling error, and
              imprecision of the observations themselves.  On the other hand, the axioms do
              not account for random error, because of their deterministic, qualitative form.
               This research project aims to solve this incompatibility by developing
              procedures of axiom testing that are based on contemporary Bayesian methods of
              model estimation, model fit evaluation, and model selection.  Through five
              inter-related research objectives, this project will investigate the Bayes
              inference framework by applying it to test axioms on real data, and by
              comparing the performance of different types of model selection methods and
              prior distributions.  The goal is to determine the best Bayesian inference
              methods for testing axioms of measurement.

For researchers in many branches
              of the social sciences, including test theory and decision theory, the fruits
              of this work should provide usable and powerful statistical tools for testing
              the key assumptions that underlies contemporary models of measurement and
              decision-making.  The use of these statistical tools should lead to a better
              understanding of these models, and possibly indicate productive extensions of
              them.
