Title       : Wakes and Scale Interactions in Stratified Flows Past Topography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0242228

Award Number: 0242228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307287             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig C. Epifanio cepi@ariel.met.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Until recently, theoretical studies of stratified flow past topography have
              largely focused on understanding topographic circulations at one particular
              scale of motion in isolation from all other scales.  Large-scale effects have
              thus been studied independently of smaller-scale phenomena, while
              intermediate-scale effects and scale interactions have in large part remained
              neglected.  Recent numerical modeling studies and observational programs
              increasingly suggest that this traditional separation between large and small
              scales in topographic flows is no longer adequate.  The research aims to start
              bridging this gap in scales by considering interactions between scales in two
              simplified, but representative contexts: i) orographic wake formation and the
              interaction of wakes with larger scales; and ii) the nonlinear generation of
              gravity waves in quasi-balanced topographic flows at small Rossby number
              (Ro).

Orographic wake formation has long been known to have important
              consequences for local and regional-scale circulations in mountainous regions. 
              Recent work suggests that orographic wakes may also have an important upscale
              effect by enhancing synoptic-scale cyclogenesis in the lee of topography.  The
              Principal Investigator will study aspects of orographic wakes spanning the full
              range of scales important to wake formation and dynamics -from the small-scale
              processes that generate wakes to the influence of wakes on larger-scale flows. 
              The key questions to be addressed include: What are the dynamical and physical
              processes that produce orographic wakes? b) How are the formation and
              subsequent dynamics of wakes modified by background rotation in intermediate-Ro
              flow? c) What effects do orographic wakes have on cyclone growth in developing
              baroclinic wave?  The Principal Investigator will approach these issues using
              idealized numerical simulations combined with sophisticated diagnostic tools
              designed to address the dynamics of both vorticity and potential vorticity (PV)
              in stratified flows.

The generation of mesoscale gravity waves in small-Ro
              flows is topic of considerable interest in the general dynamic meteorology
              community.  Flow past a ridge at small Ro provides an intriguing context in
              which to examine such phenomena due to the inherent simplicity of the
              quasi-balanced topographic flow that produces the mesoscale waves.  The
              Principal Investigator will study wave generation in small-Ro topographic flows
              using newly developed semi-analytic framework that allows fully
              finite-amplitude two-dimensional solutions for flows over broad ridges.  An
              attempt will then be made to extend these results to three dimensions using
              weakly nonlinear analysis combined with idealized numerical simulations.  It is
              hoped that this analysis of wave generation in the topographic case will
              provide insights into the mechanisms of wave generation in other small-Ro,
              non-topographic flows as well.

If successful, the work on orographic wakes
              should provide insights into multiscale effects and scale interactions in
              stratified flow past topography.  The consideration of such multiscale
              phenomena is important to further understanding of orographic effects on both
              weather and climate.  The study of wave generation at small Ro is expected to
              provide insights applicable to wave generation in more general small-Ro flows
              as well.  As such waves have significant impact on weather and clear-air
              turbulence, better understanding of their generation mechanisms could have
              important implications for forecasting.
