Title       : Foraging, Food Sharing, and Family Formation among the Hadza
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  2002  
File        : a0242455

Award Number: 0242455
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank W. Marlowe fmarlowe@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               0242455
 Marlowe
The tiny number of hunting and gathering societies left in
              the world will soon disappear and with them our chance to study behavior
              associated with the hunting and gathering niche.  This longitudinal study
              examines foraging and food sharing, and their impact on the formation of the
              nuclear family among one of these societies, the Hadza of Tanzania.  The Hadza
              have no formal marriage ceremony but form long-term pair bonds and are serially
              monogamous.  Like many foragers in warm climates women bring in more food
              calories than men, and the food men bring in is acquired much less regularly
              and is more widely shared outside the household.  This forces us to question
              the long-held view that a man's provisioning is what promotes pair bonds. About
              160 Hadza in four nomadic camps of roughly 40 people each will be observed over
              the course of three years by a human behavioral ecologist, along with graduate
              anthropology students from Harvard and the University of Dar es Salaam,
              Tanzania.  The researchers will collect data on the foraging activities and
              food acquired by all people, how much of which foods they eat while foraging,
              how much they take back to camp, and how much is shared with others within and
              outside the household in order to evaluate what role male provisioning may play
              in maintaining pair bonds.  A previous study found no effect of father absence
              on child mortality among the Hadza.  However, a cross-cultural analysis of
              foraging societies showed that men's contribution to the diet mainly affects
              women's fertility rather than offspring survivorship.  Previous data reveal
              that Hadza men bring in more food when their wives are nursing and this study
              will investigate the effects men's provisioning has on mortality, time to
              weaning, time to next child, and overall fertility rates.
Broader impacts of
              this research include a better understanding of what explains the universality
              of pair bonds among humans.  Examination of the causes and consequences of
              divorce will shed light on the importance of families and emotional attachment.
               The nutritional analysis of Hadza foods, the energetic analysis of their
              acquisition, and the economic analysis of their pattern of sharing will further
              our knowledge of human health under naturalistic conditions. By supporting
              students in extended field settings, the project combines education and
              research.

