Title       : Entry, Competition, and Welfare in the Mutual Fund Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0242031

Award Number: 0242031
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2003      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179427             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chad Syverson syverson@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ali Hortacsu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research explores a number of facets of the competitive market structure in
              the U.S. mutual fund industry, specifically with regard to the nature of mutual
              fund firms' strategic decisions. While a considerable amount of research in
              financial economics has been devoted to mutual funds, its primary focus has
              been on aspects of mutual fund operation in isolation from other industry
              firms: portfolio construction, evaluation of fund performance vis-a-vis
              benchmark portfolios, and the agency relationship between shareholders and the
              fund manager. Previous research has not delved greatly into the strategic
              decisions of industry firms. The project fills this gap and builds on the
              recent increase of interest among financial economists in the mutual fund
              industry's competitive structure. It explicitly models several aspects of
              competitive behavior in the industry, offering testable and excludable
              hypotheses. It also investigates elements of industry competition that have not
              been studied in depth. 

Specific questions that this project addresses
              include the following: (1) Do investors face 
significant search
              costs/informational frictions when choosing funds? (2) What non-risk or return
              attributes characterize investors' demand for mutual funds? (3) How do fund
              companies set 
management fees? (4) What non-price aspects of competition
              exist in the mutual fund industry? 
(5) Is the existing competitive structure
              of the industry optimal from a social welfare standpoint? 
The project takes
              several approaches to this aim. Specific topics are investigated in sector case
              studies that control for confounding influences on outcomes and highlight the
              competitive 
decision(s) of interest. Further, the research involves modeling
              market interactions and the 
estimation of the models' structural parameters
              using market data. This allows the evaluation of actual, anticipated, or
              proposed market changes on industry structure and consumer and social welfare,
              facilitating policy counterfactuals and hypothesis testing.
 
This research
              offers potentially substantial broader impact. The mutual fund industry is an
              important part of the domestic financial system, and as such has been of great
              interest to popular media, regulators, and policymakers. In 2001, for example,
              over half of U.S. households had mutual fund holdings, and various
              institutional fiduciaries held over $3 trillion in assets. The industry also
              plays a major role in households' retirement plans: roughly one-third of mutual
              fund assets are held in retirement savings vehicles. Given its size and
              ubiquity, the industry's competitive market structure and the strategic
              decisions shaping it directly affect not only the fortunes of individual funds
              and fund families, but consumer welfare as well. Improved 
understanding of
              these decisions and how they respond to real and prospective changes in the
              
competitive environment will undoubtedly yield useful insights to researchers
              and policymakers. 
Furthermore, the project's research synthesizes elements of
              the relevant finance literature with 
industrial organization research on
              consumer search behavior, product differentiation, producer entry, and
              oligopolistic price competition. As such, it holds considerable potential to
              spur additional interchange of theoretical and empirical ideas and
              methodologies between the industrial organization and finance literatures. The
              research program will emphasize the development of novel empirical methods and
              probe the applicability of current analytical tools of the industrial
              organization literature to the financial economics arena. 

