Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Innovative Process to Produce Powder for Fabrication of
               Ferritic Stainless Steel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9761114

Award Number: 9761114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90747              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Moyer Moyer@waterw.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Magna-Tech P/M Labs, Inc
	      4 Green Briar Lane
	      Cinnaminson, NJ  080773876    609/786-9061

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1771,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9761114  Moyer         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project is designed to produce high compressibility low oxide iron powder that
              is coated with chromium in concentration sufficient to yield ferritic stainless
              steel once the chromium is diffused into the iron by high temperature
              sintering.  Chromium will be deposited on high purity water atomized iron
              powder by injecting chromium-containing solution of sufficient concentration to
              permit deposition of a chromium coating on iron powder in a fluidized bed. 
              Presently, the proposer fabricates stainless steel parts from prealloyed
              stainless steel powder that is limited in compressibility.  Since particle
              surfaces are highly oxidized, they are difficult to reduce, limiting
              sinterability and corrosion resistance.  Elemental admixtures of 10 micron
              chromium powder with water atomized powder alleviate low compressibility and
              poor corrosion resistance, but a low oxygen 10 micron chromium powder is
              difficult to produce commercially.  If coated chromium powder is produced,
              denser parts can be produced.  Denser parts improve corrosion resistance,
              magnetic induction and tensile strength.  Increased purification improves
              ductility and structure sensitive magnetic properties.  If so, magnetic parts
              with improved corrosion resistance can be produced. The proposer's parts,
              unless forged, contain porosity.  Porous parts are subject to corrosion.
              Increasing porosity lowers density.  Coated iron powder permits production of
              parts that are purer and higher in density.  Therefore, corrosion, magnetic and
              high temperature properties should be enhanced.         If the process prove
              successful, the proposer would consider construction or expansion of a plant to
              produce the powder in commercial quantities.  ***
