Title       : SBIR Phase I: Strain Measurements in Bridges By Use of Fiber Optic Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9761044

Award Number: 9761044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99781              (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Brower dbrower@astrotechnology.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Astro Technology Inc
	      14227 Oak Chase Drive
	      Houston, TX  770622036    281/464-9992

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,1442,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***  9761044  Brower    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will attempt to demonstrate the feasibility of measuring strain in real time on
              bridge structures by investigating a method to monitor the mechanical response
              of the bridges components using fiber-optic sensors.  The effect of forces
              exerted on major civil engineering structures during normal usage and natural
              catastrophes such as earthquakes, hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, or severe
              storms could be measured.  These sensors will be designed to be rugged,
              low-cost, and will provide monitoring of strain in real time -- allowing a
              constant vigilance of the state-of stress, the safety, state of repair, and
              expected life-time of the structure.  The ultimate goal of this research
              effort, is to commercialize a fully developed Fiber-Optic sensor that can be
              used throughout the construction industry.  The commercial sensor systems will
              contain "proven" low-cost optical fibers, hardware, software, memory, display,
              and support equipment.  This will be achieved through research, and application
              of an approach, that uses innovative ideas built on existing fiber-optic
              interferometeric sensors.  If successful, it will be possible to accurately
              measure the mechanical response properties of bridges and other civil
              engineering structures in any desired location.  Strain from long-term and
              transient loads can be measured and recorded.    Currently, large civil
              engineering structures are visually inspected.  Extensometers or mechanical
              measuring devices are used on a periodic basis to evaluate the state of the
              structure.    Unfortunately, visual inspections usually occur after a
              structural problem has already manifest itself.  Presently, there is a
              significant need for sensing devices that Provide constant monitoring of the
              state of the structure.  The sensors could be used in civil engineering
              structures that use concrete, steel, composites and other construction
              material.  Bridges, buildings, parking garages, highway overpasses are ex
              amples.    ***
