Title       : SBIR Phase I: Processing of Microcellular Foams from Unfilled and Filled Liquid
               Crystalline and Semicrystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1997  
File        : a9761580

Award Number: 9761580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Seng C. Tan sctan@sprintmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright Materials Res Co
	      3591 Apple Grove Drive
	      Dayton, OH  45430    513/643-0007

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                ***  9761580  Tan         This Phase I Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase I project will use a novel technique to process microcellular foams using
              a single-step operation and that does not use or release any hazardous
              chemicals/gases.  The proposed foaming technique uses the principle of
              thermodynamic instability with nitrogen as the foaming gas.  The proposer will
              foam both the unfilled and filled liquid crystalline and semicrystalline
              polymers (LCPs & PPS) which have excellent strength and stiffness to weight
              ratio, good solvent resistance, barrier properties, and high temperature
              stability.  The blowing process will align the carbon/glass fibers along the
              struts of the foamed matrix.  It has been demonstrated for amorphous polymers
              that the properties of microcellular foams are similar to their solid
              counterparts.  Therefore, the low-density microcellular LCP and PPS foams will
              have tensile strength in the range of 20 to over 30 ksi.  These microcellular
              foams will have much higher temperature stability and mechanical properties
              than those of the commercially available structural foams including Rohacell
              and Divinycell.  Sandwich structures can be fabricated using these foams by
              heat pressing, thereby  reduce manufacturing and assembling costs. Conventional
              processing techniques for rigid closed-celled) foams involve multiple steps and
              the blowing agent used is toxic.  Some rigid foams give off hazardous gases
              during the post-processing steps.        Low-density microcellular LCP & PPS
              foams are expected to have many commercial applications including sandwich
              structural materials for high speed aircraft, aerospace, outerspace vehicles,
              housing and support structures for rockets and propulsion components. 
              Conventional applications of LCPs and PPS include various electronic
              connectors, electronic and audio-visual devices.  They can be replaced by the
              proposed microcellular LCP and PPS foams with equivalent performance but much
              lighter in weight.  On the ground applications, ladders an d bridges fabricated
              using these classes of microcellular foams would have extreme convenience of
              mobility because of much lighter weight.  ***
