Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Self-Lubricating Ceramic/Polymer Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1997  
File        : a9761465

Award Number: 9761465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lev Tuchinskiy ltuch@opusl.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials & Elctrochem/MER
	      7960 South Kolb Road
	      Tucson, AZ  85706    520/574-1980

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1444,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9761465  Tuchinskiy    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will attempt to develop a new kind of self-lubricating anti-friction
              ceramic/polymer composite with high mechanical characteristics and low
              coefficient of friction.  The structure of the composite comprises a ceramic
              matrix and fibers of lubricating phase oriented perpendicular to the friction
              surface.  The fibers are formed in situ, their diameter may vary significantly
              from a few microns to a few millimeters, while a uniform distribution is
              provided automatically within the process.  The content of the solid lubricant
              may vary over a wide range.  The objectives of the Phase I research are to
              develop a method for production of anti-friction composites comprising Si3N4
              and polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), investigate their characteristics and
              define the compositions and structures providing optimum combinations of
              mechanical and tribological characteristics.  If successful, the method could
              be applied to production of many tribological as well as structural composites.
               The research may thus result in creation of a new generation of high effective
              anti-fiction materials.    There are numerous potential applications for
              self-lubricating ceramic materials, including a large market in the propulsion
              systems and machine tool industry.  Application areas in the machine tool
              industry include extended life spindles, high speed head options, ultrahigh
              speed machining centers and high speed grinding spindles.  The end benefit to
              the customer from high speed machine tool bearing applications probably exceeds
              that of the aerospace application.  Other applications for self-lubricating
              ceramic bearings are in the chemical processing and semiconductor manufacturing
              areas.  This includes screw pumps, reactors and vacuum systems.  Additional
              applications are for air valve control systems or material conveying equipment
              in hot environments.  ***
