Title       : SBIR Phase I: Model-Driven Expert Software Module to Predict Burr Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1997  
File        : a9761544

Award Number: 9761544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99766              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilwhan W. Park info@integratedconstructs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Integrated Constructs Inc
	      45 Stratford Road
	      Kensington, CA      510/559-9462

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***   9761544  Park    The Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
              project will develop core software modules for burr prediction in metal
              cutting, which are part of an integrated suite of specialized software tools
              for design and manufacturing.  These tools are aimed at 1) predicting and
              minimizing buff formation in machining and 2) selecting and planning deburring
              operations, based upon these predicted buff characteristics.  Buff prediction
              models and corresponding model-driven burr prediction software modules will be
              developed.  These modules (one for milling and another for drilling) will serve
              as the basic buff prediction engines of the "Edge Finishing Master", a
              comprehensive burr minimization and deburring process planning software tool. 
              This software will support the design for manufacturability of mechanical
              components by introducing burr minimization during design and process planning.
                 Potential commercial applications are expected in industries with burr
              problems.  These manufacturing industries include aerospace, automotive,
              computer components, biomedical, chemical, heavy equipment, and optical.  This
              software is will be integrated with commercial computer-aided design (CAD)
              packages, commercial process planning packages, and commercially available
              tooling and material databases.  The burr prediction and minimization
              capabilities of this software can be utilized in the early design and process
              planning stages of a part, allowing the maximum flexibility for adjustments to
              the part design and manufacturing plan before major resources have been
              committed.  ***
