Title       : SBIR Phase I: Parallel Non-Blocking Routing Algorithm Implementation for
               Free-Space All-Optical Interconnect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9761399

Award Number: 9761399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97677              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Hamlin leli@reveo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Lu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Reveo Inc
	      3 Westchester Plaza
	      Elmsford, NY  105231609    914/345-9556

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4096,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               High-speed optical interconnections promise to play a major role in the
              development of the national information infrastructure.  Numerous tasks in a
              world reliant on information technology to improve the quality of life and
              productivity require the creation, processing, and transmission of images which
              have tremendous information content.  Hence the enormous demand for wider
              bandwidth hardware that enables the realization of high data rates.  This Small
              Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project from Reveo, Inc. will
              develop a routing algorithm that works in conjunction with a revolutionary
              all-optical crossbar switch that is capable of multi-tera-bit/second, which is
              being developed under a separate National Science Foundation SBIR project. 
              This routing algorithm will enable Reveo to realize the full potential of the
              crossbar switch.  The proposed program of research will focus on the design and
              implementation of the novel routing algorithm that can be scaled up to large
              network sizes.  In addition to the multi-tera-bit data rate of the whole
              system, the non-blocking routing algorithm features reconfiguration speeds that
              approach the nanosecond time scale.   Routing is an essential operation in all
              switching networks.  The proposed routing algorithm, along with the all-optical
              crossbar switch, will be commercialized within a multi-billion dollar
              high-speed networking market which is growing significantly.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
