Title       : SBIR Phase I: Parallel-SHIFT: A Simulation Programming Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1997   
File        : a9761146

Award Number: 9761146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aleks Gollu gollu@metax.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Meta-X
	      2271 Cedar Street
	      Berkeley, CA  94709    510/548-1315

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 2880,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Meta-X  proposes
              to design and implement a parallel version of the SHIFT languageto be run on
              multi-processor shared-memory computers.  Multiple parallelization approaches
              will be designed, implemented, and tested.SHIFT, a special purpose
              object-oriented programming language with simulation semantics developed at UC
              Berkeley, offers the proper level of abstraction for characterizing complex
              systems described by finite state machines and differential equations.  SHIFT
              specifications are compiled into C programs.  When run these programs simulate
              the design specified in the SHIFT source programs.  Due to the level of detail
              in object models, current SHIFT simulations are restricted to a small number of
              objects for timely simulation results.  Hence, current implementation of SHIFT
              is commercially not viable.   SHIFT is in use in a variety of academic
              applications including highway automation, autonomous submarines, chemical
              distillation column control, and air traffic management. SHIFT language syntax
              and semantics can be exploited to develop a parallel implementation whose
              performance can scale with the number of processors available on a given
              workstation.  The resulting performance improvements that this project offers
              will make Parallel-SHIFT a commercially viable modeling, design, simulation,
              and evaluation tool for automotive, aerospace, process control, and
              manufacturing industries.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
