Title       : SBIR Phase I: Boron Phosphide Thermal Neutron Detectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9761075

Award Number: 9761075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley M. Vernon svernon@spirecorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spire Corporation
	      One Patriots Park
	      Bedford, MA  017302396    617/275-6000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9134,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a novel
              thermal neutron detector from boron phosphide (10BP) that will combine the high
              boron density of a solid with the efficient creation of large response to the
              neutron interactions.  The new detectors will be rugged, compact, highly
              sensitive to thermal neutrons, relatively insensitive to gamma radiation, fast,
              and capable of low bias operation.  Phase I will develop the innovative
              technique of MOCVD growth of high quality BP films on graded composition Gap
              substrates.  Films will be grown to thicknesses of several tens of microns and
              examined for physical structure.  After fabrication into detectors, the basic
              electrical properties will be tested at Spire and then the detectors will be
              sent to Sandia National Laboratory for radiation testing.  Phase II will extend
              the technology for optimized detector performance and thicker film deposition
              for greater sensitivity.  The overall goal is to achieve a highly neutron
              sensitive semiconductor detector that is compact, versatile, and potentially
              capable of imaging applications.  The proposed research effort will result in
              high efficiency, boron phosphide thin film thermal neutron detectors.  Their
              compact size and low voltage operation will make them aptly suited to replace
              cur-rent gas or scintillator detectors that need to operate portably or under
              constrained conditions.  The novel design of these detectors will also find
              extended uses in neutron radiography and dosimetry, environmental monitoring,
              nuclear nonproliferation, and monitoring reactor operations.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
