Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of a High Gain Imaging Avalance Photodiode
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9761316

Award Number: 9761316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97628              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Karplus ekarplus@sciencewares.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Wares
	      30 Sandwich Road
	      East Falmouth, MA  025365602    508/457-4556

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1108,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9761316  Karplus    This small business innovation research Phase I
              proposal seeks to develop an avalanche photodiode for use as a high gain single
              photon imaging device that generates the time and position of incidence for
              each detected photon event.  Such a device will provide a lower cost, higher
              performance alternative to microchannel plate based single photon imaging
              detectors and will provide data in a format that is more conducive to rapid
              analysis than traditional image files.  Applications for the device include a
              variety of emerging techniques for real time in-vivo imaging of physiological
              and developmental processes such as calcium dynamics and free radical
              production using luminescent indicators.  Phase I of this project involves
              three iterations of the design, construction and characterization of an imaging
              avalanche photodiode device to verify the device concept, establish the design
              requirements and determine the production costs.  Phase II will produce a
              commercial imaging system that consists of an imaging avalanche photodiode in a
              c-mount enclosure, customized support electronics and data acquisition and
              analysis software.  Phase III will pursue opportunities to use the device for
              other imaging applications such as positron emission tomography and single
              photon emission computed tomography, and will also consider how to apply the
              position sensing technology to similar semiconductor devices.    Many
              scientific and medical imaging applications require high gain, high resolution
              image sensing devices.  The need for improving the performance and reducing the
              cost of these devices is expected to grow to keep pace with the development of
              luminescent labels that can be used for in-vivo imaging of calcium dynamics,
              free radical production, gene specific activity, and other physiologically
              significant processes.  Our device will provide higher performance at a lower
              cost to both the applied and research communities in science and medicine,
              making research activities more efficient  and reducing the cost of clinical
              procedures.  It will also make new research and commercial applications
              possible because of a unique image acquisition and analysis paradigm that will
              be used.  ***
