Title       : SBIR Phase I: Adaptive Control of Chemical Processes Based on Fourier Transform
               Infrared (FT-IR) Spectroscopy and Artificial Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1997  
File        : a9761057

Award Number: 9761057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99806              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Serio mserio@AFRInc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9761057  Serio    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              will demonstrate the feasibility of using Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR)
              spectroscopy measurements and artificial neural networks (ANNS) for adaptive
              control of chemical processes. Three recent events together provide an
              opportunity to develop a new generation of process monitoring and control
              systems: 1) the availability of low cost, high speed computation with personal
              computers; 2) the availability of user friendly software involving artificial
              intelligence techniques such as neural networks; 3) the availability of rugged,
              compact FT-IR spectrometers. The capabilities of FT-IR spectrometers to monitor
              multiple components of a gas phase process stream have been demonstrated by
              Advanced Fuel Research, .Inc. (AFR) and other researchers in numerous field
              demonstrations. However, the marriage of this technology with adaptive process
              control software such as ANNs to produce a superior process control algorithm
              remains to be proven.  The objective of the Phase I program is to demonstrate
              the proof-of-concept of this approach for a model chemical process..  The Phase
              II  program will concentrate on refinement and generalization of the
              methodology so that it will work in a full-scale plant as part of a distributed
              control system.    The successful completion of this program would result in
              process control methodology for maximizing conversion, selectivity and/or
              environmental acceptability of many common chemical processes which involve gas
              phase intermediates and products.  This technology would provide both economic
              and environmental benefits to the nation, and potential installations exist at
              thousands of sites in the U.S. and abroad.  ***
