Title       : SBIR Phase I: Thin Film Deposition & Dynamic Characterizations Using Sub-Psec
               Eximer Laser Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1998      
File        : a9761288

Award Number: 9761288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Church khc@cmst.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CMS Technetronics, Inc
	      5202-2 N Richmond Hill Road
	      Stillwater, OK  74075    405/624-5751

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will focus on the
              preparation and characterization of tribological layers for advanced
              application environments.  Sub-picosecond-derived films will be evaluated as a
              function of the essential PLD processing parameters; the films derived via
              sub-psec ablation will also compared to films deposited by conventional nsec
              ablation. The proposed program will focus on pulsed laser deposition (PLD), a
              comparatively new processing method by which a variety of novel and complex
              materials systems may be prepared.  Research in Germany has recently
              demonstrated that PLD carried out with sub-picosecond excimer laser pulses
              allow the deposition of thin films that possess superior properties to those
              obtained using conventional chemical vapor deposition (CVD) or nanosecond
              pulsed laser deposition methods.  These properties include improved film
              smoothness, substrate adhesion, and a large degree of epitaxial orientation in
              the ablatively-deposited films.  At present, there are no laboratories in the
              United States capable of producing films using sub-psec PLD methods.  A program
              of experimental investigations, leading to the first femtosecond pulsed laser
              deposition facility in the United States, is proposed.  The proposer has the
              necessary equipment to assemble the femtosecond pulsed laser necessary to do
              the advanced deposition. The enhancing of capabilities is brought about using
              several techniques including chemical vapor deposition sputtering, activated
              reactive evaporation, molecular beam epitaxy, solution synthetic approaches,
              and PLD.         The femtosecond pulsed laser deposition proposed would have
              application to hardened drill bits, diamond blades, bearings, panels and optics
              and other components that are enhanced to withstand high heat, high friction
              and corrosion and will provide results superior to the traditional techniques. 
               This award is supported by the Small Business Innovation Research Program and
              the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
