Title       : SBIR Phase I: Highest Brightness Electroluminescent (and Cathodoluminescent)
               Oxide Display Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1997   
File        : a9761108

Award Number: 9761108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Tompa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nanopowder Enterprises Inc
	      120 Centennial Avenue
	      Piscataway, NJ  088543908    908/885-5909

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1774,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  9761108  Tompa         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              Project will investigate and generically develop a series of thin film oxide
              phosphors for green, blue and white electroluminescent and cathodoluminescent
              displays.  Recently, a variety of oxide films have shown great promise for
              emissive displays.  The proposer is uniquely positioned to capitalize upon and
              advance those results.  The proposer plans to use MOCVD to vary alloy
              composition and dopant concentrations over great ranges in order to rapidly
              produce and qualify a variety of oxide phosphors.  In Phase I the proposer will
              examine doped ZnO based phosphor films: Zn2GeO4:Mn for green emission
              (improving upon our ZnSiO:Mn results) and Mn and Ga/Ce doped ZnGa2O4 and
              Znln2O4 for green and blue emission, in Phase II the proposer will also examine
              ZnTaO and ZnNbO phosphors.  Primary issues to be addressed are improved
              efficiency, radiative lifetimes, brightness, multilayer structures to improve
              conductivity and injection coupling, and minimization of "light piping" losses.
               The proposer will work with the Display Devices Team at the Army Research
              Laboratory through an existing Cooperative Research and Development Agreement
              to fully characterize our films, especially with respect to device physics.  In
              Phase II the proposer will build upon Phase I results, investigate additional
              phosphors and multilayer phosphor structures, reduce annealing temperatures,
              determine practical operational parameters and prototype EL (and possibly CL)
              lamps.  Also, in Phase II the proposer will examine dopants for red emission so
              that ultimately full color oxide based displays could be fabricated.  Working
              the several display companies, the proposer will commercialize the results in
              displays in Phase III.       The project will develop low voltage thin film
              phosphors for electroluminescent (and cathodoluminescence) based displays which
              have strong market potential in field emitter based displays and lamps.  ***
