Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Novel Array-Based Chemical Microsensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9761605

Award Number: 9761605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anuncia Gonzalez-Martin anuncia.gonzalez-martin@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    409/693-0017

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 1472,9102,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ***  9761605  Martin    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              describes the development of a novel array-based chemical microsensor and a
              dedicated sampling system for the monitoring of chlorinated hydrocarbons in the
              subsurface.  Chlorinated hydrocarbons represent the most prevalent contaminants
              in the subsurface, threatening the quality of groundwater at aquifers. 
              Existing technology for monitoring these contaminants requires  expensive,
              labor-intensive methods of sample collection and analysis.  In the proposed
              sensor, the chemical and electrical properties of the individual elements of
              the array will be controlled so that a unique fingerprint will identify each
              pollutant.  The output signals will be integrated into a software-based neural
              network for analyte identification.  The simple design, cost, fabrication, and
              operation requirements of the proposed sensor will overcome the limitations of
              other existing array sensors.  The development of a low-cost, reliable sampling
              and monitoring system would reduce the cost associated with sampling and
              contaminant monitoring, and allow timely continuous information.  Also, it will
              provide the possibility for automated and unattended monitoring of the
              migration of contaminant plumes, as well as for monitoring contaminants that
              breach containment operations.  Phase I will (i) demonstrate the feasibility of
              the sensor design, (ii) develop a hand held prototype, and (iii) test
              contaminated groundwater.  During Phase II, a field deployable prototype
              instrument will be developed and demonstrated.    Potential Commercial
              Applications of the Research: The increasing emphasis on environmental issues,
              waste reduction, and improved efficiency for industrial processes has
              underlined the importance of the development of new chemical sensors for field
              or in-plant use.  Specifically, sensors are needed to gauge the effectiveness
              of remediation efforts, to effect waste minimization, and to detect the
              presence of toxic, hazardous, or otherwise regu lated chemicals in waste
              effluents, drinking water, and other environmental systems.  In addition, this
              proposed sensor will find wide application in the food, drink and perfume
              industries for the determination of odors and aromas, as well as in the
              clinical (e.g., breath monitor) and agronomic industries (e.g., detection of
              pesticides).  ***
