Title       : SBIR Phase I: Membrane Hydrogen Dissolution for Bioremediation of High Strength
               Nitrate Waste
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9761250

Award Number: 9761250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart M. Nemser snemser@compactmembrane.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Compact Membrane Systems
	      325 Water Street
	      Wilmington, DE  198042410    302/999-7996

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1166,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ***  9761250  Nemser    This is a Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              proposal.  Certain remediation facilities generate waste streams containing
              high concentrations of nitrite and chlorinated aliphatic hydrocarbons.  These
              can be destroyed biologically using dissolved hydrogen gas as the electron
              donor.  Hydrogen offers several economic and operational advantages over other
              organic electron donors in denitrification and in reductive dehalogenation. 
              The factor limiting hydrogen use is its low solubility, i.e. existing
              commercial gas-dissolution technologies cannot dissolve sufficient hydrogen in
              a safe, cost effective manner.  Membrane-based gas-dissolution technologies can
              potentially supply the hydrogen required for these processes safety, but
              commercially available membrane suitable for bubble-free gas-dissolution have
              poor performance, biological fouling, or both.  Compact Membrane Systems, Inc.,
              has developed a highly gas permeable perfluoropolymer coating for microporous
              membranes.  The smooth, non-porous nature of the perfluoropolymer coating is
              highly resistant to biological fouling, especially compared to microporous
              hydrophobic membranes.  This coating could remove the performance, fouling, and
              cost barriers that preclude the use of membrane-based gas dissolution
              technologies in continuous biological processes.  The proposed study will
              demonstrate the technical feasibility of using perfluoropolymer-coated membrane
              devices as the hydrogen source for biological denitrification of high
              concentrations of nitrate and nitrite.    In addition to nitrate, nitrite and
              chlorinated hydrocarbon removal, these perfluoromembranes can be used to
              transfer many other gases into or out of water.  Examples include: oxygenation
              of bioreactors for enhanced cell growth, oxygenation of aquaculture,
              oxygenation of wastewater, ozonation of drinking water for enhanced quality and
              safety.  This broad base of utilization should lead to both high probability of
              commercial success plus a large sales base to  allow for lower pricing in
              remediation markets.  ***
