Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Portable Device for Dynamic Visual Acuity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1997  
File        : a9761155

Award Number: 9761155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66628              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Kennedy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Star Mountain, Inc.
	      3601 Eisenhower Ave
	      Alexandria, VA  22304    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Star Mountain,
              Inc.(which recently bought the Systems Effectiveness Division of Essex
              Corporation) sets out to develop a portable dynamic visual acuity (DVA) test
              system.  DVA has been described as a global measure that reflects the
              efficiency of the entire oculomotor system.  When compared to measures of
              static acuity, measures of dynamic resolution for moving targets have shown
              strong relationships with stimulus and organismic variables and many applied
              tasks in which dynamic viewing is involved (e.g., driving, flying, sports,
              etc.). Unfortunately, one cannot purchase a DVA instrument 'off the shelf.`
              This effort will examine the feasibility of development and initial normative
              testing of a low-cost, portable DVA apparatus that incorporates available
              computer and laser technology for the controlled presentation of moving
              targets.  The requisite flexibility and reliability that are needed for its
              practical use in both applied and research settings are emphasized.  DVA
              changes have been demonstrated in such diverse areas as driving assessment
              among the elderly, the consequences of alcohol impairment in dynamic settings,
              and the implications of pathological eye-movement conditions associated with
              many neurological disorders.  In Phase I, the Star Mountain project team will
              also link performance on the portable device with the traditional laboratory
              devices for which current predictive validities toward real world settings are
              available.  The next phase of the research will continue development of the
              device, establish norms, and empirically demonstrate validity of the device. 
              The human factors science and technology communities the interest in and need
              for a DVA test system keen.  Thus sales to military, university and industrial
              vision laboratories for use in basic research and advanced development studies
              will be made as soon as a prototype is available (end of Phase I)  The larger
              market would take a little longer to develop and would include incorporation of
              DVA into driver's license renewal testing, selection for various occupations
              (pilot, etc.), and identification of functional loss in the elderly.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                       
