Title       : SBIR Phase I: Agent-based Simulation and Modeling Over the World Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9761360

Award Number: 9761360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Repenning   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Agentsheets, Inc.
	      6560 Gunpark Drive, Suite D
	      Boulder, CO  803013374    303/530-1773

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9145,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Thinking of a computer as an educational tool emphasizes solitary interaction
              between the learner and the computer.  Reconceptualizing the computer, however,
              as a constructionist medium--that is, a collection of tools and capabilities
              that are used to communicate--increases it potential educational value by
              allowing the development and support of communities of learners.  Agentsheets
              is an agent-based graphical spreadsheet environment that lets a wide range of
              users create SiMCity(TM) like interactive simulations, domain-oriented visual
              programming environments, games and cellular automata.  This Small Business
              Innovation Research Phase I project from Agentsheets, Inc. plans to use
              classroom-tested Agentsheets technology to create and share interactive
              simulations and virtual worlds that combine student creations, real-world
              hardware, and World Wide Web resources, thus addressing the need for enhanced
              student learning through virtual experimentation and user-driven visualization.
               The central Phase I objective is to demonstrate feasibility by developing an
              Agentsheets-based environment (the Web Behavior Exchange) that lets K-1 2
              students not only construct, but also share and link educational software
              components over the Web.  Phase I includes the implementation of a prototype
              Exchange automated server.  The end result should be a significant resource--a
              Web Behavior Exchange featuring a changing set of compelling student creations.
                The project proffers a reconceptualization leading to a new class of computer
              applications that place constructionist activities, such as creating a
              simulation, within a more social context in which computers simultaneously
              provide opportunities for learning how to communicate as well as for enabling
              communication to enhance the learning experience.  Commercial applications
              include not only simulations and modeling for education and research, but also
              for games, programming tools, and virtual reality applications in architecture,
              medicine, and data analysis.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
