Title       : The Study of Cultural Change and Continuity in the Multi- Ethnic Colony of Fort
               Ross, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1993    
File        : a9304297

Award Number: 9304297
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49638              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent G. Lightfoot lightfoo@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9304297  Lightfoot    With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kent
              Lightfoot and  his colleagues will continue their archaeological research at
              the  site of Fort Ross which is located on the northern California  coast. Fort
              Ross was founded in 1812 by the Russian-American  Company, a mercantile
              monopoly that represented Russia's interests  in the lucrative North Pacific
              fur trade. The fort served as a  staging area for sea otter and fur seal hunts
              along the coast of  California and as an agricultural community for raising
              crops and  livestock. It remained in the hands of the Russian-American company 
              until 1841 when it was disbanded and the land sold. Fort Ross was  a
              multiethnic community and included Russians as well as a sizeable  contingent
              of Alaskan Aleut Indians who were imported to hunt.  Finally, local Pomo
              Indians were also associated with the Fort and  performed a number of tasks.
              The goal of Dr. Lightfoot's research  is to understand the ethnic interactions
              which took place and to  gain insight into how acculturation occurred. To
              accomplish this,  he will continue archaeological excavation with a focus on
              the  inter-ethnic areas of the site where, documents indicate, mixed-  group
              families lived. Pomo women married both Russian and Aleut  men. Dr. Lightfoot
              will clear large areas to reveal individual  households. He will analyze
              artifacts collected to determine the  degree of cultural syncretism which took
              place. Through use of  survey, documents sources and both Pomo and Aleut
              informants, he  will also attempt to reconstruct the larger settlement pattern
              and  cultural landscape.    Culture contact and change are  dominant forces in
              today's world as  even the most remote areas are drawn into global interaction
              and  economic systems. Anthropologists wish to understand the processes  by
              which cultural accommodation and assimilation take place and the  New World,
              because of its large size and its relatively recent  contact with the Old has
              proven a fertile ground for such  investi gations. Dr. Lightfoot notes that
              researchers have tended to  work with simple models which posit direct contact
              between  Europeans and a single Native American group. In fact, the reality 
              was often  more complicated since exposure was often mediated by  other Indian
              societies. Fort Ross provides an excellent example and  through a detailed
              examination Dr. Lightfoot hopes to determine how  mediated change, with Aleuts
              as intermediaries, took place.     This research is important for several
              reasons. It will increase  our understanding of inter-ethnic interaction and
              the process of  culture change. It will shed new light on California's early 
              history and assist in the training of several graduate students.  ***
