Title       : An Investigation of the Relation Between Mio-Pliocene Sea Level Changes and
               Dolomitization Events Imprinted on a SouthPactific Carbonate Platform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9304661

Award Number: 9304661
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176157             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Aharon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   We will undertake isotopic, elemental chemistry, and                      
              petrographic studies of the massive dolomites and host reef                    
              carbonates in the Neogene section at Niue, a raised coral atoll in             
              the South Pacific.  Recent studies in the Bahamas and Barbados have            
              suggested that dolomitization may be mediated by sea water and/or              
              sea water derived fluids, may be episodic, and may be related to               
              eustatic fluctuations.  Cores recently drilled at Niue have                    
              extended the known section there from the Upper Pliocene to                    
              probably the Lower Miocene and have revealed stratigraphically and             
              temporary discrete dolomites coexisting with multiple and distinct             
              imprints of sea level falls and rises.  Niue's pre-Pleistocene                 
              tectonic history of simple subsidence, a groundwater system limited            
              to marine and meteoric waters, and a lithologic system limited to              
              clean carbonates offers minimal tectonic and chemical interference             
              to the study of how and when massive dolomites form.  The                      
              objectives of this proposed investigation are to determine with                
              higher confidence than previously achieved (1) the exact nature of             
              the fluids involved in the replacive dolomitization; (2) the degree            
              of water-rock interaction during the dolomitization; (3) the                   
              stratigraphic position of the dolomites with respect to the fossil             
              water table; (4) the timing and duration of dolomitization vis-a-              
              vis deposition, and (5) whether there is a relation between                    
              dolomitization episodes and eustatic fluctuations.  18O/16O, 13C/12C,          
              and 87Sr86Sr ratios, Ca, Mg, Sr, and trace element concentrations,             
              XRD crystal chemistry analysis, and petrographic and SEM studies of            
              the dolomites, the host carbonates, co-existing calcite-dolomite               
              pairs, and coeval dolomites and phreatic calcite cements will be               
              the chief techniques used in this study.                                       
                   The results emerging from this investigation will provide a               
              closely dated section of Neogene dolmites and host carbonates which            
              have an important bearing on the more fundamental problem of the               
              origin of synsedimentary dolomitization and implications concerning            
              the relation between periodic sea level changes and dolomite                   
              episodicity.  It will also evaluate to what degree synsedimentary              
              dolomites preserve the geochemical imprint of the fluids involved              
              in dolomitization vis-a-vis the imprint of the host carbonates and             
              therefore contribute to the question of dolomites' utility as                  
              monitors of past surficial processes.  In addition, the sea level              
              imprints documented on this mid-oceanic carbonate platform will                
              allow a detailed reconstruction of the sea level record during the             
              Mio-Pliocene time, thus providing additional constraints to the                
              Vail-Haq sea level record obtained rom onlap/offlap imprints on                
              continental margins.
