Title       : Predicting the Crystalization of A-, B-, and Z-DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1995       
File        : a9304467

Award Number: 9304467
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pui Shing Ho hops@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9304467  Ho  The first and most critical step in any crystallographic
              experiment  is to obtain a single crystal that diffracts x-rays.  The 
              experiments in this proposal attempts to systematically develop  rules for
              growing crystals of A-, B-, and Z-DNA for structural  studies.  There are two
              primary factors that affect the growth  pattern and the ultimate structure of
              an oligonucleotide in a  single crystal: 1) the conformational of the DNA and
              2) the forces  holding the molecules in the symmetric arrangement of the
              crystal  (i.e. the crystal packing forces).  Dr. Ho has previously show that 
              the conformation of the DNA in a crystal is dependent on its  conformation in
              the crystallization solutions.  This, in turn, is  affected by the solution
              conditions for crystallization and the  sequence of the DNA being crystallized.
               For Z-DNA, Dr. Ho had  previously predicted crystallization conditions by
              estimating the  propensity of a particular sequence to form Z-DNA.  The
              stability  of Z-DNA is calculated as the difference in the hydration free 
              energy for a given sequence in the B- versus Z-conformations.  Dr.  Ho proposes
              to continue this work by extending the calculations to  include empirical
              estimates of Z-DNA stability for sequences that  have steric inhibitions to
              Z-DNA formation.  Furthermore, this same  approach can be used to predict the
              conditions for crystallizing  the A- form of DNA.  To crystallize B-DNA,
              attention will be paid  to specific sequence requirements that stabilizes only
              this right-  handed conformation.  In addition, the problem of crystal packing 
              forces, how they affect crystallization and how they affect the  structure of
              an oligonucleotide once in the crystal will be  addressed.  Experiments will be
              carried out to determine the  enthalpic versus the entropic contributions to
              these energies, and  to compare steric versus hydrophobic effects on the
              intermolecular  interactions within the crystal lattice.  %%%  The structure of
              the DNA duplex was first determined forty y ears  ago through x-ray diffraction
              studies on DNA fibers.  This general  structure launched a new era in the
              biological sciences by defining  the underlying molecular principles of genetic
              processes in the  cell.  Since that time, the structure of DNA has been shown
              to be  even more variable than originally suspected, taking new bends and 
              twists that may act as additional signals for controlling such  basic cellular
              functions as transcription and replication.  Again  x-ray diffraction has
              played a major role in the discovery of these  new and different structures. 
              These recent studies, however,  utilize single crystal of short DNA fragments
              (oligonucleotides),  which give us structures of specific DNA sequences at the
              atomic  level.  The primary hurdle to these studies has been the ability to 
              grow single crystals that are suitable for structure  determinations.  This
              process is generally treated more as an art  rather than as a quantitative
              science.  This is surprising since  crystallography is perceived as a very
              exacting science.  Dr. Ho  proposes studies that attempt to define the
              intrinsic and extrinsic  conditions required to crystallize DNA sequences in
              the various  conformations.  This includes the design of the sequence for 
              crystallization, and the types and amount of salts and alcohols  that need to
              be added to these sequences to help stabilize a  specific DNA conformation.
