Title       : Charaterization of L-myc Expression and analysis of the Homozygous Null L-myc
               Phenotype
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9304602

Award Number: 9304602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimi S. Hatton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9304602  Hatton    Myc family genes are transcription factors that are likely to
               regulate genes important in growth control and differentiation.   Recently, I
              have been successful in generating a germline null L-  myc mutant mouse derived
              from gene targeting and embryonic stem  cell methodology.  The working
              hypothesis is that since myc-family  gene expression changes at key development
              transitions in cultured  cells and in the organism, absent L-myc expression
              will lead to the  aberrant expression of phenotypic markers of differentiation.
               In  this proposal, questions concerning the role of L-myc in  differentiation
              and growth control are addressed in vitro using  cell culture systems and
              during development in vivo using  homozygous null L-myc mutant embryonic stem
              cell lines and a null  L-myc mouse mutant.  Changes in L-myc expression at key 
              developmental transitions would lead to altered morphology in the  developing
              or adult mouse, or to changes in the expression of genes  regulated by L-myc. 
              The phenotype of the null L-myc mutant mouse  will be characterized. 
              Experiments will be performed to test the  hypothesis that L-myc is an
              essential gene during embryonic  development.  Heterozygous null L-myc mice
              will be mated to each  other and the offspring will be genotyped.  If no
              homozygous null  L-myc mutant mice are born, embryos will be harvested at
              different  gestational stages and be prepared for histological examination.  
              In this specific aim, the goal is to identify changes in morphology  in
              developing tissues and organ systems by histological analysis.   In order to
              characterize further the expression pattern of the c-,  N- and L-myc genes in
              early embryonic development, the expression  of L-myc will be examined in the
              earliest differentiation event in  the mouse embryo:  the formation of
              trophectoderm and inner cell  mass.  Blastocyst and later developmental stages
              will also be  examined by in situ hybridization.  The earliest time in 
              development at which myc genes are expressed i n a cell type  specific manner
              will be identified.  Another important outcome will  be the potential
              correlation of the phenotype with the expression  pattern of L-myc.  The goal
              of this section is to identify and  examine changes in L-myc expression in
              developing tissues in order  to identify changes in the expression of gene
              products in the  absence of L-myc expression in the null mutant.  The 
              characterization of L-myc gene expression and phenotype of a null  L-myc mouse
              will lead to a significant advancement in our  understanding of myc gene
              biology.  ***
