Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Analysis of Wave Propagation in the
               Presence of Multiple Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1993    
File        : a9304406

Award Number: 9304406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Hagstrom hagstrom@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9304406  Hagstrom       The investigator conducts research on the numerical 
              simulation of nonlinear wave propagation in the presence of  multiple temporal
              and spatial scales.  The project addresses both  the development, analysis, and
              implementation of novel numerical  methodologies, and their application to
              challenging problems in  fluid dynamics.  Multiple scales problems are
              computationally  difficult because the uniform resolution of the smallest
              scales  present would lead to a prohibitively large number of degrees of 
              freedom in the approximate solution.  They are also a  common feature of
              scientifically and technologically important  fluid flow phenomena. 
              Mathematically, they are generally  associated with singular perturbations of
              the governing  equations, and can be analyzed by asymptotic techniques.  The 
              investigator uses asymptotic analysis in a number of ways to  guide and
              complement the numerical computations.  Particular  problems to be studied in
              detail include the generation and  interaction of sound waves with
              concentrations of vorticity in  slightly compressible flows, the effects of
              complex reaction and  diffusion mechanisms on flame dynamics, and nonlinear
              waves in  incompressible fluids in cylindrical geometries.  Slightly 
              compressible flows have two distinct time scales, the fast scale  being
              associated with the propagation of sound waves and the slow  with
              incompressible flow effects.  Understanding the interaction  between the
              dynamics on these disparate scales is of importance,  for example, in
              aeroacoustics.  Numerical problems considered  include the construction of
              accurate radiation boundary  conditions at artificial boundaries for long time
              computations  and the development of efficient time-stepping procedures.  For 
              the combustion problems, the investigator experiments with  various high order
              difference methods for solving the zero Mach  number reacting flow equations. 
              Using adaptive methods to  capture the thin flame front, he undertakes a
              detailed study of   various models for the chemical kinetics and transport 
              coefficients.  For the simulation of cylindrical flows, he has  developed
              efficient Chebyshev pseudospectral methods for  differential operators in
              cylindrical and helical coordinates  with coordinate mappings to resolve
              internal critical layers for  high Reynolds numbers.  One application will be
              to the  long-standing problem of transition to turbulence in pipes.       The
              science of wave propagation has a rich history  and provides a unified approach
              to the analysis of diverse  physical phenomena.  Advanced numerical methods, in
              concert with  modern computing technology, are a powerful tool for the 
              comprehensive study of the dynamics of nonlinear waves.  The  computational
              approach runs into difficulties, however, when  disparate scales are present. 
              These can be time scales, where  different waves propagate at very different
              speeds, or spatial  scales, where certain physical quantities vary greatly in 
              relatively thin layers.  To fully resolve the finest scales  throughout the
              physical domain is far too taxing for even the  most powerful computers. 
              Therefore, one must develop specialized  methods, based on a careful
              mathematical analysis of the solution  structure.  The specific problems
              considered here display both  multiple time scales (sound wave - vortex
              interactions) and thin  layers (reaction zones in flames).  They are
              fundamental problems  from the physical point of view, and also provide a
              testbed for  new computational techniques.  ***
