Title       : Design of Efficient Algorithms for Multicommodity Flow and Related Combinatorial
               Optimization Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9304971

Award Number: 9304971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205159             (Estimated)
Investigator: Serge A. Plotkin plotkin@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                 The project studies combinatorial optimization, with emphasis  on problems
              related to commodity flow and minimum-ratio cuts.  Deeper  understanding of the
              combinatorial structure of these problems will result in  improved algorithms
              for a variety of applications, including graph bisection,  small area VLSI
              layout, scheduling, and routing.  All of the currently known  algorithms for
              finding exact solutions to multicommodity flow are very slow.  These algorithms
              are based on general linear programming (LP) techniques and do  not take
              advantage of the underlying combinatorial structure of the problem.  Applying
              general LP techniques to solving such problems leads to even slower 
              algorithms.  The main goal of this project is to find  alternative approaches
              to solving multicommodity flow and related   problems.  The goal is to improve
              both sequential and parallel complexity.    In many applications, solving a
              multicommodity flow is only a first step in  approximately solving an
              NP-complete problem; in the majority of such cases  there is no need to have an
              exact solution of the multicommodity flow problem.  One of the focuses of the
              project is to develop the design of   efficient approximation algorithms.     
              Another natural application of the multicommodity flow methods is  in the area
              of routing in distributed communication networks.  For example,  problems
              related to managing available bandwidth can be stated as variants of 
              multicommodity flow, where the information rate corresponds to flow and the 
              bandwidth of every link corresponds to its capacity.  The distributed,  
              real-time nature of communication networks presents several   challenging
              obstacles that do not exist in an off-line,   sequential setting.  Among them
              is the fact that not  all the information is known in advance, which means that
              the algorithms have to  work on-line.  Second, there is usually no `manager`
              node that has a complete  information about the network and that makes all the
              decisions.  Therefore, the  algorithms should work with partial information.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
