Title       : Characterization of Clathrin-Coated Vesicles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9304758

Award Number: 9304758
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard Beevers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,9178,9232,BIOT,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                It has been demonstrated that cotyledons from developing peas                
              provide a rich source of clathrin coated vesicles (ccvs).  It                  
              appears that, in similarity to mammalian ccvs, those from plants               
              are composed of a clathrin cage consisting of heavy and light                  
              chains, adaptors, and a membrane vesicle component containing                  
              receptors to which cargo proteins are complexed.  The ccvs isolated            
              from cotyledons are primarily of trans-Golgi origin, and their                 
              adaptors are expected to differ from those of the better                       
              characterized mammalian ccvs which are principally of plasma                   
              membrane origin.  It is planned to extend on the preliminary                   
              findings which have shown a different peptide composition of the               
              adaptor fraction from plant ccvs.  A potential receptor protein                
              which interacts with the N-terminal targeting peptide of vacuolar              
              proteins has been identified.  This receptor will be characterized             
              and its role in selecting protein body proteins, along with its                
              interaction with ccv components, will be investigated.  The                    
              information accumulated will provide crucial information to the                
              understanding of vesicular transport of proteins in plants and will            
              provide a basis for extended comparative studies with animal and               
              other systems.                                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              A key feature of all eukaryotic cells is that they are physically              
              compartmentalized.  That is, cytoplasm is not a uniform mixture of             
              cellular components, but rather it is highly organized in such a               
              way that specific functions, and the components that carry out                 
              those functions, are localized in discrete regions of the cell, or             
              even external to the cell (e.g., secreted materials, cell walls,               
              etc.).  Some of these functionally distinct compartments are                   
              bounded by membranes.  It follows that there must be mechanisms to             
              ensure that specific proteins get to their particular subcellular              
              locations.  The coated vesicle system is part of this mechanism.               
              Coated vesicles are shuttle vesicles, or transporters, of proteins             
              contained within them.  In mammalian systems, the role of coated               
              vesicles in endocytosis (the transport of external proteins into               
              the cell) and in intracellular movement of newly synthesized                   
              proteins from the Golgi apparatus to pre-lysosomal or pre-secretory            
              compartments is well-studied.   In plants, relatively little is                
              known about coated vesicle function or structure, and some of the              
              available information is the subject of controversy in the field.              
              Coated vesicles are very likely to play significant roles in the               
              transport of specific proteins to the vacuole, to seed storage                 
              bodies, and to the growing cell wall.  As such, a detailed                     
              understanding of their structure and function will be critical to              
              agricultural biotechnology.  This project promises to yield solid,             
              reliable information about a very important plant biology subject.
