Title       : US-Bulgaria Cooperative Research on Computer Simulations of Polydisperse Polymer
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1994    
File        : a9304562

Award Number: 9304562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18128              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Landau   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 5958,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal, "US-Bulgaria Cooperative Research                               
              on Computer Simulations of Polydisperse Polymer                                
              Systems," will be carried out by Dr. David P.                                  
              Landau, University of Georgia and Dr. Andrey I.                                
              Milchev, University of Sofia.  It envisages an                                 
              ambitious program of research, designed to shed                                
              light on the complex cooperative behavior of a                                 
              polydisperse system of semiflexible polymer                                    
              chains in the presence of an adsorbing surface.                                
              Since the thermodynamic properties of such a                                   
              system are so far largely unknown, the                                         
              researchers believe that in a collaboration of                                 
              three years they can produce a sufficient number                               
              of results in order to get a complete picture of                               
              the phenomena in question.  The program of                                     
              research should focus on:  (1) Determination of                                
              the order of the disorientation phase transition                               
              in 2D; (2) Establishment of a total phase diagram                              
              in the multiparameter space of the energy                                      
              interactions, temperature and density; (3)                                     
              Investigation of adsorption isotherms and the                                  
              adsorption-description phase transition for                                    
              polydisperse systems with different average chain                              
              length and stiffness; (4) Study of the density                                 
              profile and the structure of the polymer solution                              
              as a function of the distance from the adsorbing                               
              surface; (5) Investigation of the impact of                                    
              impurities on the thermodynamic and structural                                 
              properties of the system.                                                      
                                                                                             
              The problem is of major practical importance                                   
              since it has broad implications in lubrication,                                
              adhesion, surface protection, etc. technology.                                 
              Polymers, adsorbed at the surface of colloid                                   
              particles, lead to (steric) stabilization of the                               
              colloid suspension which is important for dyes                                 
              production.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research in materials theory fulfills the                                 
              program objective of advancing science by                                      
              enabling leading experts in the United States and                              
              Bulgaria to combine complementary talents and                                  
              pool research resources in areas of strong mutual                              
              interest and competence.
