Title       : A Molecular-Genetic Study of Aspartate Aminotransferase Genes/Isoenzymes in
               Arabidopsis Thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9304913

Award Number: 9304913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gloria M. Coruzzi gloria.coruzzi@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A combined molecular-genetic approach is being used to study the               
              genes encoding the multiple isoenzymes of aspartate                            
              aminotransferase (AspAT), a key enzyme in plant nitrogen                       
              metabolism.  AspAT genes and AspAT deficient mutants of Arabidopsis            
              thaliana are being characterized.  The objectives are to determine             
              the function that each AspAT isoenzyme serves in metabolism, and to            
              determine whether the multiple AspAT isoenzymes perform distinct or            
              overlapping roles using molecular biology and genetics.  The                   
              molecular techniques used will define the expression pattern of                
              each individual AspAT gene with regard to cell-type, development,              
              and light.  These molecular analyses combined with the ability to              
              analyze the effects of a null mutation in a particular isoenzyme.              
              Because AspAT is involved in mobilizing nitrogen within a plant,               
              these findings have significance for improving plant nitrogen use.             
              Four distinct AspAT cDNAs have been isolated.  Characterization of             
              full length cDNA clones will enable the determination of the                   
              primary structure of the encoded AspAT polypeptide and in vitro                
              organellar uptake studies will establish which cDNAs encode                    
              chloroplast, mitochondrial, and cytosolic forms of AspAT.  The                 
              expression pattern of each AspAT gene will be monitored and the                
              results used to develop a model concerning the function of the                 
              encoded isoenzyme.  Promoter elements for each AspAT gene will be              
              fused to a reporter gene (GUS) and introduced into transgenic                  
              plants.  Histochemical analysis for GUS activity will establish the            
              cell-type in which each AspAT gene is expressed.  This information             
              will provide insight into the function of each gene.                           
              The ultimate test of the physiological function of each AspAT                  
              isoenzyme in vivo will be determined by monitoring the growth                  
              phenotype of plants which are specifically defective in one or more            
              of the forms of AspAT.  To date, three putative AspAT mutants have             
              been identified out of 750 M2 plants screened.  Genetic crosses                
              between mutants will establish the number of different loci                    
              affected.  Structural mutants will be identified by RFLP using the             
              four cloned AspAT genes.  Functional complementation of the AspAT              
              mutants with the cloned AspAT genes will delimit the lesion to a               
              particular AspAT gene.                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Aspartate amino transferase is a key enzyme in higher plants which             
              functions to shuttle carbon and nitrogen skeletons between                     
              organelles and between cells.  The biochemistry of AspAT has been              
              confused by the presence of multiple isoenzymes.  We have taken a              
              molecular-genetic approach to clone the four distinct genes                    
              encoding AspAT in a plant (arabidopsis thaliana).  In addition, we             
              have developed a technique to identify mutant plants which are                 
              specifically defective in one of the four major AspAT isoenzymes.              
              The cloned AspAT genes will be used to study the structure,                    
              function, and regulation of each unique form of AspAT in plants.               
              The mutants specifically defective in a particular AspAT isoenzyme             
              will be evaluated with regard to the affected gene, the growth                 
              phenotype, and metabolite profile to determine the role that each              
              AspAT enzyme plays in plant nitrogen metabolism.  These experiments            
              will define the function of each AspAT enzyme, the role of                     
              aspartate biosynthesis in plant growth, and also serve as a model              
              for how molecular-genetics can be used to understand fundamental               
              questions concerning plant metabolism.
