Title       : Developmental and Environmental Regulation of the Nopaline Synthases Promoter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1995      
File        : a9304867

Award Number: 9304867
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald E. Edwards edwardsg@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gynheung An  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9119,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Our long term goals are to understand the regulatory mechanisms of             
              gene expression and the molecular basis of differentiation in                  
              plants using the nopaline synthase (nos) promoter as a model                   
              system.  We will study the nos promoter to further understand the              
              regulatory mechanisms controlling activation of the promoter in                
              response to a variety of developmental and environmental signals.              
              We have shown that the nos upstream regulatory region consists of              
              two hexamer motifs and eight nucleotide spacer sequence and that               
              this nos element is essential for promoter activity  in various                
              cells and for inducibility by wounding auxin, salicylic acid and               
              methyljasmonate.  During this grant period, we plan to further                 
              characterize the structure and role of the spacer sequence of the              
              nos element by the synthetic oligonucleotide mutagenesis and the               
              random site selection method which is based on the selection of                
              specific protein binding sites from a pool of randomized DNA                   
              sequences.  The sequences immediately upstream or downstream of the            
              hexamer motif-containing region will also be studied by deletion               
              analysis.  Interaction between the hexamer motif-containing region             
              and transcription factor will be investigated.  We have isolated               
              two cDNA and four genomic clones transcription factors which                   
              specifically interact with the hexamer motif-containing elements.              
              Using gene specific probes of these clones, we will conduct                    
              Northern blot analysis and in situ hybridization experiments to                
              study whether induction of the nos promoter by wounding or the                 
              chemical stimuli occurs by increasing the amount of a specific                 
              transcription factor.  Preliminary data induction of the nos                   
              promoter is mediated at least in part by the level of the                      
              transcription factor.  It will be necessary to investigate whether             
              the increase is occurring at the transcriptional of post-                      
              transcription level.  We also plan to study the promoter regions of            
              the bZIP transcription factor genes by deletion and site specific              
              mutation analyses.                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The nos gene originated from Agrobacterium is strongly expressed in            
              most plant cells and regulation of this promoter is controlled by              
              plant transcriptional factors which are important for a variety of             
              developmental and environmental signals.  We proposed to study                 
              molecular mechanisms controlling the nos promoter by these factors.            
              The information obtained from this study will be useful for                    
              understanding the structure and function of complex regulatory                 
              mechanisms involved in plant gene expression.
