Title       : Dissertation Research: Resettlement and Adjustment of Southeast Asian Refugees
               in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1993    
File        : a9304124

Award Number: 9304124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin E. McHugh kmchugh@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9304124  McHugh       Between 1975 and 1989, over 750,000 Southeast Asian
              refugees  were resettled in the United States through a series of scatter 
              policies designed to disperse the refugees throughout the nation.  The goal was
              to inhibit the development of enclaves in order to  bring about rapid
              assimilation into host communities.  Family  reunification and secondary
              migration led to a concentration of  Southeast Asians in nine states, however. 
              Communities which  responded to the initial call for sponsors developed large 
              enclaves, while other areas experienced a net out migration of  refugees to
              other locations.  Still other regions saw development  of large refugee
              communities through secondary migration.  This  research project will examine
              the evolution of the national  geography of the various Southeast Asian refugee
              groups since  1975 and determine the role of voluntary agencies in defining 
              settlement patterns through sponsor recruitment practices.  Primary data from
              the office of refugee resettlement will be  analyzed to trace the development
              of spatial enclaves over time  and to isolate the process by which enclaves
              came into being.  Community-based organizations will be surveyed in four
              central  California cities in order to determine their role in the 
              differential adjustment experiences of refugees who have settled  or resettled
              in those communities.       Ethnic enclaves exist, but how, where, and why they
              form are  complex and incompletely understood processes.  This study  captures
              the settlement and adjustment process of immigrants and  first-born generations
              in locations where there were no pre-  exiting enclaves.  Analysis of the roles
              of active sponsors,  community-based organizations, and community response will
               contribute to an understanding of ethnic enclave formation and  development. 
              At the national level, the study will show the  influence of voluntary
              organizations in delimiting the geography  of sponsorship and primary
              resettlement and the effects of  secondary mi gration in channeling refugees to
              emerging enclaves.  At a local level, the research examines community
              organizations  as facilitators of cultural exchange between various Southeast 
              Asian groups and host communities.  In addition to contributing  to the
              theoretical literature on immigration, acculturation, and  enclave formation,
              results of this research will aid in the  development of informed immigration
              and refugee policy in the  United States.  ***
