Title       : Isolation and Characterization of Primitive Cytokines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9304309

Award Number: 9304309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail S. Habicht   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,9118,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9304309  Habicht    The cytokines interleukin 1 (IL-1), tumor necrosis factor
              (TNF),  and interleukin 6 (IL-6) are major immunoregulatory molecules, 
              produced by macrophages, that act as molecular orchestrators of  host defense
              mechanisms against a variety of environmental insults.   The immunological
              effects of these cytokines are many.  Equally  important are their effects as
              mediators of nonspecific host  defense mechanisms.  The exquisite action of
              cytokines in fine  tuning and controlling the inflammatory/immune response led
              to the  hypothesis that these molecules have been highly conserved through 
              evolution.  It was reasoned that IL-1 or a similar ancestral  cytokine is
              likely to be present in the invertebrates for several  reasons.  First, the
              molecular conservation of IL-1 and its host  defense functions have been
              preserved in the vertebrates.  Second,  macrophages which produce IL-1 are
              present throughout the animal  kingdom.  Echinoderms and urochordates belong to
              the deuterostomes  as do the vertebrates, while all the other invertebrates are
               members of the protostomes.  Results from this laboratory have  demonstrated
              the presence of cytokines in both major groups of  invertebrates.  The goals of
              this research are to determine the  amino acid and DNA sequences of
              invertebrate IL-1 and TNF and  compare them with those of the vertebrates.  The
              functions of these  mediators in the invertebrates will be characterized using
              starfish  systems in vivo and in vitro.  %%%  The goal of this research is to
              characterize, in certain key  invertebrate animals, chemical regulators
              (cytokines) of their  immune-like defense mechanisms.  Study of these
              invertebrate  immune-like defense mechanisms will contribute to understanding
              of  how a wide range of organisms respond to environmental challenges.   In
              addition, investigation of the cytokines of more primitive  organisms may help
              us decipher the complex cellular and humoral  interactions of the immune
              systems of higher animals.  ***
