Title       : Transcription of a U6 Small Nuclear RNA Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1996  
File        : a9304799

Award Number: 9304799
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary R. Kunkel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9178,9179,9183,BIOT,UNKN,
Abstract    :
              9304799  Kunkel       Experiments in this proposal are designed to explore the 
              mechanism of activation of human small RNA gene promoters.  The  primary focus
              of these experiments is on the human U6 gene.  The  transcription of vertebrate
              U6 genes is carried out by RNA  polymerase III but the promoter is constructed
              of a number of DNA  elements used in pol II genes.  Furthermore, the U6
              transcription  complex is composed, in part, of factors that are shared between
               pol II and pol III promoters.  For example, the distal region of  the human U6
              gene (more than 150 bp upstream of the transcriptional  start site) contains a
              consensus octamer motif found in the same  location as in the pol
              II-transcribed snRNA genes (e.g., U1 and U2  genes), and this element is bound
              by purified Oct-1 factor in  vitro.  Therefore, the U6 distal region is similar
              to the (pol  II)snRNA enhancer that activates transcription by one to two
              orders  of magnitude.  The objectives of experiments proposed in this 
              application are:  1) to map the extent of functional elements in  the human U6
              gene distal control region.  Mutant templates will be  prepared by
              site-directed techniques, and analyzed in vitro by gel  mobility shift and
              DNase I footprinting assays and in vivo by  transient expression in transfected
              human cells; 2) to isolate a  transcription factor that binds to the U6 distal
              region whose  presence has been detected already and is distinct from Oct-1 
              protein (Nonoct factor); 3) to characterize the step(s) in the U6 
              transcription initiation pathway that are controlled by activator  proteins. 
              Purified Oct-1 and Nonoct factors will be used for in  vitro transcription
              experiments in which transcription initiation  complexes are distinguished
              using various concentrations of  Sarkosyl or after rapid separation while
              attached to  bead-immobilized DNA templates.  The relative numbers of
              functional  transcription complexes, kinetics of complex formation and possible
               differential effects on reinitiation by the activator  proteins will  be
              determined; and 4) to determine whether Oct-1 protein and Nonoct  factor
              interact or act independently to activate U6 gene  transcription.  The spacing
              between the Nonoct and octamer protein  binding sites will be altered
              systematically, and the effect on  transcriptional activation determined. 
              Furthermore, using a DNase  I footprinting assay, binding of these two factors
              to DNA will be  investigated to determine whether cooperativity exists.  %%% 
              This research is designed to elucidate how an important class of  genes are
              expressed at a high level in vertebrate cells.  This  class of genes produces
              the small nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) that are  essential for fundamental pathways of
              gene expression in all higher  cells.  The studies will dissect the DNA
              sequences for one gene in  this class (human U6 snRNA gene) that direct rapid
              RNA synthesis.   Then the investigators will identify important proteins that
              bind  to these DNA sequences and determine how these proteins stimulate 
              efficient production of U6 snRNA.  These studies will provide  important
              information on basic mechanisms that direct how specific  genes are highly
              expressed.  ***
