Title       : Carbonic Anhydrase and the Evolution of Cellular CO2 Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9304844

Award Number: 9304844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168737             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond P. Henry henryrp@mail.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9304844  Henry    The enzyme carbonic anhydrase (CA), which catalyses the 
              reversible hydration/dehydration of CO2 has been known for many  years to
              function in the systemic transport and excretion of CO2.  Recent work, however,
              has shown that the limiting step in   CO2  transport occurs at the cellular
              level (i.e., diffusion across  individual membranes).  CA, localized on the
              "upstream" side of  the membrane, facilitates CO2 transport via the catalyzed 
              dehydration of HCO3-, maintaining a high PCO2 in the boundary  layer and thus
              driving CO2 diffusion across the membrane.  Therefore, Ca within metabolically
              active tissue (i.e., muscle)  is important for the initial step of CO2
              transport form the  intracellular compartment to the blood.  While this process
              has  been studied in mammalian systems, there is a complete void of 
              information for evolutionarily more primitive organisms.  This is  a major gap
              in our understanding of both the evolution of CO2  transport and the evolution
              of CA function, because metabolically  active, contractile tissue (muscle)
              evolved long before the  development of complex respiratory systems.  It is
              quite  plausible, therefore, for Ca to have had its evolutionary origins  in
              metabolically active tissue for the purpose of cellular CO2  elimination.  This
              hypothesis will be tested in a number of  invertebrate species using a
              combination of biochemical,  physiological, pharmacological, and histochemical
              techniques.  If  widespread support for this idea is found among the 
              invertebrates, it will form the basis for a potentially unifying  hypothesis
              for the origin of cellular CA function and the near  universal distribution of
              the enzyme in metabolically active  tissues.  These experiments will also form
              the database upon  which future experiments on even more primitive organisms
              will be  designed and performed.  ***
