Title       : Molecular Evolution of Tissue-Specific Gene Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1995      
File        : a9304793

Award Number: 9304793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. McCarrey johnmc@darwin.sfbr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Fdn for Biomed
	      P.O.Box 760549
	      San Antonio, TX  78245    210/258-9544

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9304793  McCarrey       The goal of the proposed studies is to understand how a 
              mammalian gene evolves a tissue-specific mode of regulation.  The  mammalian
              phosphoglycerate kinase (Pgk) gene system provides an  ideal system for such
              studies, since we have now amassed sufficient  information about the
              expression, regulation, and evolution of  these genes to formulate testable
              hypotheses about how different  modes of transcriptional regulation have
              evolved in different  members of this particular gene family.  The autosomal
              Pgk-2 gene  evolved as a duplication of the X-linked Pgk-1 gene by 
              retroposition or gene processing during mammalian evolution, prior  to the
              divergence of metatherians (marsupials) and eutherians  (placental mammals)
              about 120-150 million years ago.  In eutherian  mammals, the Pgk-1 gene is
              expressed ubiquitously, while expression  of the Pgk-2 gene is tissue-specific,
              occurring only in  spermatogenic cells.  The tissue-specificity of Pgk-2
              expression  apparently evolved after its origin, since ubiquitous expression of
               Pgk-2 can still be observed in certain marsupial species.  We  believe the
              evolution of tissue-specific expression of the Pgk-2  gene in eutherian mammals
              has resulted from a combination of  changes leading to: 1) the enhancement of
              Pgk-2 expression in  spermatogenic cells, and 2) the repression of Pgk-2
              expression in  somatic cells.  Our recent studies have revealed several 
              characteristics of transcriptional regulation that distinguish the 
              specifically expressed Pgk-2 gene from the ubiquitously expressed  Pgk-1 gene
              in the mouse and human, including the absence or  presence of a CpG island in
              the promoter region, single or multiple  transcription start sites,
              tissue-specific or ubiquitous protein-  DNA interactions, and differential or
              constitutive DNA  hypomethylation in expressing tissues, respectively.  We
              believe  these differences represent examples of molecular changes that have 
              lead to the evolution of tissue-specific regulation of the Pgk-2  gene  in
              eutherians.  Thus in this application, we propose to  examine these same
              characteristics in metatherian and eutherian  species that show intermediate
              degrees of tissue-specificity of  Pgk-2 expression to better understand the
              evolution of these  characteristics and to distinguish those associated
              primarily with  enhancement of Pgk-2 expression in spermatogenic cells from
              those  associated with repression of Pgk-2 expression in somatic cells.  %%% 
              Organic evolution occurs by various genetic mechanisms, including  the
              appearance or loss of entire genes, and changes in the  structure of the
              proteins encoded by specific genes.  However  changes in another mechanism,
              gene regulation, which determines  whether or not, or when or where (ie- in
              what organs or tissues) a  particular gene is used (or expressed) also play a
              major role in  the evolutionary process, but this area has received
              inordinantly  little attention to date.  This lack of attention has occurred 
              primarily because appropriate hypotheses and informative model  systems in
              which to test those hypotheses have not been readily  available.  The mammalian
              phosphoglycerate kinase (Pgk) gene system  now provides an ideal system for
              such studies, because we have  learned enough about it that we can develop and
              test appropriate  hypotheses.  The mammalian Pgk gene system includes two
              functional  genes, Pgk-1 and Pgk-2, each of which encodes a similar metabolic 
              enzyme called phosphoglycerate kinase.  The Pgk-1 gene is used  ubiquitously in
              almost every part of the body, however the Pgk-2  gene is used in only one type
              of cell, the spermatogenic cells that  give rise to sperm in the male.  We know
              that the Pgk-2 gene  evolved as a duplicate copy of the Pgk-1 gene early in
              mammalian  evolution, and we have evidence that when it first evolved it was 
              used in all parts of the body just like the Pgk-1 gene.  Thus we  believe that
              it was not until after it originally appeared as a  duplication of the Pgk-1
              gene that the Pgk-2 gene evolved its  tis sue-specific mode of regulation such
              that it is only used in one  type of cell.  What is more, we believe that by
              studying the right  species of mammals, we can recapitulate how this evolution
              of  tissue-specific expression occurred.  Thus we know that in some  species of
              marsupials that exist today, the Pgk-2 gene is still  expressed in all parts of
              the body, while in other marsupial  species the Pgk-2 gene is expressed in
              several, but not all, parts  of the body.  It is only in placental mammals that
              expression of  the Pgk-2 gene is strictly limited to the spermatogenic cells. 
              We  have already carried out several experiments at the molecular level  to
              determine what mechanisms are involved in the ubiquitous  expression of the
              Pgk-1 gene and the tissue-specific expression of  the Pgk-2 gene in the mouse
              and the human.  Thus in this project,  we plan to investigate the status of
              these same molecular  mechanisms in certain marsupial species that show
              intermediate  degrees of tissue-specificity of Pgk-2 expression.  In this way,
              we  hope to learn more about which molecular mechanisms were directly  involved
              in the transition from ubiquitous to tissue-specific  expression of the Pgk-2
              gene, and also to learn more about how  these mechanisms changed during
              mammalian evolution.  ***
