Title       : The Role of the Calcium Gradient in Pollen Tube Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1995      
File        : a9304953

Award Number: 9304953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Hepler hepler@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9304953  Hepler    Pollen tube elongation delivers the male gametes to the egg 
              apparatus and is thus essential for sexual reproduction in plants.   Within
              this highly polarized cell, vesicles are produced throughout  and transported
              by cytoplasmic streaming to the apical region.  By  a process that is not well
              understood, these vesicles fuse  specifically at the tip, providing new wall
              material that supports  unidirectional elongation.  Recent work has shown that
              a growing  pollen tube of Llium has a sharply defined gradient in free calcium 
              focused at the extreme apex of the tube.  The further observation  that
              dissipation of this calcium gradient leads to cessation of  growth, and that
              reinitiation of growth is accompanied by its  reformation provide evidence that
              the gradient is essential for tip  growth.  The purpose of this research is to
              analyze the  relationship between the calcium gradient and tip extension in 
              detail.  Using indicator dyes that have been microinjected into  pollen tubes
              the spatial profile of the calcium gradient will be  examined in living cells
              and directly correlated with the rate of  tube elongation.  Cells will then be
              experimentally treated with a  variety of agents including calcium buffers,
              channel agonists,  antagonists, osmotic modulators, and growth inhibitors to
              allow a  careful exploration of the relationship between the position and 
              magnitude of the calcium gradient with the modulated growth  behavior, and with
              the underlying cell structure and patterns of  cytoplasmic streaming.  The
              position and activity of calmodulin  will also be studied in living cells using
              confocal laser scanning  microscopy and fluorescence anisotropy.  Finally, the
              relationship  between the calcium gradient and the actin cytoskeleton will be 
              examined in living pollen tubes using confocal microscopic analysis  of cells
              that have been microinjected with fluorescent actin  monomer.  By correlating
              the calcium gradient with these several  factors, a new and greater
              understanding of  the mechanism of pollen  tube elongation should result.  %%% 
              In higher plants, the male reproductive cells (gametes) are carried  in pollen
              grains.  For fertilization to take place, the pollen must  deliver the male
              gametes to the egg apparatus within a flower by  producing a tube, along which
              the male gametes move toward the egg.   The pollen tube is the fastest growing
              of all plant cells.  As it  grows, it becomes several thousand times longer
              than it is wide.   Because of its importance to plant reproduction and its
              dramatic  growth characteristics, the mechanisms regulating pollen tube are 
              important topics of research.  The goal of this project is to  understand the
              role of calcium ions in pollen tube growth.   Sophisticated biophysical and
              structural techniques will be used to  study the gradient of internal calcium
              along a growing pollen tube.   The results should determine whether the calcium
              gradient plays a  role in the organization and movement of the sub-cellular 
              structures involved in pollen tube growth.  ***
