Title       : Regulation of Phosphatidylinositol 4-Kinase Activity: A Plant Perspective of
               Signal Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9304556

Award Number: 9304556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy F. Boss wendy_boss@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9304556  Boss    The polyphosphorylated inositol phospholipids,
              phosphatidylinositol  monophosphate (PIP) are present in the plasma membranes
              of higher  plant cells; however, their functions in signal transduction are 
              not well understood.  PIP and PIP2 levels are relatively low in  higher plants.
               This laboratory has isolated a 49 kDa protein from  carrot cells that
              activates phosphatidylinositol (PI) 4-kinase, the  enzyme that synthesizes PIP.
               The 49 kDa PI kinase activator,  designated PIK-A49, is a multifunctional
              protein.  It binds and  bundles actin and has translational elongation
              factor-1-alpha  activity.  This research is based on the working hypothesis
              that  PIK-A49 plays an important role in coordinating the status of PIP 
              metabolism, the actin cytoskeleton, and protein synthesis within  the cell.
              PIK-A49 and PI kinase are present in the plasma membrane,  actin cytoskeleton
              and soluble fractions of carrot cells.  Changes  in the membrane and
              cytoskeletal PI kinase activity have been  observed within seconds of exposing
              carrot cells to external  stimuli.  Whether PIP and PIP2 serve as precursors of
              second  messengers or as direct membrane effectors, understanding the 
              mechanism of regulation of PIP and PIP2 biosynthesis is essential  in order to
              understand their roles in signal transduction.  The  goals of this research are
              to understand the mechanism of  regulation of PIP biosynthesis in response to
              environmental stimuli  and to understand how these changes in PIP metabolism
              might affect  cell physiology.  For these studies, carrot suspension culture 
              cells will be used as a model system and two stimuli, one that  increases PI
              4-kinase activity and one that decreases PI 4-kinase  activity.  Specific
              questions to be addressed are:  What is the  mechanism of activation of PI
              4-kinase by PIK-A49?  Is there a  change in the distribution of PIK-A49, PI
              kinase or F-actin in  response to stimuli, and if so, what causes the change in
               distribution?  This work provides a different perspective  of PIP 
              metabolism--one focused on PIP synthesis.  In addition, the fact  that the
              PIK-A49 activates PI 4-kinase, binds and bundles actin,  and has elongation
              factor activity adds a new dimension to the  potential for cross-talk among the
              plasma membrane, cytoskeleton,  and protein synthesis machinery within plant
              cells during responses  to environmental stimuli.  %%%  Little is known about
              the mechanisms used by plants to sense  environmental signals.  This
              investigator has shown that a subset  of very negatively charged lipids in the
              outer membranes of plant  cells undergo chemical changes in response to
              environmental  stimuli.  The biosynthesis of these lipids is regulated by an 
              activator protein that can also regulate the structure of the  cytoskeleton and
              protein synthesis within the cell.  This finding  suggested that the activator
              protein may serve to communicate the  changes in the plant's environment from
              the outer membrane to the  rest of the cell.  The goals of this research are to
              understand how  biosynthesis of these lipids is regulated and to determine
              whether  the activator protein acts as a sensor to communicate environmental 
              signals to the interior of the plant cell.***
