Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Dynamical Structure and Stabilityof Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1994   
File        : a9304012

Award Number: 9304012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Hunter hunter@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9256,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator is proposing theoretical studies               
              into some aspects of the dynamics of galaxies.  One objective of               
              this research is to build self-consistent equilibrium stellar                  
              dynamic models of elliptical galaxies, with special emphasis on                
              galaxies in which orbits of more than one basic family are                     
              present.  For self-consistency, the different orbits that are                  
              dynamically possible must be populated in such a way that the                  
              resulting gravitational field is exactly that needed to hold the               
              galaxy together.  The second aim of the work is to understand the              
              kinematic properties of the stellar dynamic models, and to relate              
              them to observations.  Projections of the kinematic properties of              
              real galaxies  on the plane of the sky can be observed, and                    
              provide only indirect  information from which to determine the                 
              true intrinsic motions.  A third aim of the work is to study the               
              oscillations and stability of disk-like galaxies.                              
                   A typical galaxy is composed of hundreds of billions of                   
              stars, each of which moves on its own individual orbit according               
              to well-known physical laws of dynamics.   Galaxies are also                   
              interesting examples of complex systems, whose behavior comes                  
              from the combined effects of much simpler components.  This                    
              project aims to build mathematical models that incorporate the                 
              basic characteristics of real galaxies, matching observations as               
              far as possible, which is not simple because only flat pictures                
              of the truly three-dimensional galaxies are ever observed.  The                
              work will use a combination of both mathematical analysis and                  
              computation to elucidate the present day dynamical structure of                
              galaxies, which should contain significant information about                   
              their past history, including that of their formation.
