Title       : Clastic Dikes as Conduits for Episodic Fluid Flow in the Upper Crust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9304581

Award Number: 9304581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157762             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Boles boles@geol.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Spera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9189,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9304581  Boles    The proposed study seeks to identify and quantify processes by
               which clastic dikes serve as conduits for episodic and rapid fluid  flow in
              the upper crust.  This study will investigate transport  mechanisms for breccia
              components in clastic dikes in silicious  shales of the Miocene Monterey
              Formation, coastal California, and  in Paleozoic limestones both in Titus
              Canyon, Death Valley, and in  the Shell Creek Range, NE Nevada.  Minimum
              velocities of fluid flow  will be calculated using relations among flow
              velocity, clast size,  viscosity, and fluid and clast densities in fluidized
              beds.  These  parameters will be estimated based on field and thin section 
              investigators, fluid inclusion studies, and published density  values of
              similar rock types.  Episodic fluid flow through the dike  can be inferred if
              the calculated flow velocity through the dike is  much faster than seepage by
              darcian flow.  In addition, mechanism  leading to fragmentation of wall rock
              and breccia components in  clastic dikes will be investigated.  Identification
              of the latter  process would allow estimated on the magnitude and rate of drops
              in  pore pressure.  Rapid drops are considered as characteristic for  clastic
              dikes serving as conduits for large scale, episodic fluid  flow.  Stable
              isotope and trace  element measurements across crack  seal veins associated
              with clastic dikes will determine if the  dikes were chemically closed or open
              systems.  Strontium isotope  analyses of wall rock and vein filling minerals
              will indicate if  vein cementation occurred in a closed or open system.  The
              proposed  investigations will increase the present understanding of fluid  flow
              mechanisms within the upper crust.  Findings of this study may  influence
              research in applied fields such as transport of  contaminants and heat in
              fractured rocks of earthquake hazard  analysis.  ***
