Title       : Characterization of RNA Editing in Physarum Polycephalum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9304465

Award Number: 9304465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonatha M. Gott jmg13po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9304465 Gott RNA editing, the process by which genetic information is altered at
              the RNA leave, is a fundamental aspect of gene expression and regulation in a
              variety of systems.  Some editing phenomena occur globally within an organelle,
              while others are tissue specific or developmentally regulated.  Despite the
              almost unlimited potential for the control of gene expression provided by this
              process, little is known about the mechanisms by which RNA editing is
              accomplished.  In addition, the specific nature of the changes involved makes
              editing a potential target for therapeutic agents.  Thus an understanding, at
              the molecular level, of the mechanisms of editing may have practical
              applications as well providing insights into another level of the control of
              gene expression.  Two distinct forms of RNA editing have been described: base
              substitution and base insertion/deletion.  Preliminary results suggest that
              both types of editing coexist in the slime mold Physarum polycephalum.  This
              unique feature, along with biochemical and developmental tractability of the
              organism, make Physarum an excellent model system in which to study editing
              mechanisms.  The goals of this research are to identify the intermediates and
              products of RNA editing in Physarum and to characterize the occurrence and
              extent of editing relative to the stages of the life cycle.  Based on observed
              differences between mitochondrial DNA and RNA  sequences from Physarum, two
              genes have been identified whose expression is likely to depend upon RNA
              editing.  The proteins encoded by the "edited" versions of these mRNAs are
              highly homologous to subunits 1 and 2 of other mitochondrial cytochrome
              oxidases, suggesting that th is process is required for the generation of
              functional mRNAs.  These genes and their RNA and protein products will be
              characterized further using a combination of techniques, including RNA finger
              printing, thin layer chromatography, primer extension, nuclease protection,
              Northern and Southern hybridization, PCR amplification, gel electrophoresis,
              and in vivo and in vitro isotopic labeling experiments.  Although the
              biochemical experiments described above are essential to an understanding of
              the editing process, the identification and characterization of the editing
              apparatus will be facilitated by the development of a genetic framework in
              which to study editing.  A necessary prelude to such experiments is an accurate
              description of the nature and extent of editing events during the complex life
              cycle of Physarum.  This information will also be useful in the design of
              future biochemical fractionation experiments and may provide clues regarding
              potential roles of editing in gene regulation and development in Physarum. %%%
              This research will help us understand an unusual step in the processing of
              genetic information. ***                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
