Title       : The Formation of the Continental Crust: Evidence from Siderophile and
               Chalcophile Trace Elements in Volcanic Arcs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1997   
File        : a9304131

Award Number: 9304131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tamara L. Dickinson                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Horton E. Newsom newsom@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The origin of the continental crust is fundamental to                          
              understanding the evolution of the Earth as a whole.  Recent                   
              work has shown the bimodal behavior of certain siderophile                     
              and chalcophile mobile elements (e.g. Pb, As, Sb) in terms                     
              of their greater than expected enrichments in volcanic arcs                    
              and the continental crust, compared to their geochemical                       
              behavior during igneous fractionation.  This project will                      
              extend our studies to additional elements (e.g. Pb, Zn, Cd,                    
              Sn, Hg, and Bi) in suites we have analyzed for other                           
              elements.  Characterizing and quantifying the affected                         
              elements and their enrichments will allow a better                             
              understanding of the location and geochemical conditions                       
              under which the enrichments occurred, for example, ridge                       
              versus subduction zone environments.  We will analyze new                      
              samples for our complete set of siderophile elements, from                     
              additional arcs and from samples that extend our across-arc                    
              data.  The compositional data from the volcanic arcs from                      
              additional samples of the ancient continental crust will be                    
              important for  improving estimates of the composition of the                   
              continental crust.  The modelling efforts will use a more                      
              sophisticated transport model that will also allow                             
              evaluation of isotopic constraints.
