Title       : Multiple-Access Codes & Random-Access Protocols with Multiple Reception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1995      
File        : a9304763

Award Number: 9304763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas E. Fuja                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95865              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bixio Rimoldi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9304763        Rimoldi       We are approaching the era of personal
              communication which  requires an infrastructure capable of providing untethered
              access  to a global network from any point on (and above) the surface of  the
              earth. Implementation of this scenario requires efficient  communication via a
              wireless network. One major component of a  wireless network is the Gaussian
              multiple-access channel.       The objective of the proposed research is to
              extend recent  results of the principal investigator leading to a novel
              procedure  to construct codes for this channel.       The following two steps
              have led to the proposed procedure.  Step 1  A simpler channel model called
              G-adder channel was  considered and multiple-access codes for this channel were
              studied.  The G-adder channel associated to some finite group G has inputs 
              that are elements of G and output that is the sum (over G) of the  inputs. To
              start on a more familiar ground it was assumed that G is  the additive group of
              a finite field F. It was shown that  multiple-access codes for such G-adder
              channels can be studied and  constructed in a framework that is akin to the
              algebraic theory  of error control codes. Two simple procedures to construct 
              multiple-access codes with desirable properties via maximum  distance separable
              codes were given. A G-adder channel does not  arise naturally. It can be
              created on a local area network by means  of "smart" nodes that add information
              symbols according to the  arithmetic in G.  A stronger motivation for the study
              or G-adder  channels came from step two.  Step 2:  It has been shown that it is
               possible to decompose the Gaussian multiple-access channel into a  number of
              independent G-adder channels provided that each such  channel is then used to
              transmit multiple-access codewords over G  considered in step one. The
              decomposition is obtained via T  "modulators" (one for each channel input node)
              and a "demodulator."  The modulator outputs are lattice-type signal-space
              codewords for  the Gaussian  channel.  ***      Compared to spread spectrum
              (the common practice) the codes  resulting from  steps 1 and 2 above have the
              following advantages: (l) They are  designed  keeping in mind that interference
              and noise are two distinct  problems that  need different solutions. In
              particular, active users do not  contribute to  the noise level of other users;
              (2) Decoding is simple and  algebraic;  (3)  There is no bandwidth expansion.
              in the sense that while taking  care of the  problem of assigning the channel
              to busy users. the codes allow  transmission of the same amount of information
              that would be  possible via  time-division multiple-access (or
              frequency-division  multiple-access).  (4)  They support transmission of
              several bits per dimension which is an  important attribute for codes designed
              to operate in a bandlimited  environment. (5) They are natural offspring of the
              powerful coding  and  shaping techniques that have revolutionized the design of
               signal-space  codes for the (single-user) bandlimited Gaussian channel. (6)
              They  have the  properties that are needed for the codes assumed in recently 
              proposed  random-access protocols with multiple reception capability. These 
              protocols  can achieve throughputs arbitrarily close to 1.
