Title       : 1) Inhibitors of Cholesterol Biosynthesis 2) A Methionine Salvage Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1995   
File        : a9304029

Award Number: 9304029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Abeles   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9304029  Abeles  (1) The decarboxylation of mevalonate pyrophosphate to
              isopentenyl  pyrophosphate will be investigated as well as the basis of the 
              inhibition by 5-flouro methyl mevalonate pyrophosphate.  This  enzyme catalyzed
              reaction is one step in cholesterol biosyntheses.   Inhibition could lead to
              reduction of cholesterol synthesis.  It is  proposed that the transition state
              for the decarboxylation has a  carbo-cationic character.  To test this, the
              appropriate demethy-  mevalonate pyrophosphate analogue will be prepared and
              subjected to  enzyme action.  If a carbo-cation transition state is involved
              the  reaction should proceed slowly.  In the event a methylphosphate  addition
              occurs, analogues will be devised to block enzyme action.   Hopefully, a more
              complete understanding of the mechanism will lead  to effective inhibitors of
              the enzyme and control of cholesterol  synthesis. (2) In all living organisms
              5-S-methyl adenosine is  converted to methionine.  Four novel compounds, which
              are  intermediates in the pathway, have been characterized, as well as  four
              new enzymes.  It is the goal of this research to identify all  intermediates
              and all enzymes of the pathway.  In this system a  deadenylylated C5
              intermediate, 1,2-dihydroxy-5-methylthio-1-  pentene-3-one, is formed and
              spontaneously converts to a secondary  intermediate on the way to methionine. 
              It is likely that this  reaction is enzyme catalyzed.  After the complete
              pathway is  identified, an inhibitor will be developed.  This inhibitor will be
               used to evaluate the importance of the pathway in various  microorganisms and
              in plant cells, where it may be essential for  ethylene production.  %%%  Each
              living cell carries out hundreds of chemical interconversions.   They are
              called metabolic pathways.  The proper function of each  pathway is essential
              for the survival of the cell.  Blockage of a  pathway can be fatal.  This
              research program consists of two parts.   (1) An enzyme of the metabolic
              pathway for the formation of  choles terol will be studied.  We hope that a
              complete understanding  of the mechanism of action of the enzyme
              (mevalonate-pyrophosphate  decarboxylase) will allow for the development of a
              compound to  inhibit the enzyme and thereby control cholesterol formation in 
              plant and animal cells.  (2) All living organisms convert 5-S-  methyl
              adenosine (MTA) to methionine, an essential amino acid.    The intermediates of
              the pathway will be characterized, as well as  the enzymes.  With this
              information, it will be possible to develop  an inhibitor to block the pathway
              and thereby determine its role in  different microorganisms and in plants.  In
              plants, it may operate  to produce ethylene, a plant hormone, that controls
              ripening of  fruit.  Inhibition of the MTA in plants could be used to stop 
              ethylene production, and serve agriculture as a useful means to  control fruit
              maturation.  Supported jointly by the Metabolic Biochemistry and Molecular 
              Biochemistry Programs, Division of Molecular & Cellular  Biosciences.  ***
