Title       : C-signal Perception in Myxococcus Xanthus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9304083

Award Number: 9304083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Shimkets   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9304083  Shimkets  Cell-cell interactions are essential for the development of
              many  organisms and the myxobacteria provide a model system with which to  use
              genetic approaches to determine the biological roles and  molecular mechanisms
              of intercellular communication.  The CsgA gene  product, the C-signal, is a
              novel type of developmental timer whose  extracellular concentration rises
              steadily during fruiting body  formation of the myxobacterium Myxococcus
              xanthus and induces  successive stages of the developmental pathway at
              successively  higher concentrations.  These studies are expected to reveal how 
              the C-signal is perceived by developing cells to express rippling, 
              aggregation, and sporulation genes.  The CsgA receptor gene will be  identified
              and cloned using one of four approaches : dosage  suppression, construction of
              heterologous signaling systems  containing components from different
              myxobacterial species, reverse  genetics following purification of the receptor
              protein, or  molecular recognition. Putative receptor genes will be sequenced 
              and examined for amino acid homology with known receptors.  The  chromosomal
              wild type allele will be replaced with a disrupted  allele to determine if a
              receptor null mutation blocks development  at the same point as a csgA null
              mutant.  Radiolabeled CsgA will be  used in binding studies to determine the
              associate constant and  receptor number during different stages of development.
               The  cellular location of the CsgA receptor will be determined by  colloidal
              gold electron microscopy.  Genetic analysis of the socA  (for suppressor of
              CsgA), and socB suppressor loci will continue,  to learn the normal
              developmental roles of the wild type suppressor  genes as well as the
              mechanisms by which the mutant alleles  suppress csgA mutations.  %%%  This
              research allows the techniques of bacterial molecular genetics  to be used to
              answer fundamental questions about how cell  differentiate.  Dr. Shimkets is
              studying a type of cell- to cell  communication that  up until know was only
              known in higher  organisms.  ****
