Title       : Molecular Structure of the Multienzyme Complex Responsible for Acetate Cleavage
               in Methanosarcina barkeri
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1995      
File        : a9304637

Award Number: 9304637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Grahame   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H M Jackson Fdn Mltry Med
	      1401 Rockville Pike, Suite 600
	      Rockville, MD  20852    301/294-1276

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9304637  Grahame  This project will obtain information needed to define the 
              quaternary structure of a multienzyme complex that catalyzes  metabolism of
              acetate in Methanosarcina barkeri, a methanogenic  bacterium .  The structural
              study proposed is fundamental to  achieve a detailed understanding of the
              mechanisms by which the  multienzyme complex catalyzes cleavage of the
              acetyl-CoA acetate  carbon-carbon bond.  The specific objectives of this study
              follow.   1) Establish the molecular mass, subunit structure, and overall 
              symmetry of the protein complex by physical methods of dynamic  light
              scattering, electron microscopy, rate zonal  ultracentrifugation and gel
              filtration.  2) Identify the subunit  that specifically binds the corrinoid
              (vitamin B12-like) cofactor  used for methyl-group transfer during acetyl-CoA
              cleavage.   Minimally disruptive methods will be used, followed by 
              chromatography, to obtain the single subunit, or protein component,  that binds
              the corrinoid cofactor. 3) Identify the component that  binds
              tetrahydro-sarcinapterin.  This component will be purified  from
              chromatographic fractions of the disrupted protein complex and  identified as
              the enzyme that catalyzes methyl group transfer  between methyl-corrinoid and
              tetrahydro-sarcinapterin. 4) Obtain  additional information about
              nearest-neighbor relationships among  subunit types from chemical cross-linking
              experiments on the intact  complex.  A major outcome of the research will be to
              develop a  three-dimensional model of the complex.  The overall structure will 
              display the corrinoid and the tetrahydro-sarcinapterin-binding  subunits placed
              in approximate relative position to one another and  to all other subunits of
              the complex.  %%%  Microbial conversion processes involving both the production
              and  the consumption of acetic acid in nature are biological reactions  of
              major importance.  It is estimated that in nature 1010 metric  tons of acetic
              acid are produced per year.  Subsequent conversion  of acetic acid to gase ous
              products as carbon dioxide and methane  occurs in both natural ecosystems and
              in systems created by man for  waste treatment and biomass conversion.  In
              conversion of acetic  acid to methane and carbon dioxide, the methanogenic
              bacterium,  Methanosarcina barkeri is very important.  This research is 
              designed to learn how a multienzyme structure responsible for  acetic acid
              metabolism in M. barkeri works at the molecular level.   Physical, biochemical,
              and immunological methods are used to  determine the arrangement of protein
              subunits and certain organic  cofactor binding sites within the architecture of
              the protein  complex.  The structural details provided from this research will 
              provide fundamental information needed for a complete understanding  of the
              molecular mechanism of acetate cleavage.  ***
