Title       : Development of the Genetic Map of Volvox
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1997     
File        : a9304447

Award Number: 9304447
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $610080             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kirk kirk@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9300047  Kirk    Volvox carteri is a potentially powerful model system for
              analysis  of the genetics of differentiation and development. It is a 
              eukaryotic multicellular organism but it contains only two cell  types, mortal
              somatic cells and immortal germ cells, which are  arranged in a predictable
              pattern within a simple spheroid. The  organism is normally haploid,
              reproduction is usually asexual and  mutations are phenotypically obvious but
              because sexual  reproduction is readily induced, formal genetic analysis is 
              possible. Mutations which cause organizational abnormalities are  viable
              because cell development is autonomous. Because there are  close relatives of
              Volvox that lack cellular differentiation, the  potential for evolutionary
              studies exists. One limitation of this  organism as a model system has been the
              lack of a genetic map and  an inability to transform it. The latter procedure
              has been  recently developed in our laboratory and we are embarking upon the 
              former. The genetic map has been expanded by the incorporation of  many
              restriction-fragment-length-polymorphism (RFLP) and drug  resistance markers.
              Methods for tagging and recovering genes of  interest via transposon
              mutagenesis have been developed. The goals  for the next five years are to tag,
              identify and map genes that  regulate development and differentiation of germ
              and somatic cells  as well as morphogenetic movements and cellular senescence
              and  programmed cell death.  %%%  The achievement of the goals of this project
              will provide a bridge  organism between simpler single cell organisms and much
              more  complex multicellular organisms for the study and understanding of 
              development and differentiation as well as evolution.
