Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Thermochronologic Closure Temperature in Regional
               Metamorphic Settings: An Empirical Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9304072

Award Number: 9304072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas O. Wright                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223189             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kip V. Hodges kvhodges@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel A. Bowring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9304072  Hodges       Rigorous inversion of petrologic and geochronologic  data
              to estimate parameters such as unroofing rate in  ancient orogenic belts
              requires precise estimates of  pressure-temperature and time-temperature paths
              for a  variety of structural levels.  Uncertainties in Tt paths  largely stem
              from uncertainties in the temperatures at which  isotopic themochronometers
              become closed with respect to  loss of radiogenic daughter nuclides.  Factors
              that can  result in variable closure temperatures for a given mineral- 
              isotopic system include: 1) compositional differences; 2)  the extent of
              interaction with infiltrating fluids; and 3)  differences in the effective
              diffusion dimension for the  radiogenic daughter due to reaction or
              deformational  history.  The relative importance of these factors or 
              deformational history.  The relative importance of these  factors in governing
              closure behavior is not well understood  for most commonly used
              thermochronometers.       This project is intended to improve this situation 
              through a systematic empirical study of thermochronometers  based on the U-Pb
              and K-Ar (40Ar/39Ar) decay schemes in the  Connemara region or Ireland. 
              Connemara was chosen for this  study because it provides an unparalleled
              opportunity to  race a variety of lithologies, containing many 
              thermochronometrically important minerals, continuously from  garnet grade to
              second sillimanite grade.  We intend to  explore variations in mineral ages as
              a function  of  composition, microstructure, grain size, and metamorphic 
              grade.  An important component of this work will be the  coupling of
              thermochronology with detailed stable isotopic  work in an effort to evaluate
              the significance of  fluids in  the radiogenic isotopic evolution of
              thermochronologic  systems.  The research will improve our understanding of the
               geochemical behavior of these systems, as well as provide  important insights
              into the reliability of assumptions  commonly used in the construction and
              interpretation of  time-  temperature paths in orogenic settings.
