Title       : Structure and Function of Yeast Spindle Pole Bodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1993      
File        : a9304512

Award Number: 9304512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher W. Akey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9304512  Akey    Comparative studies of yeast and mammalian nuclei are providing
              important insights into complex cellular processes such as control of the cell
              cycle, mitosis, meiosis and nucleocytoplasmic transport.  Moreover, the well
              established area of yeast genetics allows rapid correlation between structural
              alterations at the genetic level with changes in cell behavior and functions of
              supra-molecular assemblies.  In this project, the structure and function of a
              supra-molecular assembly which resides within pores in the yeast nuclear
              envelope will be studied: the spindle pole body (SPB).  Electron microscopy of
              partially enriched cell fractions will be employed, together with
              three-dimensional (3D) image analyses, to reveal structural principles which
              govern the assembly and functions of these complex supra molecular structures. 
              In the case of SPBs, it has recently been shown that these are highly ordered
              and amenable to structural studies.  Moreover, there are two lateral size
              classes present in in vitro isolates.  These will be studied using 3D
              tomography of both thin sectioned and frozen-hydrated specimens.  These studies
              should reveal the architectural principles which govern the assembly and fusion
              pathways traversed by the SPB during normal cell growth and mating, and should
              also reveal molecular details of how the yeast microtubule organizing center
              anchors and nucleates microtubules.  The work will complement ongoing
              biochemical and genetic analyses being carried out in other laboratories, and
              may broaden our understanding of centrosomal functions in other species.    %%%
               In eukaryotic cells, the genetic material (DNA) is sequestered from the bulk
              cytoplasm, in a structure called the nucleus, by a double-membrane boundary,
              the nuclear envelope.  In Saccharomyces yeast, the nuclear envelope does not
              break down at the time of mitosis (cell division); instead, the mitotic spindle
              (the microtubular structure responsible for the separation of daughter
              chromosomes during the mitotic p rocess) forms inside the nucleus.  In these
              yeast cells, the spindle pole bodies (microtubule organizing centers), which
              are essential structures for the assembly of the mitotic spindle and the
              mitotic process itself, are associated with the nuclear pores.  In this
              project, advanced methods for studying the morphology of yeast spindle pole
              bodies at high resolution will be used to study the structure of this cellular
              component.  Yeast are amenable to genetic analysis, and both genetic and
              biochemical analyses of spindle pole body assembly are ongoing in other
              laboratories. The powerful combination of structural and genetic analyses in
              yeast will lead to an increased understanding of the essential process of cell
              division, and may broaden our understanding of centrosomal functions during
              mitosis in other eukaryotes.  ***
