Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Adapting Higher-Order Encodings to
               Sophisticated User Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9304207

Award Number: 9304207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Penny Anderson apa@CS.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign centers                                
              of proven excellence.  The program's awards                                    
              provide opportunities for joint research, and                                  
              the use of unique or complementary facilities,                                 
              expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Penny                                       
              Anderson to work with Dr Gilles Kahn, at INRIA                                 
              Sophia-Antipolis, France.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research will explore how the wealth of                                   
              theoretical work in formal logic, proof theory,                                
              logical frameworks, and related topics can be                                  
              used to improve programming practice.  Dr.                                     
              Anderson will investigate the use of higher-                                   
              order abstract syntax and related techniques in                                
              systems based on formal deduction that have                                    
              efficient and well-designed user interfaces.                                   
                                                                                             
              Effective user interfaces are essential for                                    
              most of the activities one might wish to                                       
              undertake with the support of automated                                        
              deductive systems:  theorem proving, language                                  
              prototyping, semantic analysis, program                                        
              development, etc.  These tasks require the                                     
              management of large amounts of detail, and for                                 
              even medium-sized problems they become                                         
              infeasible without extensive support for                                       
              presenting information to the user. In order to                                
              carry out experiments with deductive systems                                   
              that are needed to bring theoretical work to                                   
              practical application, one needs user interface                                
              tools that are general in the same sense that                                  
              logical frameworks are.  The use of higher-                                    
              order encoding techniques has the potential to                                 
              simplify the task of tailoring user interface                                  
              tools to particular formal deduction systems.                                  
              The purpose of this research is to bring                                       
              together research in the application of logical                                
              frameworks with research in user interfaces to                                 
              deduction-based systems.  This should result in                                
              better understanding of implementation                                         
              techniques and useful refinements of the                                       
              underlying framework; the use of these                                         
              encodings should clarify the semantic basis of                                 
              the interaction with the user.
