Title       : Symposia on Protistan Cell Surfaces; Ames, Iowa; August 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1993    
File        : a9304086

Award Number: 9304086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Andersen randersen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9304086 Andersen          Advances in electron microscopy and in molecular
              analyses of DNA have renewed interest in many aspects of the biology of
              protists (unicellular algae, fungi, and protozoa).  Two primary reasons are
              their roles in bridging the evolutionary gap between prokaryotes (bacteria) and
              the multicellular plants and animals, and their roles as model experimental
              systems in cell and molecular biology.  Despite the interest of many biologists
              in the phylogeny of protists, few scientists have addressed the basic problems
              in terminology and homology that were created by the classical academic
              separation of the fields of phycology, mycology, and protozoology.  In an
              attempt to resolve problems in communication and synthesis, a NSF sponsored
              task force was established in 1987.  The Cell Surface Components Task Force
              will complete its studies this year, and it will present its findings at the
              1993 American Institute of Biological Sciences annual meeting.  Leading
              national and international scientists will participate in two symposia that
              summarize recent advances in the study of protistan cell surfaces.  Proceedings
              of the meetings and additional solicited review papers will be published in
              international journals. %%%          Experts in the biology of unicellular
              algae, fungi, and protozoa will meet at the annual meetings of the American
              Institute of Biological Sciences to synthesize recent ultrastructural and
              molecular data on protis tan organisms.  The principal goal is to synthesize a
              single, coherent terminology for homologous features of protistan cell
              surfaces, hitherto obscured by the separate academic traditions of studying
              these organisms in phycology, mycology, and protozoology departments.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
