Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1993       
File        : a9304604

Award Number: 9304604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Nelson Caine cainen@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   In order to better understand complex hydrologic processes                
              and to test hypotheses regarding hydrologic responses to changing              
              physical or climatic regimes, many hydrologists have organized                 
              their research around development and testing of physically                    
              based, distributed-parameter models.  These models are founded on              
              a number of assumptions, one of the most important of which is                 
              that spatially distributed data on crucial variables and                       
              parameters is available.  In high alpine systems, the storage of               
              water in snowpacks and the release of that water through                       
              snowmelts is a major component of hydrological systems.  Alpine                
              snowpacks are spatially heterogeneous, however, with their                     
              distribution and rates of accumulation and melting a function of               
              the influences of rugged topography on precipitation, the                      
              redistribution of snow by winds, and surface radiative energy                  
              fluxes.  This doctoral dissertation project will develop and test              
              a dynamic snowpack initialization model, which will provide                    
              improved data on the spatial and temporal patterns of snowpacks                
              and meltwaters for use in hydrologic models of alpine regions.                 
              The model will be tested using data for three watersheds in the                
              Front Range of the Rocky Mountains in Colorado.  Data scanned                  
              from aerial photographs will be used in conjunction with data                  
              acquired within snowpacks and in downstream portions of                        
              watersheds to provide more reliable hydrological information                   
              about the water content of snow and the spatial and temporal                   
              patterns of melting.  Analyses of these data will permit                       
              refinement of models related to meltwater inputs from snowpacks                
              into hydrologic models for the watersheds.                                     
                   This project will provide valuable new information from a                 
              number of different perspectives.  Through exploration of the                  
              potential for using new photogrammetric techniques to infer                    
              snowpack characteristics from aerial photographs and development               
              of a dynamic snowpack initialization model, the project will                   
              advance research methodologies.  The project also will make                    
              substantive contributions as it enhances understandings of the                 
              complex factors that affect the geographic and temporal                        
              distributions of snow and meltwaters in alpine areas.  As a                    
              doctoral dissertation improvement award, this award also will                  
              provide support to enable a promising student to establish a                   
              strong independent research career.
