Title       : Routing of Dictyostelium Beta-Hexosaminidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9304439

Award Number: 9304439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold Kaplan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1228,9119,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The study of mechanisms by which lysosomal enzymes are sorted is             
              teaching us about the relationship of protein structure to protein             
              transport.  In complex organisms, lysosomal enzymes serve a key                
              role in embryonic re-sculpting.  Their sorting is regulated during             
              development.  The long range goal of this project is to discover               
              the molecular details of this regulation.  Dictyostelium discoideum            
              is a simpler organism whose development is well studied.  A                    
              complete CDNA copy of the Dictyostelium MRNA which encodes beta-               
              hexosaminidase (beta-hex), a lysosomal enzyme, has already been                
              cloned and sequenced.  This was used to transform the organism with            
              a vector designed to express proteins accurately.  It was shown                
              that the transformants overproduce active enzyme, which is                     
              appropriately sorted.  Also, a beta-hex-invertase fusion system was            
              developed for evaluation of candidate signals.  That study led to              
              the discovery of a signal which sorts proteins to a vesicle whose              
              contents are stored during growth and secreted during development.             
              It also led to the hypothesis that lysosomal enzymes may be                    
              directed from organelle to organelle by more than one receptor, or             
              by the combination of one receptor ligand interaction and other                
              features of the enzyme structure.  This will be pursued through the            
              following specific aims.  The first is to determine the exact                  
              chemical nature of the signal which is required to sort protein to             
              the lysosomal pathway.  This includes: a, determination of the                 
              minimal biologically functional sequence and the extent to which               
              that sequence can be varied but still lead to proper sorting; b,               
              confirmation that the sequence acts as a ligand for a receptor and             
              purification of the receptor; and c, analysis of the specificity of            
              the ligand-receptor interaction with synthetic peptides.  The                  
              second is to test the idea that features of proteins, other than               
              recognition markers, are required for proper sorting to lysosomes,             
              specifically, to test theories that explain why a terminal beta-hex            
              sequence is necessary.                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              A key feature of eukaryotes is that their cells are physically                 
              compartmentalized; that is, the cytoplasm is not a uniform mixture             
              of cellular components, but rather, is highly organized in such a              
              way that specific cellular functions, and the components that carry            
              out those functions, are localized in discrete regions of the cell.            
              Some of these functionally-distinct compartments are bounded by                
              membranes, and can be considered to be "organelles."  Since most of            
              the cell's proteins are produced on cytoplasmic ribosomes, it                  
              follows that there must be mechanisms to ensure that specific                  
              proteins get to their specific subcellular locations.  One well-               
              studied example of this is the problem of how newly-synthesized                
              lysosomal (degradative) enzymes get to the lysosomes (specialized              
              membrane-bounded compartments responsible for enzymatic degradation            
              of macromolecules).  Nature seems to have provided multiple                    
              mechanisms for this to occur.  Although the best-studied mechanism             
              involves membrane-bound receptors which recognize mannosyl-6-                  
              phosphate residues at the terminal position of asparagine-linked               
              oligosaccharides on lysosomal enzymes, it is not the only mechanism            
              for proper targeting of lysosomal enzymes.  In the slime mold                  
              Dictyostelium discoidum, mannosyl-6-phosphate receptors have been              
              looked for but not found; therefore lysosomal enzyme targeting in              
              these cells must be via one or more alternative mechanisms.  This              
              project holds the promise of elucidating details of at least one of            
              these alternative mechanisms.  Detailed understanding of the                   
              structural requirements for a protein to be targeted to a specific             
              subcellular location is of basic importance to the biotechnology               
              industry; it is expected that the information learned from this                
              project will allow molecular engineers to design proteins more                 
              intelligently for production in bioreactors.
