Title       : Isolation and Characterization of Yeast DNA Replication Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9304171

Award Number: 9304171
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles D. Liarakos                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Brill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This proposal addresses the mechanism by which cellular factors                
              initiate DNA replication in yeast.  One of the few cellular factors            
              known to be required for this process is a multi-subunit protein               
              complex called Replication Protein A (RPA).  RPA is  conserved                 
              throughout eukaryotic species, including the yeast S. cerevisiae.              
              Biochemically, the remaining initiation factors will be isolated               
              from yeast cells using an "origin unwinding" assay that mimics an              
              early step in the initiation reaction.  This assay is dependent                
              upon RPA and a yeast origin of DNA replication but is relatively               
              simple because it separates  initiation from the elongation phase              
              of DNA replication.  Protein-affinity chromatography, using RPA as             
              a specific ligand, will be used to enrich for rare proteins that               
              interact with RPA at initiation.  These factors will be purified to            
              homogeneity and used to raise specific antisera.  The purified                 
              proteins will be characterized to identify DNA-binding and DNA                 
              helicase activities.  A crucial prediction about these initiation              
              factors is that their activity will be regulated throughout the                
              cell-cycle.  The antisera will be used to study cell-cycle-                    
              dependent modifications to the protein and changes in their                    
              activity.  The ultimate goal of this approach is to reconstitute               
              complete DNA replication in-vitro and study its regulation.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              It is known that DNA replication is necessary for a cell to divide,            
              yet little is known about how the process actually begins.  This               
              study intends to identify the factors that initiate DNA replication            
              using the well-characterized and highly conserved yeast system.                
              Protein factors that initiate DNA replication will be purified                 
              using a DNA sequence that initiates replication in yeast.  These               
              proteins will be studied in order to understand how their activity             
              is controlled.  Since yeast cells use many of same proteins that               
              human cells use to replicate their DNA, it is likely that                      
              understanding this simple model system will shed light on how DNA              
              replication is controlled in human cells.
