Title       : Development of APS Synchrotron Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9304725

Award Number: 9304725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1450474            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome B. Cohen j-cohen3@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Buckley Crist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Bedzyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine T. Faber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth R. Poeppelmeier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1037,1750,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Cohen  9304725    Northwestern University, E.I. Du Pont de Nemours and Dow 
              Chemical have formed a Collaborative Access Team, known as  DUNU, and are
              proposing to instrument and operate a sector  at the Advanced Photon Source. A
              funding schedule, with  costs to be shared equally by both parties has been
              agreed  upon, covering both a five year construction phase, as well  as a ten
              year minimum operations phase. Currently DUNU  employs three full-time senior
              scientists and engineers  headquartered at Northwestern (a nationwide search is
              on for  a fourth senior  scientist), with extensive experience in beam line 
              construction and operations both at the Cornell High Energy  Synchrotron Source
              (CHESS) and the National Synchrotron  Light Source (NSLS Brookhaven), plus
              management of one of  the largest x-ray diffraction laboratories in the
              country.    The purpose of this Collaborative Access Team is to carry  out
              research on the structure of advanced materials. Our  understanding of the
              structure (atomic to micron level) is a  crucial prerequisite to the
              development of new materials  with enhanced properties. Synchrotron radiation
              has become  an essential tool in every aspect of structural analysis and  has
              revolutionized many subfields of science and  engineering. Many members of our
              CAT have been very active  users of our national facilities. The vastly
              increased  capabilities of "third generation" machines, such as the APS  and
              similar storage rings in Europe and Japan, promise a  second revolution.    A
              broad research program has been formulated, involving  currently more than 30
              principal investigators from Du Pont  and Northwestern. At least fifty other
              scientists and  engineers, students and post-doctoral fellows will  ultimately
              be involved. Although many fields of materials  science and engineering are
              represented in this research  program, the research to be supported by the
              instrumentation  in this project has a particular focus: It deals with 
              materials, whose  intermediate scale structure  (nanometer to  micrometer) has
              a profound influence on their properties.  Such materials are of immense
              technological importance and  include precipitation-hardening alloys, ceramics,
              polymers,  cement and composite materials. Many elements of this  research
              program are totally beyond current capabilities at  available x-ray sources
              (conventional and synchrotron). The  instrumentation that we will develop
              depends heavily (or  crucially) on the characteristics of the APS. It is
              grouped  in two experimental stations, both utilizing undulator  radiation:   
              1. General purpose scattering instrument, suitable for all  types of
              diffraction experiments (amorphous, powder and      single crystal work,
              surface and interface diffraction,  standing waves etc.). Collimated beams
              (0.1-1 mm) and      microbeams  will be available for diffraction and 
              microprobe work. The microbeam capability is of      particular interest in the
              context of this proposal.                                  2. Small Angle X-ray
              Scattering  microtomography instrument  equipped  with 2-D position   sensitive
              detector and environmental chamber with multiple  attachments (low and high
              temperature, UHV,     sample changer). This may be the first x-ray instrument  
                                         with  sufficient imaging and scattering resolution
              to     allow the two techniques to overlap in studying micron-                 
                          sized  structural features.    We believe that DUNU possesses all
              the key ingredients of a  productive and strong Collaborative Access Team. 
              Northwestern University anchors an interactive research  community through its
              interdisciplinary research centers  (many of which, such as the Materials
              Research Center and  the Center for Advanced CementBased Materials are
              supported  by the National Science Foundation) and individual faculty 
              research. E.I. Du Pont de Nemours &  Co. brings its immense capabilities in
              scientific research  and development. It is a world leader in process chemistry
               and engineering and t he manufacturing of high technology  products. It is the
              intent of this collaboration not only to  share a station at this major
              facility, but to develop  interactive, collaborative research between the two 
              institutions (we have installed a videoconferencing link to  aid this
              interaction).
