Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Magnetic Properties of Metallic
               Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9304567

Award Number: 9304567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Mini   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5956,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the International                                          
              Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables                                    
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three                                 
              to twelve months of research at foreign                                        
              centers of proven excellence.  The program's                                   
              awards provide opportunities for joint                                         
              research, and the use of unique or                                             
              complementary facilities, expertise and                                        
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month                                         
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Susan Mini                                  
              to the Universite Paris-Sud to work with Dr.                                   
              Alain Fontaine.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The aim of their research will be to study the                                 
              magnetic properties of metallic multilayers                                    
              using magnetic circular x-ray dichroism                                        
              spectroscopy (MCXD).  The importance of this                                   
              new spectroscopic technique is that each atomic                                
              species can be probed selectively.  MCXD is a                                  
              high energy spectroscopic method which has been                                
              used for the study of localized and itinerant                                  
              magnetism in ordered magnetic systems.  It is a                                
              powerful tool for the study of the local                                       
              magnetic properties because it takes advantage                                 
              of the selectivity of x-ray absorption                                         
              spectroscopy and the polarization properties of                                
              synchrotron radiation.  Because it can                                         
              selectively probe each core orbital of each                                    
              atomic species in a material, the magnetic                                     
              contribution of each species in a multilayer                                   
              may be deduced.  Multilayers of interest                                       
              include Fe/Pd systems because the Fe-Pd(l00)                                   
              interface appears to experience minimal mixing                                 
              and unlike many other systems the Fe appears to                                
              induce a magnet moment in the interfacial Pd                                   
              atomic layer ?C.Liu et al., J.Appl. Phys 67,                                   
              5758 '90!.  Since MCXD is element specific, the                                
              magnetic moment contributions of the Fe and Pd                                 
              may be observed separately.  MCXD can be used                                  
              to address specific problems concerning the                                    
              magnetism of multilayer interfaces.                                            
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to                                     
              cover international travel, a stipend for                                      
              twelve months, and $1,000 for travel to                                        
              Grenoble to conduct experiments and a small                                    
              allowance for language training.
