Title       : Mechanism of Action of Lipoxygenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9304565

Award Number: 9304565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Axelrod   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wladyslaw Minor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lipoxygenases are widely distributed dioxygenases whose natural                
              substrates are polyunsaturated fatty acids.  These enzymes are                 
              responsible for the generation of a number of extraordinarily                  
              potent bioactive substances in mammals.  The role of lipoxygenases             
              in plants is less well established but they are involved in                    
              development and in defense against pests and disease organisms.                
              This study will be focused on soybean lipoxygenase, L-1, the most              
              thoroughly investigated of these enzymes.  The goal of the proposed            
              research is to elucidate the structure-function relationship of                
              lipoxygenase.  To this end, the X-ray structure of L-1 will be                 
              vigorously pursued, following up recent progress.  While this work             
              is in progress testing the significance of suggestive amino acid               
              residues and structures will be continued with the aid of                      
              recombination genetics and enzymatic studies.  A remarkable feature            
              of the lipoxygenase from both the plant and animal kingdoms is the             
              high level amino acid sequence homology in "essential" regions.                
              Insight gained from the proposed studies will be applicable to a               
              broad range of lipoxygenases.  Although all lipoxygenases catalyze             
              primarily the formation of hydroperoxides from their substrates,               
              they vary considerably in regio-specificity, substrate specificity,            
              pH optimum and secondary reactions.  The proposed studies should               
              provide a basis for understanding these differences.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              The proposed research should lead to an understanding of the                   
              structure-function relationships of the lipoxygenases.  These                  
              enzymes and their substrates, the common polyunsaturated acids,                
              occur throughout nature.  They have been extensively studied in                
              higher plants, as well as more recently in mammals.  Lipoxygenase              
              products in mammals are potent effectors of vasoconstriction,                  
              chemotaxis and inflammation.  In plants, the enzyme controls                   
              phytohormone formation and plant defensive systems.
