Title       : Cytoarchitecture of Living Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1995       
File        : a9304603

Award Number: 9304603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Luby-Phelps   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9108,9161,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                A detailed view of cytoarchitecture is essential to understanding            
              kinetics and mechanisms of biochemical reactions in living cells,              
              and for understanding transport and localization of intracellular              
              components.  Rheological, biochemical, and electron microscopic                
              evidence suggests that cytoskeletal elements interact to form a                
              three-dimensional cytoplasmic network.  Measurements of solvent                
              viscosity in living cells indicate that rotational diffusion of                
              molecules in cytoplasm is essentially the same as in dilute                    
              solution, while their translational diffusion is significantly                 
              hindered, apparently by a combination of collisions with other                 
              solute molecules and sieving by the cytoskeletal network.  Even                
              very small solutes such as ions and metabolites may diffuse 3 to 4             
              times slower in cytoplasm than in dilute aqueous solution.  The                
              diffusion of particles >26 nm in diameter is further constrained by            
              exclusion from some subcompartments.  Many of the intracellular                
              components involved in protein synthesis, respiration and particle             
              transport are also absent from such compartments, raising the                  
              possibility that they represent functional as well as structural               
              differentiations of the cytoplasm.  Excluding compartments are                 
              filled with bundles and meshworks of actin microfilaments. An                  
              actin-binding protein, ABP280, that crosslinks F-actin into                    
              isotropic networks is also concentrated in excluding compartments.             
              Since F-actin / ABP280 networks in vitro are very elastic and                  
              stable, the presence of these two cytoskeletal proteins in                     
              excluding compartments suggests they are specialized for a                     
              mechanical function.  The objectives of this proposal are to test              
              several models for the organization of the cytoskeletal network                
              that hinders the diffusion of macromolecules, to test the                      
              hypothesis that exclusion of large particles from excluding                    
              compartments is due to molecular sieving by a gel network, to                  
              identify actin-binding proteins that may be components of the                  
              cytoarchitecture of excluding compartments, and to attempt to                  
              implicate F-actin and ABP280 more directly in the exclusion of                 
              particles by selectively disrupting their function.  A                         
              multidisciplinary approach will be employed, combining                         
              microinjection of proteins and inert fluorescent tracer particles              
              into living cells, fluorescence recovery after photobleaching to               
              measure intracellular diffusion coefficients, digital fluorescence             
              microscopy to study the dynamic localization of injected molecules             
              and the response of the cells to them, fluorescent antibody                    
              localization of endogenous molecules in cells that have been fixed,            
              gold antibody localization to obtain a high resolution picture of              
              the three-dimensional organization of molecules in the cytoskeleton            
              of excluding compartments, and molecular genetics techniques to                
              disrupt the function of ABP280.  Ultimately, information obtained              
              from this research should lead to an understanding of the effects              
              of cytoarchitecture on diffusion and localization of intracellular             
              components, and stimulate testable hypotheses regarding the                    
              function and regulation of excluding compartments.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Much current thinking about cellular biochemistry and metabolism is            
              extrapolated from assays performed in homogeneous, dilute solution.            
              However, the interior of a cell is neither dilute, nor homogeneous.            
              The intracellular concentration of certain enzymes is orders of                
              magnitude higher than the concentrations commonly used to assay                
              enzyme activity in vitro, and the total protein concentration may              
              be as high as 200 to 300 mg/ml.  Sophisticated experiments                     
              employing a variety of biophysical and other techniques have                   
              demonstrated the existence of "structure" (other than the better-              
              understood membrane-bound compartmentation) within what has until              
              recently been considered an amorphous cytoplasm.  This project will            
              further define the nature and function of this cytoplasmic                     
              structure.  The work is significant not only for what it can help              
              us understand about the function of the living cell, but also                  
              potentially as a model for a new generation of synthetic materials             
              of functionally defined porosities.
