Title       : Biochemistry and Regulation of Chlorophyll Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1994      
File        : a9304974

Award Number: 9304974
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Timko mpt9g@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,
Abstract    :
              9304974     Timko  Chlorophylls, hemes, and their derivatives play an important
              role  in the energy absorption and transduction processes of all 
              photosynthetic organisms.  The laboratory has isolated and  characterized
              members of three nuclear gene families that encode  enzymes of the tetrapyrrole
              biosynthetic pathway.  There are three  objectives desired.  The first
              objective is to understand how cells  regulate the coordinate formation of the
              various tetrapyrrole  biosynthetic pathway enzymes in a developmental and cell
              specific  manner.  The second objective is to define the similarities and 
              differences in the regulatory mechanisms controlling the expression  genes
              encoding protochlorophyllide reductase in angiosperms (pea)  and gymnosperms
              (pine).  In order to meet these objectives, more  effort will continue on
              current studies examining how the formation  and intracellular distribution of
              these enzymes are regulated, the  nature of the transcriptional or
              post-transcriptional of processes  that control them change in response to
              alterations in cell  physiology or environment.  These studies will provide
              important  new information on the structure, function, and expression of 
              enzymes involved in one of the most fundamental processes in  plants.     %%% 
              Chlorophylls and similar molecules play an important role in the  ability of
              plants to absorb light energy and transduce the energy  into food and
              biomaterials.  The researchers have isolated and  characterized  three gene
              families that code for the enzymes that  produce chlorophyll and other similar
              molecules.  There are three  objectives desired.  The first objective is to
              understand how cells  produce the right amounts of the enzymes during the life
              of the  plant and in different parts of the plant.  The second objective is  to
              see what is similar and different in the genetic control of one  particular
              enzyme in peas and pine trees.   More work on current studies examining how the
              formation and  intracellular distribution of these enzyme s is regulated by 
              different processes will continue.  These studies will provide  important new
              information on the structure, function, and  expression of enzymes involved in
              one of the most fundamental  processes in plants.  ***
