Title       : Dynamic Reassimilation of Atmospheric Observations for Global Climate Change
               Studies: A Feasibility Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1994     
File        : a9344212

Award Number: 9344212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $554055             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagadish Shukla shukla@cola.iges.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Kinter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Global Environ Soc
	      401 Powder Mill Road, Suite 302
	      Beltsville, MD  20705    301/595-7000

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The PIs will produce a four-dimensional internally consistent                  
              gridded data set for the global atmosphere for the period May 1982             
              to November 1983.  They will do so by assembling the most complete             
              set of atmospheric and oceanic observations made during that period            
              and by using a state-of-the-art multivariate optimal interpolation             
              scheme for atmospheric data assimilation.                                      
                   The primary motivation or this work is to demonstrate the                 
              feasibility of reanalyzing past atmospheric observations using a               
              state-of-the-art global model and a global data assimilation                   
              system.  Such a feasibility study is needed before making plans for            
              reanalysis of long term (> 10 years) historical data sets for                  
              climate research.                                                              
                   The data assimilation system to be used will include the COLA             
              general circulation model, the forecast of which will provide the              
              first guess, and most accurate optimum interpolation gorithm                   
              available.  The observational data se will be a combination for                
              level II-data archived in real time during the period and delayed              
              mode data, including the comprehensive Ocean-Atmosphere Data Set               
              (COADS), which have been assembled at NCAR.  The critical                      
              evaluations of the analyses will include general circulation                   
              statistics; global and local energy spectra; global energetic                  
              diagnoses including generation and dissipation of energy; a                    
              detailed examination of the global hydrologic cycle including                  
              regional budgets for the tropical Pacific, North America, the                  
              Amazon basin, and sub-Saharan Africa; and computations of surface              
              wind stress and total heat flux to force a global ocean model.  The            
              PIs will archive the various measures of analysis error obtained               
              during the assimilation cycle to study the quality of the analyses             
              and to provide confidence estimates and error bars.                            
                   This study will be extremely useful to support the scientific             
              objectives of national and international research programs such as             
              the Tropical Oceans Global Atmospheric (TOGA), World Ocean                     
              Circulation Experiment (WOCE), Global Energy and Water Cycle                   
              Experiment (GEWEX) and International Geosphere Biosphere Program               
              (IGBP).  The PIs have chosen the 1982--83 period for this study                
              because it witnessed the most outstanding example of ocean-                    
              atmosphere interactions as manifested by the El  Nino-Southern                 
              Oscillation phenomenon and its related world-wide effects.
