Title       : Molecular Simulation of Volume Phase Transition in Polymer Gels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a9901430

Award Number: 9901430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan J. De Pablo depablo@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9901430
Juan de Pablo

Polymer gels are commonly used in
              industrial, analytical, and domestic applications.  Increasingly, gels with
              novel chemistry and architecture are being investigated not only to improve the
              performance of known processes and products, but also to develop new materials
              for chemical and biomedical applications.  These applications often rely on the
              precise control of the swelling behavior of a gel.  Development of useful gels
              has been hampered, however, by the lack of a molecular-level understanding of
              the physics underlying the volumetric behavior polymer gels.  In this work we
              propose to develop the necessary theoretical formalism to predict the phase
              behavior of polymer gels from molecular considerations, so that new materials
              with yet to be discovered properties can be designed on a more rational,
              scientific basis.

It is proposed to perform Monte Carlo simulations and
              semi-theoretical calculations to study the molecular basis of several classes
              of volume phase transitions in polymeric gels.  In particular, the principal
              investigator examine the effect of (i) entropic factors (such as network
              topology, chain stiffness, chain length asymmetry, and (ii) energetic
              interactions (such as hydrophobic interactions, ionic forces) on the onset and
              characteristics of volume phase transitions.  To date, swelling has only been
              investigated by molecular simulation for a limited class of regular, neutral
              networks.

This project will also investigate the relation between volume
              phase transitions in gels and other fluid-fluid phase transitions.  In order to
              describe effectively the effect of highly anisotropic interactions (due to
              hydrogen-bonding or mesogenic groups) and compressibility on the structure and
              thermodynamics of the gel, we simulate coarse-grained molecular models in a
              continuum.  The approach entails a sequential study from simple to complex
              polymeric gels, and systems as diverse as polyelectrolyte gels and
              strain-induced nematic elastomers.  The complexity of such systems will require
              that novel Monte Carlo simulation methods be developed capable of capturing
              their phase behavior.    

The work proposed here will provide numerical data
              to test basic assumptions and Predictions of several theories for gel swelling.
               More importantly, it could provide general guidelines for the design of
              improved polymeric gels, which take full advantages of the entropic forces
              prevailing in multicomponent systems. 

Key words:  materials, polymers and
              gel

