Title       : Nucleon Spin Structure Studies Using Parity Violating and Inelastic Electron
               Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9901428

Award Number: 9901428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd D. Averett averett@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901428
Averett
An experimental program is underway to study the structure of
              the
nucleon in terms of quark degrees of freedom at the Thomas
              Jefferson
National Accelerator Facility (Jefferson Laboratory).  This
              research
will be carried out in two distinct experimental programs.  The
              first
is the so-called ``G0'' experiment which will use parity violating
              electron scattering to precisely determine the weak elastic form factors of the
              proton.  From this measurement, one can extract the strange electric and
              magnetic form factors which are directly related to the charge and current
              
distributions of the strange quarks within the nucleon.  To achieve 
the
              goal of high precision and broad kinematic coverage of this 
experiment, a
              dedicated large acceptance and liquid hydrogen target 
are being constructed. 
              Design, prototype studies, and final construction of the detector is the shared
              responsibility of the Electroweak Spin Physics Group (Finn et al.) and myself
              at the College of William and Mary and a collaboration of scientists from North
              America and France.
The second area of research encompassed by this grant
              involves
studies of fundamental properties of the neutron such as the
              electric
and magnetic form factors, spin structure functions,
              higher-twist
effects, and tests of the fundamental Drell-Hearn-Gerassimov
              (GDH) 
Sum Rule.  In these experiments, polarized electrons are scattered from
              an 
optically pumped, polarized Helium-3 gas target (which serves as a
              
polarized neutron target), and are subsequently detected using two
high
              resolution spectrometers.  The first two of six approved experiments
using
              polarized Helium-3 were successfully completed from August 1998-February 1999. 
              These measurements provided high precision determinations of the GDH Sum Rule
              and magnetic form factor for the neutron at low momentum transfer where
              non-perturbative QCD effects are important.  Data analysis from these first
              experiments, and polarized target improvements in preparation for the remaining
              experiments, are currently underway.  Of particular interest is experiment
              E97-103 (Averett, Korsch et al) which will search for higher twist
              (non-perturbative QCD) contributions to the deep-inelastic structure function
              g2 for the neutron at low momentum
transfer.  This will be accomplished by
              scattering longitudinally
polarized electrons from a transversely polarized
              Helium-3 target.  
It is expected that this experiment will achieve a
              statistical
error which is approximately two orders of magnitude smaller than
              
current world data and will provide much-needed quantitative guidance
for
              future theoretical calculations in this area. 



