Title       : SBIR Phase II: Novel Catalysts for Photocatalytic Adsorption-Integrated-Reaction
               (AIR) Emissions Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a9901759

Award Number: 9901759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Kittrell kseinc@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KSE Inc
	      P O Box 368
	      Amherst, MA  010040368    413/549-5506

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to
              complete the development of novel photocatalysts and reactor systems for an
              Adsorption-Integrated-Reaction (AIR) technology, providing a system to destroy
              volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in applications with high flow rates of air
              and dilute contaminant concentrations.  KSE, Inc. has developed novel
              photocatalyst formulations which are orders of magnitude more active than
              conventional titania photocatalysts.  The research will provide a new,
              multicomponent, zeolite-based photocatalytic adsorbent, which is a highly
              effective photocatalyst.  This research program will consist of synthesis of
              catalyst compositions, kinetic studies on representative classes of VOCs,
              reactor design studies, and a comparative cost analysis of the resulting
              photocatalytic technology.  The development of an effective dilute phase
              pollution control concept is expected, which will provide a cost-effective
              technology for destroying VOCs in high flow rate air with dilute VOC
              concentrations.
     Commercial applications will include control of air
              pollution (a) by destruction of air emissions of VOCs from soil and groundwater
              remediation, (b) from industrial emissions, and (c ) for enhanced indoor air
              quality, for both government and the private sector.  The technology will
              reduce the costs of air pollution control, enhance environmental quality, and
              improve economic competitiveness.


