Title       : Design and Implementation of Algorithms in Semi-Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9901947

Award Number: 9901947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77874              (Estimated)
Investigator: Saugata Basu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry has attracted a lot of attention in recent
              years due to its applications in a range of areas such as robot motion
              planning, geometric modeling, computer-aided design, geometric theorem proving,
              mathematical investigations of real algebraic varieties, discrete and
              computational geometry, and molecular chemistry.  This research project is
              concerned with several central algorithmic problems in semi-algebraic
              geometry.

The theoretical areas to be investigated consist of various
              algorithmic problems in semi-algebraic geometry, their connections with several
              important problems in discrete and computational geometry, as well as new
              applications of algorithmic semi-algebraic geometry to such areas as constraint
              databases and control theory. The practical goal is to build a system able to
              compute topological invariants (such as the number of connected components, the
              Euler characteristic, the Betti numbers, the full homology groups) of given
              semi-algebraic sets. Polynomial system solving is a basic step in the
              algorithms for computing higher topological invariants. Powerful multivariate
              polynomial system solvers have recently become available. These specialized
              systems are more efficient than what is available in standard computer algebra
              packages.  However, there has not been any effort to compute more geometric
              properties, like the number of connected components, descriptions of each
              connected component, the homology groups etc.  The algorithms for solving these
              problems are considerably more complicated than those for just testing
              emptiness of a semi-algebraic set. Routines will be adopted from existing
              state-of-the-art polynomial system solvers as building blocks towards
              developing a software package able to answer questions about connectivity and
              higher homologies of semi-algebraic sets.


