Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Recycling the Sacred Landscape: The Ritual Reuse of
               Cultural Geography among the Late Postclassic Maya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9901369

Award Number: 9901369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10430              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl A. Taube karl.traube@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Karl Traube, Mr. Karl Lorenzen will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will continue his archaeological research at the
              site of Tumben-Naranjal, located in the Quintana Roo region of Southern Mexico.
              The site is important because it experienced two periods of occupation. It was
              originally constructed during the Classic Maya period and contains temples,
              ceremonial tombs and other monuments which characterized the height of Mayan
              civilization. It and adjacent counterparts were relatively abandoned at the end
              of the Classic period and remained unoccupied for approximately 900 years.
              During the late Postclassic period which immediately proceeded Spanish
              immigration, the site was reoccupied, again by Mayan peoples. Mr. Lorenzen is
              interested in this latter time period and wants to determine how Postclassic
              leaders may have established ritual ties with both the abandoned buildings and
              with other features of the landscape to establish power. He believes that by
              manipulating and claiming symbolic ties with the Classic elite, Postclassic
              rulers worked to reinforce their own power. Many high status Postclassic family
              shrines and tombs are spatially associated with their earlier counterparts.
              Based on ethnographic analogy and analysis of early Spanish documents Mr.
              Lorenzen believes that this strategy was an intentional tactic employed by
              displaced Maya kin-based groups who during periods of migration recreated their
              lineage histories and transplanted them to the sites they reoccupied. The key
              component of this specialized approach incorporated a potent form of ancestor
              veneration strategically placed burials created a fictive patrimony which
              ultimately served to legitimize site title.

     In past field seasons Mr.
              Lorenzen has conducted survey and limited excavation at the site. With NSF
              support he will carry out test excavations around basal platforms of Late
              Postclassic shrine complexes as well as simple residential foundations
              associated with ceremonial architecture. Excavation of refuse deposits adjacent
              to ceremonial structures will recover artifacts used during ritual activities
              and provide valuable data regarding the use and function of these structures.
              Residential compounds will be examined for evidence of ritual architecture such
              as shrines and alters. The underlying question is how large groups of
              individuals were organized into functional social units and how status
              hierarchies developed and were maintained. Mayan archaeologists have come to
              realize that religious ritual served an important function in this regard and
              the fact that Tumben-Naranjal was reoccupied, makes it possible to gain unique
              insight into how this process worked.

     This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many regional
              archaeologists. It will shed new light onto prehistoric social organization and
              will assist in training a promising young scientist.

