Title       : Intermediate Energy Physics at Jefferson Lab and IUCF
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a9901529

Award Number: 9901529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $822701             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Dytman dytman+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wilfried W. Daehnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901529
Dytman
The University of Pittsburgh Intermediate Energy group has
              two
major projects underway.  The first project is centered around
the CEBAF
              Large Acceptance Spectrometer (CLAS) at the Jefferson
Lab.  We will use this
              newly commissioned detector for a wide
range of studies of the basic
              components of matter- the proton and 
neutron.  The microscopic structure of
              the proton has been studied
for many years, but its richness has made a
              quantitative understanding difficult to obtain.  Our basic goal is to learn as
              much as possible about the resonant intermediate states that are rearrangements
              of the quarks and gluons in the proton, i.e. the spectroscopy of the baryon
              states.  The basic reaction has 
photon or electron beams impinging on a
              liquid hydrogen 
target.  With CLAS, we can then examine essentially all of
              the many 
final states simultaneously.  Our group will study final states that
              include eta and eta-prime particles because limited data to date have shown
              unusual and interesting behavior.  The wide coverage will allow more complete
              theoretical studies of the quantum mechanical processes through which the final
              states develop.  We also working on a phenomenological analysis program to
              extract the spectroscopic information.  Our second project uses the Indiana
              University Cyclotron Facility (IUCF) Cooler Ring to produce pions in
              proton-proton collisions.  Our previous experiments found a strong sensitivity
              to the way the pion couples to the proton, one of the fundamental features of
              the strong interaction in nuclei.  The present experiments extend the study to
              spin variables at higher energy.

