Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Data Collection for a Study of the History
               of Greenland and the Greenlandic Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9901437

Award Number: 9901437
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna Berge aberge@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5914,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901437
Berge
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide Dr. Anna Berge with support for
              twelve months to work with Dr. Michael Fortescue at the University of
              Copenhagen, in the Department of Eskimology in Denmark.
Dr. Berge is studying
              the history of Greenlandic, a dialect of the Inuit (Eskimo) language.  The vast
              majority of work on Greenlandic has been produced in Denmark.  The Institute of
              Eskimology is one of the foremost centers of the study of Greenland and
              Greenlandic.  The history of West Greenlandic Eskimo has not been studied to
              any great extent.  This knowledge would make a valuable contribution to
              historical linguistics.  In Denmark, she will have access to library and
              archival materials, as well as to experts in the field of Eskimology.  There
              are written records of Greenlandic that go back to the 17th century.  The
              results of her research will provide insight into the development of
              Greenlandic in historic times, which will lead to a better understanding of
              topicality and text structure, which is an understudied aspect of linguistics. 
               
Dr. Fortescue, the Chair of the Institute, is an expert in the study of
              Greenlandic.  He has produced a comparative Eskimo dictionary with historical
              reconstruction of Proto-Eskimo words.
***

