Title       : Investigations of Macrocyles of Plant Origin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9901449

Award Number: 9901449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Madeleine M. Joullie mjoullie@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project is aimed at developing strategies for the synthesis of
              macrocycles of plant origin and alkaloids having unusual features requiring the
              development of new methodologies.  An area of special concern is the
              development of new synthetic applications of amino acids;  other areas of
              interest include new aryl-aryl ether syntheses and macrocyclization
              methodologies.  These chemistries are being pursued in the context of total
              synthetic efforts directed toward the macrocyclic peptides hymenocardine and
              astins C and D.  Further studies will involve the synthesis of fluorinated
              prolines, a carbocyclic analog of astin C, and a cis-amide bond mimic.

With
              this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program supports the
              research of Professor Madeleine M. Joullie of the University of Pennsylvania. 
              Professor Joullie is studying the chemistry of several molecules that are akin
              to small, cyclic proteins.  These naturally occuring substances originate in
              the plant kingdom although they are often produced in very small amounts, and
              their preparation in the laboratory is quite challenging.  In addition to the
              scientific curiosity involved in learning how to build such molecules, they are
              important for their pharmaceutical applications.  For example, the vancomycin
              family of antibiotics is included in this category, while others demonstrate
              antitumor activity.  A thoroughgoing study of ways to make these molecules in
              the laboratory will make possible an evaluation of their biological activity.

