Title       : Hamline University / 3M Company Project: A Liaison for Undergraduate Science
               Curricular Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9901782

Award Number: 9901782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert L. Kuczkowski                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $560402             (Estimated)
Investigator: Olaf A. Runquist orunquis@piper.hamline  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Brennan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Banovetz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Brisbois  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hamline University
	      Snelling & Hewitt Avenues
	      Saint Paul, MN  55104    612/641-2800

NSF Program : 1990      CHEMISTRY EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1504,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this GOALI project supported by the Special Projects Office of the Chemistry
              Division, Olaf Runquist of Hamline University will couple Hamline University
              with the 3M Corporation in a program to develop curricular models to prepare
              undergraduate science students better for careers in industry and to
              cross-educate faculty and industrial partners about their respective work
              environments.  The project's five target skill areas are communications,
              technical subjects, industrial organizations, team problem solving, and
              culture/technology/the global marketplace.  The project is divided into four
              programs involving interdisciplinary teams of faculty, students, and 3M
              professionals that will define curriculum requirements, define learning and
              assessment objectives, design learning models and incorporate them into the
              science curriculum, and participate in exchange programs between the two
              institutions.  In these exchange programs student and faculty interns would
              work at 3M, and 3M professionals would be involved in institutional activities
              at Hamline.  It is expected that 23 faculty, ten students, and more than 40 3M
              professionals will be involved in the project.

The Grant Opportunities for
              Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program aims to synergize
              industry-university partnerships by supporting a variety of industry-university
              linkages.  Of particular interest are programs that foster collaborative
              interactions between academic institutions and industry through research
              projects or fellowships.  Such programs allow faculty, students, and
              postdoctoral fellows and their industrial partners to make extended visits to
              the partner institutions, thereby helping to ensure that intellectual capital
              and emerging technologies are brought together.  This program is an example of
              such an exchange that will result in changes in a new model for student
              curricula enhanced by dialog and direct involvement between academic
              institutions and industry.

