Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Neighbor Recognition Between Territorial Bullfrogs (Rana
               catesbeiana): The Behavioral Ecology of a Psychological Phenomenon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9901199

Award Number: 9901199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9712               (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Carl Gerhardt gerhardtc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
In nature, animals recognize their neighbors.  This research will examine the
              foundation of how psychological mechanisms of recognition play a role in this
              widespread phenomenon.  Territorial male bullfrogs recognize their nearby
              neighbors by the distinctive properties of their acoustic communication
              signals, or songs.  Three acoustic playback experiments will address four
              unanswered questions about neighbor recognition: 1) Does the perceived fighting
              ability of new neighbor's affect the establishment of new territorial borders? 
              2) What is the relative importance of locational and acoustic cues in mediating
              recognition of neighbors?   3) How important are physical interactions during
              the establishment of territorial borders?  4) What is the role of memory in
              recognizing a neighbor?

The experiments will extend previous investigations
              to more focused and interesting questions about the psychological mechanisms of
              recognition,  providing an opportunity to gain deeper insight into the
              operation of these mechanisms in nature.   The results will provide a
              foundation for future studies examining the precise nature of the learning
              experience involved in neighbor recognition.  Because much is known about the
              processing of acoustic signals by the frog nervous system, the behavioral
              experiments in this proposal can form the basis for future neurophysiological
              investigations of neighbor recognition. This proposal continues a recent and
              important trend toward integrating behavioral, ecological and psychological
              approaches in the study of animal behavior.  

