Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Edge Effects and the Conservation of
               Mexican Cloud Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2001      
File        : a9901464

Award Number: 9901464
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68885              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Manson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R,Manson
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  12545    914/677-7569

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5922,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901464
Manson
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will support a twenty-four-month postdoctoral
              research visit by Dr. Robert H. Manson to work with Dr. Guadalupe
              Williams-Linera at the Instituto de Ecologia in Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico. 
              Twelve months of this project are being supported by NSF's U.S.-Mexico
              Program.
Dr. Manson will examine the consequences of habitat fragmentation for
              the maintenance of biological diversity in threatened Mexican cloud forests. 
              He will investigate how fragmentation may reduce the long-term viability of
              vertebrate communities in remnant patches of cloud forest and limit the ability
              of these forests to regenerate.  He will do this by addressing two questions:
              1)How does the activity and abundance of cloud forest vertebrates change along
              vegetation gradients from patch interiors into habitats surrounding forest
              fragments? and; How do the responses of herbivores to forest-field edges
              influence cloud forest regeneration in disturbed areas surrounding forest
              fragments?

Dr. Williams-Linera has conducted extensive studies on cloud
              forest vegetation and has been awarded a long-term European Community grant
              that will channel funds to support parallel herbivory studies in disturbed
              areas surrounding Chilean forests.  The Instituto de Ecologia is devoted
              primarily to the generation and dissemination of knowledge relevant to the use
              and conservation of natural resources and biodiversity in Mexico.  It has over
              140 scientists working in the areas of ecology, biosystematics and animal
              behavior. In addition, it houses the most important herbarium on the flora of
              Veracruz that will be crucial in the identification of plant species relevant
              to this project.
***

