Title       : Systems Support for Scalable Requestt-Specific File Service
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9901640

Award Number: 9901640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A.L. Narasimha Reddy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project proposed to build an experimental system that can provide scalable
              request-specific file service. The demands on the file and web servers continue
              to increase along with the increase in the diversity of application
              requirements (deterministic guarantees for continuous media retrieval, short
              latencies for interactive applications and throughput requirements of regular
              file retrieval).  The new applications' (multimedia and database decision
              support) requirements of large amounts of I/O bandwidth also prompt new
              directions in providing file service.  These application trends, coupled with
              the trends in the availability of hardware such as network-attached disks, and
              cheaper processing power, prompt us to investigate the following:  

(a) How
              to provide flexible service in a file/storage system?
(b) How to provide
              scheduling and resource allocation support for integrated service of multiple
              types of requests?
(c) How to provide support for migrating service close to
              the data?
(d) What kind of application interface should be provided for
              flexible service?

This project proposed to build and experimental prototype
              based on a cluster of PCs.  The prototype will be instrumental in evaluating
              the validity and efficacy of the proposed file-specific request service.

