Title       : SBIR: Phase II: Removal of Contaminants from Soil Using an Enhanced
               Phytoextraction Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9901716

Award Number: 9901716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dalibor Hodko hodko@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    979/693-0017

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project describes the
              development of a new method for in situ removal of contaminants from soil by
              combining the processes of phytoremediation and electrokinetic remediation of
              soil. Phytoremediation is an attractive approach for cleanup of soil because it
              is a low cost and low maintenance technology, which can be applied in treatment
              of soils contaminated by heavy metals, radionuclides and organic contaminants.
              However, its application is limited to surface contamination only because the
              cleanup depth is strictly determined by the length of the plant roots.  It is
              also a passive technology in terms of contaminant transport. The movement of
              contaminants in the soil is induced exclusively by a slow plant root suction,
              thus the efficiency of the contaminant removal depends on the extension of the
              plant roots in the soil subsurface. The new combined electrokinetic
              phytoremediation technology developed in Phase I utilizes the electrokinetic
              effects induced in soil by the application of an electric field to achieve an
              efficient transport of contaminants in the rhizosphere and to enhance metal
              accumulation in the plant roots. The Phase I results demonstrated that using
              the electrokinetic phytoremediation process up to two orders of magnitude
              higher lead concentration could be achieved in Brassica juncea mustard plants
              compared to the conventional phytoremediation process. Phase II will focus on
              the optimization and scaling-up of the process parameters governing the
              enhancement of contaminant extraction by the plants in conditions of the
              applied electric field. The field test results will yield technical and
              economical evaluation of the process and recommendations about applicability of
              the combined electrokinetic phytoremediation to contaminated sites with varying
              chemical and hydrogeological characteristics.
     The developed
              electrokinetic phytoremediation process will have large applications for in
              situ cleanup of
soils contaminated by heavy metals, radionuclides, and/or
              organic contaminants. Compared to conventional phytoremediation processes, the
              proposed process can be applied to soils where contaminants are located deeper
              than the root zone of plant hyperaccumulators. This will significantly extend
              the application of phytoremediation to the sites with deep contaminant
              plumes.



