Title       : Intracrystalline Protein Repeat Sequences: Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a9901356

Award Number: 9901356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Evans jse@dave-edmunds.dental.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9901356
Evans

The focus of this project is on an emerging area of
              biomolecular-based materials referred to as biomineralization, an
              organism-directed process which lead to the formation of composites - i.e.,
              polymers in association with inorganic material.  An interesting model system
              in biomineralization are sea urchins and sponges: in their embryonic stage,
              both organisms produce a calcium carbonate-based mineral structure known as the
              spicule.  In sea urchins, the spicule begins as single crystal calcite, but
              develops an amorphous calcium carbonate phase which envelopes the calcitic
              phase.  The amorphous phase then transforms into calcite as development
              proceeds.  In sponges, the story is slightly different: some spicules are
              either entirely comprised of amorphous calcium carbonate, or, have a calcitic
              core which is surrounded by the amorphous phase.  In both organisms, the
              inorganic matrix contains a  protein-based, self-assembled matrix which runs
              parallel to the mineral phase.  The proteins which comprise this matrix
              contains a protein-based, self-assembled matrix which runs parallel to the
              mineral phase, and are believed to stabilize the amorphous phase and/or
              manifest fracture-resistant or elastic properties.  To understand how these
              proteins perform their functions, NMR and molecular modeling studies will be
              undertaken to determine the structure of sea urchin spicule matrix protein
              sequences, and, how these particular domains may either associate with each
              other, with the mineral environment, or, behave under force extension.  The
              data obtained from these studies will not only help to understanding how
              biological self-assembly, inorganic phase stability, and fracture resistance
              occur within spicules, but will also lead to the development of a molecular
              blueprint for novel and versatile biomimetic-based materials.  Educational
              goals within this project will include the development of multidisciplinary
              training programs for graduate and undergraduate students, as well as
              involvement of high school students in research projects which draw from the
              areas of biology, chemistry, and physics.

In a quest for better materials
              that can be used in medicine, aerospace and manufacturing, scientists are now
              turning to Nature, where simple organisms, such as sea urchins and sponges,
              have developed way to generate structures that protect them from their
              environment.  These structures involve naturally-occurring polymers that
              associate with inorganic-based materials like calcium carbonate.  Our plan is
              to study these structures tat the molecular level.  From these studies, new
              strategies will emerge for material processing, creating
              environmentally-friendly materials, and improving material properties such as
              fracture resistance or material stability.

