Title       : Structure Preserving Reduced Rank Approximation: Theory, Algorithms and Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9901992

Award Number: 9901992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haesun Park   (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Ben Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Determining a structure preserving reduced rank approximation to a given
              structured matrix has many important applications such as signal processing,
              image processing, system identification, and control 
processes.  The goal of
              this project is to develop the mathematical foundation, and design fast and
              robust algorithms for computing this structured reduced rank approximation, and
              making the resulting software available for use in the application areas.  In
              this research, all linear and nonlinear structures of 
matrices will be
              considered, where the matrices can be represented as a differentiable function
              of a parameter vector, which includes sparse, symmetric, banded with fixed
              bandwidth, Hankel, Toeplitz, Vandermonde, or combinations of these.  In
              addition, the project will investigate a broad range of applications for which
              new techniques will prove effective, and for which the accuracy of solutions
              can be improved dramatically with the exploitation of both rank deficiency and
              problem structure. 

The basic approach used is the minimization of the norm
              of an appropriate error, while preserving the structure and specified lower
              rank of the approximating matrix. This is a difficult problem, both
              theoretically and computationally, because the structure preservation and rank
              reduction requirements make this a nonconvex minimization problem, which may
              have more than one local minimum.  To overcome this difficulty, several
              techniques will be attempted, including the way in which the reduced rank
              condition is formulated, and the selection of good initial values. This
              approach leads to a structure preserving overdetermined system of equations,
              which can be solved by the Structured Total Least Norm (STLN) algorithm,
              developed previously by the principal investigator. 

