Title       : SBIR Phase II: Controlled Foam Injection for the Fracturing of Rock and Concrete
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a9901791

Award Number: 9901791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chapman Young chyoung@cfiex.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appl Geodynamics, Inc
	      110 Anglers Drive, Box 2129
	      Steamboat Springs, CO  804772129    970/879-3032

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0510703   Rock Fracture Mechanics                 
Program Ref : 1064,5373,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research  Phase II project is directed
              towards the study and refinement of a
new non-explosive rock excavation and
              concrete demolition method. The method involves injecting high-
pressure foam
              into pre-drilled holes in the rock or concrete to be broken through a barrel
              incorporating a new hole bottom sealing method. The high viscosity of the foam
              (as compared to a gas) combined with its stored energy characteristics (as
              compared to a liquid) result in very controlled breakage. The Phase I program
              demonstrated that the method can consistently break rock or concrete at
              pressures an order of magnitude less than in explosive or propellant based
              methods. Airblast and flyrock are reduced to very benign levels allowing the
              method to be applied in a continuous manner and to be used in urban and other
              sensitive environments. The incremental breakage of the method combined with
              the simplicity of the requisite hardware make the method highly amenable to
              automation. The Phase II project will investigate foam formulations to further
              improve the efficiency of the method, improved hole sealing methods, automation
              of the drill and break cycle, and integration of the technology with other
              mining and tunneling operations, such as mucking and ground control.
     The
              controlled foam injection method for rock breakage could have many applications
              in infrastructure development and maintenance. The method would be ideal for
              developing utility tunnels under existing streets and buildings, providing
              access tunnels or shafts to existing subway systems, modifying the round bores
              produced by tunnel boring machines or excavating underground space for
              buildings. In the area of concrete breakage and stripping the method would be
              useful for demolishing concrete structures when explosive methods were
              precluded or where salvage and recycling of building or structure components
              are desirable.


