Title       : Lives In Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a9901978

Award Number: 9901978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1830386            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula S. Apsell paula apsell@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9901978
APSELL

WGBH is producing four, two-hour programs on the lives of
              scientists.  These programs will be the initial programs in a continuing series
              of television portraits of distinguished scientists to be broadcast as regular
              features in the prime-time science series NOVA.  The scientists to be covered
              in the first four programs are Galileo Galilei, Charles Darwin, Marie Curie,
              and Percy Julian.  By illuminating the lives and scientific careers of these
              important figures, the programs will enhance public understanding of such basic
              scientific concepts as evolution, the solar system, the chemical bond and the
              structure of the atom.  Ultimately, the programs will give viewers a new
              perspective on the process of scientific discovery.  

Ancillary educational
              support for the programs will include enhanced content on the web site at NOVA
              Online and classroom support material in the NOVA Teacher's Guide that is
              mailed to 60,000 teachers nationwide.  WGBH also has formed an outreach
              partnership with the American Library Association to create informal
              educational resources for use by families, youths, and adults.  The core of
              this special outreach plan is a set of Library Resource Kits that will be
              available to all 16,000 public libraries.  

Paula Apsell, Executive Producer
              for NOVA, will serve as PI for the project.  Members of the advisory committee
              include:  Evelyn Fox Keller, Professor of History and Philosophy of Science,
              MIT; Kenneth R. Manning, Thomas Meloy Professor of Rhetoric and of the History
              of Science, MIT; Noami Oreskes, Associate Professor of History, University of
              California, San Diego; Daniel I. Rubenstein, Chair of the Department of Ecology
              and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University; and Neil D. Tyson, Frederick P.
              Rose Director of the Hayden Planetarium.



