Title       : GOALI: Fabrication and Electronic Properties of Nanocrystalline Silicon
               Superlattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9901064

Award Number: 9901064
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260570             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Tsybeskov   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philippe M. Fauchet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This GOALI project is a collaborative research activity between Motorola and the
              University of Rochester. The project addresses fundamental materials science
              synthesis and processing issues, fabrication, and exploratory applications of
              Si nanocrystal layered structures. Structural characterization, and modeling of
              the role of surface and interface stress in controlled a-Si recrystallization
              and related issues such as Si nanocrystal size distribution, positioning
              including lateral separation, crystallographic orientation, and surface
              passivation will be studied. Silicon quantum dot electronics, including
              high-density memory cells and other devices based on single-electron phenomena
              will be evaluated. The research will be performed by several investigators from
              the University of Rochester and Motorola in collaboration with Rochester
              Institute of Technology, the National Research Council, Ottawa, Canada, and the
              Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC. The program represents a partnership
              between academic institutions, government laboratories, and industry, yielding
              a collaboration between technologists, experimentalists, and theorists to
              address basic issues in silicon nanoscale materials science and
              technology.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area
              of materials science having high potential technological relevance. The
              research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
              level to important fabrication aspects of electronic/photonic devices. The
              basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
              contribute to improving the perform-ance of advanced devices and circuits for
              computing and communications.  An important feature of the program is the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. Educational features of the
              project include special opportunities for students from the University of
              Rochester and Rochester Institute of Technology to experience academic and
              industrial research perspectives and approaches, and access to special
              instrumentation and facilities. The project is co-supported by the MPS
              OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities).
***

