Title       : Laser Surface Thermal Lensing (STL) as a Tool for Probing the Dynamic-Mechanical
               Properties of Polymer Thin Films: Applications in Detecting Solid-State Phase
               Transitions, etc.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a9901306

Award Number: 9901306
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. Snyder donald.snyder@emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Marshall Thomsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9141,9146,9161,9229,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9901306
Snyder

Absorption of energy from a pulse-modulated laser beam
              impringing on a transparent material leads to cyclic thermal expansion and
              contraction of the surface exposed to the beam. This distortion of the surface
              forms a transient optical lens structure which can be probed by monitoring
              changes in a second, continuous laser beam reflected at an angle off the lens
              curvature.  Major improvements in detection and quantitation of the reflected
              probe-beam developed at the EMU Experimental Laser Physics Laboratory have
              resulted in a highly sensitive technique, termed laser Surface Thermal Lensing
              (STL), for study of the thermomechanical response of surface materials. 
              Micron-thick films or organic polymers applied over the surface of optical
              materials have been found to give much stronger STL signals than the glass
              background.  Since the magnitude and phase of the STL signals should be a
              function of both the absorbtivity and the dynamic/mechanical properties of the
              polymer, it is reasonable to theorize that any changes in external conditions
              which affect these properties should result in detectable changes in the STL
              signal.  This research project will study the relationship between laser STL
              characteristics of a polymer, its structure, mechanical properties and relevant
              external conditions.  Methodology will involve initial study of instrument
              parameters such as optical bench configuration, pump-beam frequency, power and
              wavelength in order to optimize the STL response of suitable test polymers. 
              The STL signal behavior will then be studied as a function of temperature for
              different polymers to determine the feasibility of using this technique to
              investigate glass-transition and other solid-state phase transitions.  The
              effect of small organic molecules adsorbed from the gas phase into the surface
              layer of the polymer on the STL response of the polymer film will also be
              investigated to determine it plasticization effects can be quantified by
              changes in the STL signal.

The laser STL technique has numerous potential
              applications in polymer structural analysis and related fields since it allows
              studies of dynamic/mechanical properties for polymers as processed thin films. 
              The ability to measure glass-transition temperatures over minute areas of the
              polymer surface would be useful in studying structural defects due to
              phase-separation in commercial coating systems based on polymer blends.  The
              sensors for airborne materials such a solvent vapors and organic pollutants. 
              STL with tuneable infrared lasers could also allow the technique to be used as
              a sensitive detector for analytical spectroscopy of surface chemical
              composition.

