Title       : SBIR Phase II: A New Volumetric Data Storage Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9901856

Award Number: 9901856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399914             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Rostler OFFICE@SRL.COM  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Science Research Lab Inc
	      15 Ward Street
	      Somerville, MA  02143    617/547-1122

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 1517,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   There is an ever-increasing need for improved data storage techniques.  A
              technology that can store terabytes of information in a small volume
              economically would be extremely useful, especially if the data could be (1)
              accessed randomly in several microseconds, and (2) stored permanently, making
              archiving possible.  The goal of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
              Phase II project is to achieve these benefits by storing terabits of
              information volumetrically in an optical microchannel array, rather than on a
              surface.  The individual bits are encoded both spectrally and spatially, and
              the array is accessed by scanning one end with a light beam.  In Phase I the
              writing process and data coding schemes were analyzed theoretically, optics for
              reading and writing were designed, and an experiment demonstrated that the
              noise level was insignificant.  The proposed Phase II research will demonstrate
              the volumetric reading and writing of data to fibers and microchannels with a
              spatial and spectral density that is consistent with achieving terabit storage
              in a compact array, Phase III will demonstrate terabit data storage and will
              develop a manufacturing prototype Microchannel Array ROM.
     The development
              of a data storage system that is based on optical microchannel storage has
              unique features that provide it with vast commercial potential, It combines
              high-capacity terabit storage With microsecond access time, volumetric storage
              density and low cost.  Two major applications are: (1) the maintenance and use
              of large databases, particularly image databases, such as medical, scientific,
              and military databases; and (2) mass recording of large digital video
              information for the entertainment industry.

