Title       : Research in Nuclear Astrophysics, Nuclear Physics, and Particle Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a9901241

Award Number: 9901241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard N. Boyd   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1234      LOW ENERGY NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This NSF grant is intended to support three main programs, all aimed at
              understanding supernovae or x-ray bursts, two of the most dramatic events in
              the cosmos.  The first two will study nuclei or nuclear reactions that are
              important to processes in stars that synthesize many of the nuclei of which our
              universe is comprised.  Both processes involve unusually hot stellar
              environments, which result in the processes proceeding at very rapid rates. 
              Thus they can add many protons, in one case, or neutrons, in the other, without
              undergoing the decays that usually maintain nuclei at or near stability. 
              Understanding these processes necessitates knowing the properties of, and
              reactions on, the nuclei through which they pass, so both of these programs
              focus on short-lived nuclei.  These nuclei can only be produced at radioactive
              nuclear beam facilities, necessitating our working at accelerator laboratories
              at Michigan State University, TRIUMF in Canada, or RIKEN in Japan.  A good
              understanding of the nuclear aspects of the processes by which nuclei are
              synthesized ultimately allows inversion of the predicted nuclear abundances to
              understand or constrain the stellar environments in which these processes
              occur.  Thus these two programs are aimed at understanding both the
              nucleosynthesis from these processes and the conditions in which the processes
              operate.  Much of this research will produce data of interest to both nuclear
              astrophysics and nuclear physics.

The third project is for development of an
              observatory of neutrinos emitted from a galactic supernova.  While this will
              ultimately be a much larger effort than could be supported by the present
              grant, we plan over the next three years to perform the calculations and
              develop the detectors that will be essential for this observatory.  The
              neutrinos from a supernova are expected to arrive at earth in several tens of
              seconds, during which time we should be able to obtain an extraordinary amount
              of diagnostic information about the process of stellar collapse and the ensuing
              events that accompany the explosion of a supernova and the collapse of its core
              to a neutron star or black hole.  It may also be possible to use the data to
              determine the mass of the most massive neutrinos, information that would be
              extremely useful to other areas of astrophysics and to particle physics.


