Title       : Dissertation Research: Effects of Plant Diversity on Community Invasibility in a
               California Riparian System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9901984

Award Number: 9901984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7710               (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla M. D'Antonio dantonio@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne P. Sousa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9901984
D'Antonio
Great concern over the impacts of invasive species has
              stimulated renewed interest in the hypothesis that diverse communities better
              resist invasion. Evaluating this hypothesis in natural communities has proven
              challenging because variation in diversity is controlled by, and therefore
              covaries with, disturbance, resources, consumers, etc.-the same factors
              directly impacting invasions. This research will isolate the independent
              effects of diversity and the effects of these covarying factors on the
              invasibility of sedge tussocks that dominate the Eel River. Each tussock houses
              a mini-community, varying naturally in native plant diversity, making an ideal
              system to explore the diversity-invasibility relationship. Exotic and native
              plants will be introduced on tussocks varying naturally in diversity and onto
              tussocks where diversity has been experimentally manipulated. This powerful
              combination will enable these investigators to determine how the number of
              species on a tussock influences its invasibility, evaluate the degree to which
              this relationship is driven by native diversity, and explore the underlying
              mechanisms. By additionally examining how diversity relates to invasibility at
              scales broader than the tussock, this research will also evaluate how the
              diversity-invasibility relationship changes with scale. This research will aid
              the conservation of threatened riparian communities, and enhance the
              predictability of invasion patterns across landscapes.

