Title       : Symbolic Software for the Study of Integrability of Nonlinear Partial
               Differential and Differential-Difference Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a9901929

Award Number: 9901929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233645             (Estimated)
Investigator: Willy A. Hereman whereman@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to further develop and implement powerful
              symbolic algorithms
for the investigation of integrability, through the
              calculation of conservation laws,
higher-order symmetries, and recursion
              operators of nonlinear partial differential equations (PDES) and
              differential-difference equations (DDEs).
Based on the concept of scaling
              invariance, the implemented algorithms will allow one to compute explicitly
              conserved densities, Hamiltonians, generalized symmetries, and cosymmetries. 
              On the operator side, the algorithms can be used to compute the recursion
              operator and its conjugate, and the symplectic and cosymplectic (Hamiltonian)
              operators.  The envisioned product is a comprehensive symbolic package in
              Mathematica syntax that will complement and build on previous software to
              compute invariants and symmetries for PDEs and DDEs.
In addition, the project
              further develops symbolic software to compute exact solutions of PDEs and DDEs.
               The solution methods are based on multi-linear homogenization techniques. 
              Once implemented, the software will allow the user to compute closed form
              solutions, such as soliton solutions and homoclinic and heteroclinic orbits,
              for large classes of nonlinear PDES.  The extension of the method to DDEs will
              be investigated.
The software will be written in Mathematica syntax.  The
              packages will be entirely symbolic and produce analytical output.  The
              development of novel mathematical techniques, in addition to the refinement and
              generalization of existing methods and algorithms, is an essential part of the
              proposed work.  A comparison with existing algorithms will also be carried
              out.
The aim is to provide high-quality symbolic software to researchers
              working on various aspects of integrability in soliton theory, dynamical
              systems, and mathematical physics.  Specifically, our solvers and integrability
              testers are useful for the analysis of nonlinear PDEs and DDEs that arise in
              networks, elastic media, chemical kinetics, material sciences, biosciences,
              fluid dynamics, plasma physics, and nonlinear optics.

