Title       : New Applications and Algorithms that Involve the Kronecker Product
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1999    
File        : a9901988

Award Number: 9901988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247874             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Van Loan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Kronecker product has a rich and very pleasing algebra that supports a wide
              range of fast, elegant, and practical algorithms. Three trends in scientific
              computing suggest that this important matrix operation will have an
              increasingly greater role to play in the future. First, the application areas
              where Kronecker products abound are all thriving. These include signal
              processing, image processing, semidefinite programming, and quantum computing.
              Second, sparse factorizations and Kronecker products are proving to be the
              preferred way to look at fast linear transforms. Researchers have taken the
              Kronecker methodology as developed for the fast Fourier transform and used it
              to build exciting alternatives. Third, as computers get more powerful,
              researchers are more willing to entertain problems of high dimension and this
              leads to Kronecker products whenever low-dimension techniques are "tensored"
              together. Moreover, Kronecker products are a useful way to keep track of data
              motion in memory hierarchies that are the hallmark of advanced machines. 

In
              light of these developments, the goal of this project is to widen the use of
              the Kronecker product in numerical linear algebra. The first step is to study
              the nearest Kronecker product problem because progress in this area will lead
              to new and interesting ideas for preconditioners. Other applications that
              require Kronecker product approximations have been identified and many new
              methods are called for. All of the algorithmic work will culminate in
              production of Matlab and C++ libraries.  The research will heighten the profile
              of the Kronecker product throughout the field of matrix computations and
              thereby make it easier for researchers to spot Kronecker "opportunities" in
              their work. By building an "infrastructure" of effective Kronecker-product
              algorithms, applications that feature the operation will proliferate at an even
              greater rate.

