Title       : Surface Chemistry of Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a9901224

Award Number: 9901224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $615000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Schwartz jschwartz@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Bernasek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This interdisciplinary award to Jeffrey Schwartz and Steven L. Bernasek at
              Princeton University is supported by the Advanced Materials Program in the
              Chemistry Division and the Solid State Chemistry Program in the Division of
              Materials Research. The research will address the synthesis and
              characterization of the interfaces of dissimilar materials used in electronic
              devices. The common theme will be surface modification, viewed from the
              perspective of metal-ligand interactions. Two areas will be emphasized. First
              is a study of surface passivation using metal alkoxides to effect chemical
              bonding between the substrate surface and a polymer overlayer. This study will
              facilitate packaging electronics to withstand failure by oxidative or chemical
              attack. The second research area will focus on the activation of electronic
              materials by using surface complexes to bond conducting organic species to
              modified electrode surfaces of importance for the preparation of efficient
              light emitting diodes (LED). Typically, surface-modified indium tin oxide
              electrodes will be overlayered with copolymers containing polyphenylenvinylene,
              polypyridylvinylene and polyvinylcarbazole. Interfaces will be characterized by
              FTIR and XPS.  Correlation of LED performance of multilayer devices with
              molecular structure will be carried out through collaboration with Prof.
              Antoine Kahn in Electrical Engineering.

Encapsulated multilayer composites
              are ubiquitous in microelectronic devices.
This fundamental study of the
              synthesis and characterization of surfaces and interfaces in multilayers will
              lead to more efficient and environmentally stable devices.  The highly
              interdisciplinary nature of the research in synthesis, characterization,
              polymer science and microelectronics will provide broad training for
              students.


