Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Novel Microcrystalline Silicon Solar Cell Devices Prepared Using
               a Unique Microwave Gas Jet Deposition Technique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9901811

Award Number: 9901811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott J. Jones sjones@ovonic.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Energy Conversion Devices
	      1675 West Maple Road
	      Troy, MI  480847197    248/280-1900

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,5373,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II will further
              develop a novel microwave Gas Jet technique for its use the production of high
              efficiency microciystalline silicon solar cells at high deposition rates.  In
              Phase I, it was demonstrated technique can he used to prepare microcrystalline
              silicon i-layers for single-junction nip solar cells at deposition A/s, rate
              3-5 times high than those obtained using standard techniques. These rates make
              the large-scale production microcrystalline cells economically feasible. 
              Microcrystalline cells are an attractive alternative to amorphous silicon
              germanium cells as red light absorbing structures in high efficiency amorphous
              silicon based multi-junction solar cell devices because their efficiencies do
              not degrade with long-term light exposure.  Thus use of the microcyrstalline
              materials will lead to higher stable efficiencies for the multi-junction cells.
               In Phase II, the solar cell efficiencies for these microcrystalline cells will
              be further improved through optimization of the deposition conditions which
              include the use of carbon and fluorine based gases, and use of new load-locked
              hardware for the preparation of doped layers without air exposure of layer
              interfaces.  Also, hardware designs for large-scale usage of the Gas Jet
              technique will be tested.
     A successful program will lead to the
              replacement of the standard rf glow discharge deposition technique in ECD's
              joint venture solar module production lines with the Gas Jet technique as well
              as the replacement or red-light absorbing amorphous silicongermanium layers in
              ECD's triple-junction solar cell design with more stable microcrystalline
              layers.  As a result, we will fabricate modules with higher stable efficiencies
              at reduced costs. This will lead to a wider use of Photovoltaic (PV) products
              thereby reducing the dependency on fossil fuel energy sources.  Development of
              a high deposition rate technique to prepare high quality microcrystallitic
              silicon could also be used in other applications such as in thin film
              transistors, photodetectors, and photosensors.

