Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Comparative Study on Woody Disjunct Plant
               Taxa Between Temperate Eastern Asia and North America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a9901277

Award Number: 9901277
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32060              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qinfeng Guo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Q,Guo
	      102 Plant Industry
	      Lincoln, NE  685830814    402/437-5178

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5921,5956,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901277
Guo
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral
              research visit by Dr. Qinfeng Guo to work with Dr. Xingguo Han at the Chinese
              Academy of Sciences in Xiangshan, Beijing, China and Dr. M. Kato at the
              University of Tokyo in Japan.  For support of the Japan portion, Dr. Guo has
              been nominated for an award under the Japan Society for the Promotion of
              Science Program.  The Program will also support six months of this project in
              the United States at the University of Missouri under the direction of Dr.
              Robert E. Ricklefs.
Dr. Guo's research focuses on an important problem in
              plant geography and evolutionary biology, that of the origin of the North
              American disjunctions and the forces that drive evolution from presumably
              similar ancestors once the separation occurs.  He will assemble data available
              for the taxa from literature and herbaria and subject them to new statistical
              analyses.  The results will increase our understanding of the processes
              involved in the diversification of these lineages.  This project will give
              English speaking researchers access to data previously available only in
              Chinese and Japanese.
Dr. Han is director of the Institute of Botany of the
              Chinese Academy of Sciences.  He has organized several international botanical
              expeditions in China and Southeast Asia.  The Institute is the largest
              botanical research unit in China and has the largest herbarium in Asia.  Dr.
              Kato is very knowledgeable on all other Eastern Asia-North American disjunct
              plant taxa and his institution, the University of Tokyo has the largest
              herbarium and most comprehensive botanical literature collection in Japan.  Dr.
              Ricklefs has been active in the geographical analyses of biodiversity patterns.
               His program works in conjunction with the Missouri Botany Garden.
***

