Title       : Travel Grants for Students to Attend the American Power Conference, to be held
               in Chicago, Illinois in April 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1999   
File        : a9901622

Award Number: 9901622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1999  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9975               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander J. Flueck flueck@ece.iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9901622
Flueck

The American Power Conference (APC), sponsored by the
              Illinois Institute of Technology (IIT), is an annual national forum for the
              discussion of the broad technical aspects of generation, transmission,
              distribution and utilization of power.  APC has significant educational value
              particularly for undergraduate students who aim to learn more about the
              industry.  In recognition of this fact, IIT has been conducting a special
              program for faculty and students in conjunction with APC.  This program is
              called the Ben Elliott Sponsored Student Faculty (SSF) Program.  The program
              features special breakfast seminars and other events (e.g., plant tours)
              expressly for students in addition to the regular APC technical
              sessions.

Through industry sponsorship, the program has been successful in
              enabling over 120 students and faculty to participate in APC each year,
              However, many undergraduate and graduate students are currently unable to
              attend due to lack of industry sponsors.  The emerging competitive electric
              power industry environment makes it difficult for existing sponsors to maintain
              their current levels of sponsorship.

In this proposal, we request travel
              funds, for 35 students to attend APC and participate in the Ben Elliott SSF
              Program for the 1999 APC.  The amount will be cost-shared with funds from
              utilities and from universities of the students.  The students will be selected
              from among those enrolled in U.S. universities per the following
              criteria:

Undergraduate students, in particular, sophomores and juniors will
              be given priority.

Women, under-represented minorities, and disabled
              students will be given first preference.

U.S. citizens and permanent
              residents will receive greater consideration than non-citizens.

Students who
              have demonstrated prior interest in the power industry either through power
              engineering courses or through internships will receive additional
              consideration.

Graduate students who will present papers at APC will be
              given preference over other graduate students.

This grant will significantly
              aid the Ben Elliott SSF Program in its mission of encouraging more students
              (especially undergraduates) to pursue careers in power engineering.



