Title       : SBIR Phase II: Catalysts for Carbon Monoxide Removal During Automobile Cold
               Start
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a9901857

Award Number: 9901857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Gebhard   (Principal Investigator current)
              Girish Srinivas  (Principal Investigator former)
              Di Wei  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : TDA Research, Inc
	      12345 West 52nd Avenue
	      Wheat Ridge, CO  800331917    303/940-2301

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project deals with developing a
              novel low
temperature CO oxidation catalyst for CO removal from indoor air and
              for gas masks. CO is
frequently found in indoor air due to faulty heating
              equipment, cracked heat exchangers, cigarette
smoke, etc. The CO levels in
              indoor air can be hazardous especially to chronically ill patients,
children,
              etc. TDA Research, Inc. (TDA) has developed a novel catalyst that effectively
              oxidizes CO to C02 at temperatures as low as 250C. This catalyst can be used In
              the HVAC system to oxidize CO to C02 in the return air in buildings. The CO
              catalyst can be used to remove CO from restaurants, offices, casinos, fire
              stations etc. TDA has collaborated with a major catalyst manufacturer and an
              HVAC equipment manufacturer and installer to commercialize the technology., The
              CO oxidation catalyst may also be used in cartridges for gas masks. The
              catalyst would oxidize any CO that would pass through currently used carbon
              canisters, rendering the air that is breathing  through the mask safe from CO. 
              During the Phase I project, TDA synthesized, characterized and tested a series
              of catalysts for CO oxidation at low temperature. In Phase II, TDA will
              synthesize monolith catalysts and test the catalysts under simulated indoor air
              cleanup application in the laboratory will also design and fabricate a system
              to perform a bench-scale test of the catalysts to determine the effectiveness
              and
durability of the catalyst under actual operation. Pelletized catalysts
              will be made and tested for the
gas mask application in Phase II.

The
              immediate application for the low temperature CO oxidation catalyst is in
              oxidizing CO to C02 in indoor air. There is a significant market for this
              application for use in commercial and residential buildings. Other markets are
              in the use of CO oxidation catalyst for gas, masks to remove CO from breathing
              air, and for catalysts in PEM fuel cells.

