Title       : Studies of Convection Initiation and Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9901688

Award Number: 9901688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Kingsmill davidk@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under this award the Principal Investigator will perform research on the
              initiation and evolution of convective storms.  The goal is to advance
              fundamental knowledge of the kinematic, dynamic, and thermodynamic processes in
              convection initiation and evolution in order to improve the accuracy of storm
              prediction by operational forecasters.  Since the consequences of convective
              storms can be severe, an increase in predictive capability will serve both
              public and commercial interests.

Boundary layer convergence lines
              (boundaries) is a focus of this research.  During the past fifty years, the
              role of these boundaries in processes related to convection has been
              investigated.  Gust fronts, sea-breeze fronts, cold fronts, drylines, and other
              boundaries, for example, have been associated with the initiation of
              convection.  Further, the evolution of convection has been hypothesized to be
              related to boundary characteristics. This research emphasizes investigation of
              the role of boundaries in convection initiation and evolution.  The specific
              objectives are to:
1. Determine the kinematic, dynamic, and thermodynamic
              fields associated with the development of horizontal shearing instabilities
              along thunderstorm outflow boundaries and the role of these instabilities in
              convection initiation.
2. Characterize the kinematic, dynamic, and
              thermodynamic structures associated with boundary collisions and the effect
              they have on convection initiation and evolution.
3. Determine the kinematic,
              dynamic, and thermodynamic processes involved in convective cell
              mergers.
These objectives will be pursued by testing specific hypotheses using
              high quality Doppler radar, surface mesonet, balloon sounding, and aircraft
              data from the 1991 Convection and Precipitation! Electrification (CaPE)
              experiment in east-central Florida.  This program was conducted in a region
              ideally suited to the topics addressed in this research and involved a wide
              range of ground-based and airborne data collection instruments.  Two analytical
              approaches will be pursued.  Objectives 1 and 2 will be investigated through
              limited analysis of numerous cases to test research hypotheses in a
              statistically significant manner.  Objective 3 will be investigated through an
              in-depth, case study approach.







iii

