Title       : Experiments in Adaptable Distributed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1999      
File        : a9901712

Award Number: 9901712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bharat Bhargava   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Bharat Bhargava
CCR-9901712


An adaptable system can gracefully reconfigure
              based on its environment during execution.  A series of experiments are being
              conducted that will lead in the development of policies for adaptability at the
              application, system, and network layer to meet the quality of service
              requirements.  The impact of system constraints in determining the quality of
              service that can be guaranteed to the user is investigated.  The adaptability
              guidelines and mechanisms that will be implemented in the application and
              system software are being identified.  How adaptability impacts in meeting the
              quality of service requirements in different applications is evaluated.  The
              focus is on two fundamentals research problems:  Adaptability mechanisms and
              infrastructure and Adaptable quality of service provision and control for
              distributed systems.  This will lead toward developing expert rules/guidelines
              for system adaptability and its impact on various applications.  This will
              allow the research on the behavior of system software and its impact on various
              emerging applications such as electronic commerce. Digital libraries, and video
              conferencing systems.  This research will allow experiments with advanced
              system services, protocols, techniques and their experimental evaluation.  This
              knowledge is applicable to various system software used in collaborative
              computing, distributed file systems, multimedia application, and real-time
              processing.

