Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Integrating Multi-Date Satellite Images and
               Dynamic Spatial Modeling with GIS in a Rapidly Suburbanized Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9901082

Award Number: 9901082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6180               (Estimated)
Investigator: Chor-Pang Lo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Outward expansion of metropolitan areas continues to be one of the most
              significant forms of land-use and land-cover change across the Earth's surface.
               Within the United States, suburban expansion is estimated to result in the
              conversion of more than 20 square km daily of farmland or open space into urban
              uses each day.  Monitoring growth and change along the metropolitan periphery
              is of critical concern both to those who study metropolitan dynamics and those
              who must manage resources and provide services in these rapidly changing
              environments.  This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the
              processes resulting in land-use and land-cover change from 1973 to the present
              along the outskirts of the Atlanta, Georgia, metropolitan area through the
              integration of information from satellite images taken at different times and a
              dynamic spatial model functioning on a geographic information system. 
              Satellite-image processing, dynamic model development and calibration, and
              interactive data visualization will be used to assess the spatial and temporal
              characteristics of suburban land-use and land-cover change.  The evolution of
              scattered and clustered urban forms will be evaluated in relation to
              demographic and socioeconomic changes.  This project will enhance conceptual
              understandings of land-use and land-cover change mechanisms across different
              biophysical and socioeconomic domains, and it will add insights regarding the
              applicability of new forms of data integration and modeling of change.  As a
              Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
              support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

