Title       : The IGEX 76 Ge Double Beta Decay Experiment and CUORE, The Next Generation 130
               Te Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9901626

Award Number: 9901626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268076             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank T. Avignone avignone@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1234      LOW ENERGY NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The International Germanium Experiment (IGEX) is an intense search for an exotic
              nuclear decay mode, nutrionless double-beta decay, the existence of which would
              definitely prove that neutrinos are their own
anti-particles, and have
              non-zero mass.  Presently the experiment is being operated in the Canfranc
              Underground Laboratory operated by the University of Zaragoza in Spain, and
              includes three large germanium
detectors fabricated with isotopically enriched
              germanium from the former Soviet Union.  At present a forth detector is being
              fabricated with funding from the US Department of Energy.  This experiment, and
              its competitor the Heidelburg-Moscow experiment, have produced the most
              sensitive search for this type of exotic process thus far.  IGEX has recently
              developed very high quality pulse shape electronics techniques that allow the
              elimination of much of the interfering background which will further increase 
              its sensitivity.  This grant supports the technical leader and spokesman of the
              experiment and three graduate students.  The spokesman's institute, the
              University of South Carolina, also supports travel and subsistence of Russian
              participants.  The IGEX collaboration is composed of twenty-six researchers
              from the United States, Spain, and the former Soviet Union.  The grant also
              provides partial support for the Principle Investigator to participate in the
              development of next generation, significantly enlarged double-beta decay
              experiments using newly development cryogenic techniques.  Since these
              techniques have not yet demonstrated their ability to reduce interfering
              background to the necessary levels, the germanium-76 experiments still
              represent the most sensitive technique for searching for this important exotic
              nuclear decay mode and its implications for the existence of neutrino mass. 
              These experiments represent very sensitive tests of the standard model of
              elementary particle physics, and have the potential for a significant impact in
              particle physics, astrophysics, and cosmology.

