Title       : SBIR Phase II: Improved Carbon Electrodes for Ultracapacitors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2001    
File        : a9901792

Award Number: 9901792
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Dietz sdietz@tda.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TDA Research, Inc
	      12345 West 52nd Avenue
	      Wheat Ridge, CO  800331917    303/940-2301

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5373,9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This objective of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
              project is to prepare improved monolithic carbor electrodes for
              ultracapacitors.  Ultracapacitors, because of their high rate of charge and
              discharge, are prime candidates for use as the load-leveling power source in
              electric vehicles, premium power systems and battery powered electronics.  The
              most important parameter in determining the power and energy density of a
              carbon-based ultracapacitor is the amount of surface area accessible to the
              electrolyte.  This in turn is primarily determined by the pore size
              distribution.  The major problem with current monolithic carbons is that their
              pores are too small for the electrolyte to enter.  TDA Research, Inc.  has
              developed methods to prepare porous monolithic carbon with the correct pore
              size distribution.  The process is considerably simpler than previous methods
              and uses low-cost feedstocks and processing steps, greatly lowering the
              production cost.  This combination of improvements will allow us to attain the
              cost and performance targets necessary to make ultracapacitors commercially
              viable power sources.  In this Phase II program, TDA will further improve the
              properties of the materials, develop methods for mass production, estimate
              their cost in large scale production, and supply pre-production quantities of
              these material to ultracapacitor manufacturers.
In addition to use as the
              load-leveling power source in electric vehicles, improved ultracapcitators will
              be more cost-effective in current markets (calculators, watches and electric
              razors), on-going communications markets (cellular telephones and digital
              communicators) and premium power markets (clean power/filters).

