Title       : Pattern Time Distributions and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a9901053

Award Number: 9901053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon M. Ross smross@euler.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                    This research project is concerned with  finding efficient general
              techniques for determining the expected time until a rare event occurs in a
              variety of models involving chance.  Because the probability distributions of
              the times until such events occur usually have large variances, straightforward
              simulations are typically not efficient; because the state description is
              usually multidimensional, standard Markov methods also typically  cannot be
              implemented.  Using ideas from renewal theory, along with newly developed
              variance reducing simulation  techniques, efficient ways of finding the
              expected time for a rare pattern to occur when observing random data were
              developed in previous grant supported research.  Building on these previous
              studies, this project proposes to consider rare events of more general
              stochastic processes, such  as the expected time until the workload of  a
              multiple server queuing system exceeds its carrying capacity.  In addition,
              methods to keep a system from becoming too congested by sometimes blocking new
              arrivals from joining the system will also be studied.  Examples of this are
              queuing models in which a potential arrival first presents itself to a
              gatekeeper who must decide, usually with limited information about the number
              of customers presently in the system, whether to allow that arrival to join the
              system.  Efficient simulation procedures for studying small system failure
              probabilities for specific classes of reliability models will also be
              determined.
     Catastrophic events such as when a production process breaks
              down, or a nuclear power plant goes off-line, or a telecommunication system
              crashes because of overload, tend to be rare events.  If  successful this
              research will go a long way towards enabling industrial users to efficiently
              determine the probability distribution of the time until such events occur
              under present operating policies. In addition, more efficient  operating
              policies that keep such systems from crashing will be determined.

