Title       : Association, Segregation, and Transport in Copolymer Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a9901087

Award Number: 9901087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy P. Lodge lodge@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9901087
Lodge

Multicomponent polymers in general, and block copolymers in
              particular, offer attractive routes to novel properties, by the incorporation
              of disparate chemical elements into materials with  prescribed morphologies. 
              However, the important dynamic properties of such mixtures are rather poorly
              understood.  Complications arise due to the presence of structure, which
              presents barriers to transport, and by the unkown effects of mixing on the
              chain dynamics.  The unifying philosophy of this proposal is that the
              collective dynamic response of a multicomponent polymer system can only be
              understood if the underlying structure, mechanisms of motion, and individual
              component contributions are known.  Experimental studies addressing three
              fundamental issues in this area will be pursued.  First, the transient states
              of aggregation that may exist upon disordering block copolymer melts from the
              sphere morphology, and upon disordering block copolymer solutions in solvents
              of varying selectivity, will be characterized. The former topic has received
              some experimental attention in the literature, but the results are
              controversial; the latter has not been addressed systematically.  Second, the
              mechanisms of motion of strongly-segregated block copolymers will be
              delineated, particularly through measurements of chain diffusion along, and
              perpendicular to, the cylinder axis in oriented samples.  This study builds on
              a previous exploration of the weakly-segregated regime, and will be relevant to
              most copolymer materials, which are typically more strongly-segregated.  Third,
              the composition and temperature dependence of the monomeric friction factors of
              the two components of exemplary immiscible mixtures will be examined.  This
              work exploits recently-developed approach involving disordered multiblock
              copolymers that circumvents the phase separation problem.

Polymers are
              ubiquitous in contemporary technology, but future advances in their application
              will rely on incorporating several different components into one material,
              while controlling structure on the microscopic level.  Such microstructures can
              have profound effects on the flow properties of molten polymers, which in turn
              control the processing of polymers into films, fibers, and three-dimensional
              objects.  This proposal seeks to gain fundamental insight into the way
              molecular parameters of the several components impact the flow properties of
              the resulting multicomponent polymer materials.

