Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Mountain Building in the Urals and the
               Nature of Ultrahigh-Pressure Metamorphism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a9901573

Award Number: 9901573
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98817              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Leech mary@geo.standord.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
Program Ref : 0000,5914,5946,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901573
Leech
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide Dr. Mary L. Leech with twelve
              months of support to work with Dr. Martin Menzies at Royal Holloway, the
              University of London, Egham, Surrey, UK, and for twelve months at Stanford
              University in Stanford, California, to work with Dr. Trevor R. Ireland.
These
              researchers will study ultrahigh-pressure metamorphism using an ion microprobe,
              laser-ablation, and fission-track thermochronology to produce
              pressure-temperature-time paths for the polar Urals.   Mineral phases such as
              coesite and diamond represent stability fields under extraordinarily high
              pressure and an investigation of their environment of formation in the polar
              Urals would add significantly to our understanding of plate collision
              mechanisms and environments.
Royal Holloway has the necessary geochemical
              instruments for this work, and is conveniently located to permit side trips to
              Edinburgh and Oslo, Norway to consult with other researchers working on this
              area of research.  Dr. Menzies has experience into larger scale tectonic and
              continental growth processes.  Stanford has been a center for ultrahigh
              pressure metamorphism and will be an ideal place to continue the work started
              in the UK.  It also has a new SHRIMP-RG ion microprobe, which will be used to
              perform analyses to complete the project.
***

