Title       : Stable Carbon Isotope Variation in Late Miocene Paleosol Carbonates from North
               America: Habitat Change and Mammalian Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9901693

Award Number: 9901693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7137,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9901693
Fox

The research will focus on the carbon isotope composition of
              soil carbonates preserved in the late Miocene Ogallala Formation of central
              North America.  During this interval (approximately 15-5 Ma), the mammalian
              fossil record indicates significant decreases in diversity and changes in the
              ecological structure of mammal communities globally, including North America. 
              The changes among mammals broadly correlate with changes in the carbon isotope
              composition of both paleosol carbonates and fossil mammalian herbivore teeth. 
              The carbon isotope composition of calcium carbonate deposited in paleosol
              carbonate and mammal teeth on a number of continents during the late Miocene
              indicate shifts in the composition of plant communities and suggest that
              habitat changes may have been at least a contributing factor in the changes
              among mammals.  It has recently been proposed that a global lowering of the
              concentration of atmospheric CO2 during the late Miocene is the cause of the
              changes in plant communities.  This explanation predicts synchronous changes in
              faunal and isotopic records, both locally and globally.  The research will test
              the prediction of synchrony of change in the mammalian fossil record and the
              stable isotope record of paleosols in North America during the late Miocene. 
              If the changes are not synchronous, a strictly global explanation is not
              supported and alternatives, with significant regional components, must be
              sought.  As soil carbonates are a direct reflection of the habitat, the project
              will also provide a test of connections between climate, habitat, and faunal
              changes among mammals.

