Title       : Large Scale Epitaxy of Mercury-Based High-Temperature Superconducting Thin Films
               in Cation-Exchange Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1999   
File        : a9901460

Award Number: 9901460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285136             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy Z. Wu jwu@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9901460
Wu
This project addresses the growth mechanism of thin films of
              Hg-based high-Tc superconductors (Hg-HTSs) in a novel cation exchange process,
              and aims at developing technologically feasible techniques for high-quality
              epitaxy of Hg-HTS thin films over large scales. The high volatility of the
              Hg-HTSs limits use of conventional thermal-reaction processing over large
              areas. The proposed research on the cation-exchange process addresses this
              problem in epitaxy of volatile compounds using an approach, in which a highly
              volatile compound is formed by replacing a weakly bonded cation in a precursor
              lattice with the desired volatile cation. The epitaxy of the volatile compound
              is directly inherited from the epitaxial precursor matrix. By choosing
              precursor matrices with pre-designed crystalline structures and chemical
              compositions, the cation-exchange process allows high-quality epitaxy of many
              existing volatile compounds as well as a search for new volatile compounds.
              Four topics to be addressed include: (1) Identification of characteristic
              parameters in the cation-exchange process and study of their effects on the
              cation-exchange mechanism; (2) Development of a three-zone cation exchange
              process for large-area epitaxy (> 2 inches in diameter); (3) Study of surface
              morphology and film/substrate-interface microstructures of cation-exchange
              processed Hg-HTS thin films on technologically compatible substrates; and (4)
              Direct conversion of Tl-HTS devices to Hg-HTS devices.
%%%
The project
              addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science having
              high potential technological relevance. The success of this research may lead
              to development of commercially viable technologies for Hg-HTS film-based
              applications including microwave components/systems, infrared detectors, and
              high-current superconducting tapes, and is expected to allow establishment of
              novel methods for synthesis of volatile compounds with pre-designed crystalline
              structures and chemical compositions. The research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to new aspects of electronic
              devices. A variety of fundamental issues are to be addressed in these
              investigations, and the proposed experiments will also develop a
              technologically important superconducting material.  An important feature of
              the program is the integration of research and education through the training
              of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
***

