Title       : Multiply - Bonded and Low-Coordinate Silicon and Germanium Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9901266

Award Number: 9901266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark E. Welker                          
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert West west@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Robert West, of the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin, studies the synthesis,
              structure, and bonding of multiply-bonded and low-coordinate silicon and
              germanium compounds.  Specific classes of compounds under investigation include
              silynes, disilynes, metallole dianions, and metallacalicenes, as well as other
              compounds containing new types of double bonds between silicon or germanium and
              other atoms.  Professor West is also exploring the chemistry of stable
              dicoordinate silicon compounds (silylenes) and their complexes with transition
              metals and the vaporization of carbon in the presence of silicon tetrachloride,
              producing silicon-containing fullerene derivatives.

Many questions remain
              unanswered about the nature of chemical bonding, particularly with regards to
              the bonding between elements other than carbon.  Professor Robert West, of the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin, is supported by the
              Organic Synthesis Program for his studies of the synthesis and structure of
              compounds containing silicon and germanium atoms displaying unusual chemical
              bonding motifs.  Of particular interest to Professor West are those compounds
              which display multiple bonds to these elements (e.g., silicon-carbon and
              silicon-silicon triple bonds) and those in which these elements bear fewer
              bonds than usual (e.g., dicoordinate silicon compounds).  Finally, by inclusion
              of chemical sources of silicon atoms in the carbon vaporization synthesis of
              fullerenes ("Bucky balls"), Professor West is preparing silicon-containing
              fullerenes.  Observations from each of these studies promise to afford
              fundamental advances in our understanding of the nature of chemical bonding.
