Title       : SBIR Phase II: Processing of Microcellular Foams from Unfilled and Filled Liquid
               Crystalline and Semicrystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a9901754

Award Number: 9901754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seng C. Tan sctan@sprintmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright Materials Res Co
	      3591 Apple Grove Drive
	      Dayton, OH  45430    513/643-0007

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                    This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will focus
              on optimizing the processing techniques and scale up of the firm's
              microcellular LCP and PPS foams. Conventional processing techniques for rigid
              foams involve multiple steps and the blowing agent used is toxic, Some rigid
              foams give off hazardous gases during the post-processing steps.  In the Phase
              I research the firm developed a novel technique to process microcellular foams
              that does not use or release any hazardous chemicals/gases.  The foaming
              technique uses the principle of thermodynamic instability with inert gas as the
              foaming gas. We have foamed both the unfilled and filled liquid crystalline and
              semicrystalline polymers (LCPs & PPS) which have excellent strength and
              stiffness to weight ratio, good solvent resistance, barrier properties, and
              high temperature stability. 
     Low-density microcellular LCP & PPS foams
              are expected to have many commercial applications including sandwich structural
              materials for high speed aircraft, aerospace, outerspace vehicles, housing and
              support structures for rockets and propulsion components.  Conventional
              applications of LCPs and PPS include various electronic connectors, electronic
              and audiovisual devices.  They can be replaced by the proposed microcellular
              LCP and PPS foams with equivalent performance but much lighter in weight.  On
              the ground applications include ladders and bridges fabricated using these
              classes of microcellular foams that would be much lighter in weight than those
              currently available.

