Title       : Object-oriented Development and Analysis of Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9901017

Award Number: 9901017
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty H. Cheng chengb@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt Stirewalt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9901017  Betty Cheng
This project bridges the gap between formal and informal
              approaches to embedded systems development by formalizing part of the Unified
              Modeling Language (UML), an object-oriented modeling notation that is quickly
              becoming the de facto standard.  Three of the UML notations, use cases, class
              diagrams, and state diagrams will be investigated; these three models
              sufficiently represent embedded-systems requirements.  Through formalization,
              the models can be integrated into a single specification that can be analyzed
              for consistency, concurrency properties (e.g., deadlock, liveness), and
              constraint satisfaction.  In choosing the representations, an assessment will
              be made as to how they can be analyzed using simulation, model checking, and a
              combination of these approaches.  The specifications will also be assessed to
              determine how well they can be used to construct automated design
              transformations that refine the diagrams into design-level specifications.  The
              investigations will yield a framework for systematically and rigorously
              developing
embedded systems, where informal requirements are formalized and
              refined with design information to obtain the corresponding implementation.  A
              prototype will be developed to support the graphical construction of the
              models, generate the corresponding specifications, and provide access to the
              analysis tools.  The formalizations will be applied to increasingly complex
              case studies to ensure that the approach is applicable to real projects from
              industry.

