Title       : SGER: Local Extinction of Acropora Cervicornis, the Primary Framework Builder of
               Lagoonal Reefs in Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1999    
File        : a9901969

Award Number: 9901969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1999   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Aronson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Envrnmtl Sci Conso
	      101 Bienville Blvd.
	      Dauphin Island, AL  36528    251/861-2141

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Aronson
9901969	

Over the past two decades, coral reefs around the world
              have changed dramatically. Coral cover has declined, and in many cases fleshy
              macroalgae have increased. This change has been particularly pronounced in the
              Caribbean region. Hurricanes, coral bleaching, diseases, overfishing,
              eutrophication, pollution, sedimentation, and other factors may all be
              involved, but their relative importance is poorly understood in most
              situations. Global climate change may interact with and exacerbate the effects
              of these disturbances and stresses. Some have suggested that the
              coral-dominated and macroalgal-dominated situations represent alternative
              community states, each of which is resistant to conversion to the other. The
              recent switch to macroalgal dominance, caused by what appears to be a unique
              conjunction of natural and anthropogenic disturbances, may be unprecedented in
              the Pleistocene-Holocene history of the Caribbean.
	With the widespread
              occurrence of bleaching in coral reefs, including Belize, there have been
              dramatic changes in the dominant members of coral reefs systems.  In the
              Belizean inner lagoon,  the large framework building Acroporids have been
              losing out to other forms.   Now with the disturbances of Hurricane Mitch,
              there is a possibility that virtual extinction of these once dominant (recent
              and past) forms may achieve local extinction.
	This Small Grant for
              Exploratory Research will help to start addressing the following questions. 
              Did Hurricane Mitch, rapidly following the coral bleaching episodes, cause the
              extinction of Acropora cervicornis in the central lagoon? Did Agaricia
              tenuifolia also suffer heavy mortality? Will Echinometra viridis be able to
              control algal populations in the face of massive provision of substratum (dead
              coral skeletons)? Will space opened by Hurricane Mitch actually promote the
              recovery of A. cervicornis populations (contrary to expectation), bringing them
              back from the edge of extinction? 
	This rapid response funding will enable
              Dr. Aronson to address several issues of current concern, including modem-day
              extinctions and the contribution of different forms of disturbance to unique
              changes on coral reefs. The first order of business is clearly to assess
              Hurricane Mitch's effects as soon as possible. Then the data collected over the
              next several months will be published rapidly, and will be used as a basis for
              future research

