Title       : Datapath Design and Code Generation for VLIW ASIPs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9901255

Award Number: 9901255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margarida Jacome jacome@ece.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gustavo A. de Veciana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Very Large Instruction Word (VLIW) Application Specific Instruction-Set
              Processor (ASIP) cores realize performance/power/energy tradeoffs that can be
              very attractive in the exceedingly competitive embedded multimedia and signal
              processing market. In particular, specialized datapaths comprising clusters of
              functional units with associated (local) register files can enable significant
              performance/power/energy gains over those based on centralized register files.
              However, such specialized datapaths pose significant research and practical
              challenges. The proposed research focuses on jointly addressing (1) the
              synthesis of VLIW ASIP datapaths, and (2) the development of high-quality
              retargetable compilers for such specialized processors. The proposed
              methodology includes a novel problem phasing/decomposition that first considers
              the joint binding of operations and data objects to the functional units and
              register files of the specialized datapath. Complementary aggressive
              optimization heuristics will be developed to perform datapath dependent code
              transformations, exploit problem symmetries to dramatically reduce the search
              space, and to effectively bind/assign and schedule operations, data objects and
              data transfers onto the datapath's resources. If this research is successful,
              it will contribute to technologies that will increasingly provide the
              competitive edge
for the embedded systems industry.



