Title       : Collaborative Research: Si, N and P Limitation in the Northern Gulf of Mexico:
               Phytoplankton Responses to Increased N and P Delivery from the Mississippi
               River
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9901147

Award Number: 9901147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296470             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Nelson nelsonda@coas.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1389,4444,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dortch and Nelson
		During the last 30 - 40 years the nitrate and phosphate
              concentrations in many rivers have increased substantially while silicic acid
              concentrations have either remained constant or decreased. This effect is most
              prevalent in rivers that drain agricultural lands in Europe and North America,
              and it appears to be attributable to changes in land use. The main consequences
              of these changes in the adjacent coastal ocean have been eutrophication and an
              increasing likelihood that diatom growth is limited by Si. Major floristic
              shifts from diatoms to nonsiliceous taxa have now been observed in some of
              these systems, and predicted in others.
		The Mississippi River and its
              coastal plume provide a classic example of these phenomena. Nitrate
              concentrations at the river mouth have more than doubled since 1960 while
              silicic acid concentrations have decreased by > 30%, resulting in almost a 75%
              decrease in the ratio of dissolved Si to dissolved N delivered to the Gulf of
              Mexico by the river. Before 1960 this ratio was ~4 (representing a large excess
              of Si over N in relation to diatom nutrient requirements) and now it is ~1
              (almost exactly in balance with those requirements). Largely as a result of
              this balance, Si, N and P limitation have all been demonstrated at different
              time in the coastal Gulf of Mexico since 1987. A general pattern seems to have
              emerged in which P limitation is most common in spring and in the low-salinity
              waters of the upper river plume, N limitation occurs more frequently in summer
              and in higher- salinity waters down-plume and Si can become limiting anywhere
              in the system at any time. But inter-annual differences and event-scale
              (floods, storms) perturbations are both important enough to make a general
              seasonal pattern difficult to discern.
		The stoichiometric nutrient balance,
              in combination with the quantitative importance of the river as a nutrient
              source and its time-varying properties, has created an interesting and
              scientifically useful situation in the coastal Gulf of Mexico. Nutrient
              concentrations and their ratios change with time in the system in response to
              changes in river discharge, coastal flow patterns, weather (especially major
              storms) and the seasonal cycle of thermal stratification and de-stratification.
              These changes can selectively drive the system into Si, N or P limitation. Thus
              the time-varying character in the main nutrient source and the relative
              confinement of the resulting phytoplankton bloom within the extended river
              plume combine to make this system a natural laboratory for studying nutrient
              limitation and its consequences in the coastal ocean. This situation,
              especially as it pertains to Si limitation of the diatoms, appears to be a
              historically recent phenomenon resulting from the altered Si:N and Si:P ratios
              in the river.
		In this project Drs. Dortch and Nelson will undertake a
              comprehensive study of Si, N, and P limitation in a coastal habitat in the Gulf
              of Mexico.  This system has undergone significant anthropogenic changes in
              nutrient input and because limitation by each of the three major nutrients has
              been observed. The study will include direct experimental assessment of the
              degree of Si, N and P limitation at key times of the seasonal and
              river-discharge cycles, based on the measured response of the phytoplankton to
              selective release from Si, N and P limitation and from all possible
              combinations of Si, N and P limitation. It will use AVHRR and SeaWifS data and
              underway mapping of temperature, salinity and fluorescence to locate sampling
              sites within the biomass maximum of the river plume (where nutrient limitation
              is often particularly severe) and in lower-biomass, more saline waters farther
              down the plume. It will specifically assess Si, N and P limitation of diatom
              growth and productivity by measuring the rate of 32Si uptake, a process that is
              highly specific to the diatoms, in response to selective nutrient enrichment.
              Of equal importance, this study will consider nutrient limitation on time
              scales ranging from a few hours to three days and will identify changes in bulk
              properties, diatom-specific properties and species-specific properties as part
              of the same experimental plan. This will enable us to evaluate the overall
              nutrient status of the coastal waters affected by the Mississippi River
              outflow, resulting in the first case study against which general hypotheses
              regarding eutrophication-driven nutrient limitation in the coastal ocean can be
              tested.

