Title       : Non-Equilibrum Svnthesis and Growth of Silicon Micro-and Nano-Columns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9901238

Award Number: 9901238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337877             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Pedraza apedraza@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas H. Lowndes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to explore the formation, growth, and physical
              properties of micro- and nano-columns. Arrays of high aspect ratio silicon
              nanocolumns will be grown on the surface of a silicon wafer by using a pulsed
              excimer laser to generate "active tips" where the deposition of silicon from
              the vapor phase is dramatically augmented. Mechanisms of initial formation and
              subsequent growth of nanocolumn arrays will be studied, and electronic and
              optoelectronic properties of silicon nano-columns measured. Controlled growth
              of silicon micro- and nano-column structures could find significant
              applications in solar cells, field emission tips and sensors. Prior work
              indicates a connection between silicon microcolumn growth during pulsed-laser
              irradiation and earlier studies of silicon whisker growth by the
              vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) method. This link opens new avenues for greater
              understanding of both methods and provides new tools for the production of
              semiconductor structures with reduced dimensionality. In the first stage of
              research the tips of microcolumns will be melted to activate nanocolumn growth.
              In a second research stage, melting will be avoided in order to grow nanometer
              scale tips using primarily photolytic activation of growth, based on
              established knowledge of laser-assisted CVD. In both stages the nanocolumns are
              grown using previously grown microcolumns as a template. Nanocolumns are
              expected to grow straight, maintaining the crystal orientation of the
              microcolumns that serve as their pedestals, and will be directly connected to
              the wafer beneath. This makes possible control and characterization of
              nanocolumn structure and properties. With straight, interconnected nanocolumns
              a short carrier path and short propagation/response time to electrical signals
              can be achieved. Pulsed-laser growth also permits control of the dopant-atom
              content as well as simple formation of a passivation layer from the gas phase.
              The effects of growth conditions on the length, diameter, and evolution of
              micro- and nano-columns will be investigated. In situ, nanosecond resolution
              diagnostics including ion probe measurements and emission and absorption
              spectroscopy will be used to determine the species present close to the silicon
              surface during ablation and their temporal behavior. Morphological,
              compositional, and structural features of the individual columns and arrays,
              and their growth kinetics, will be determined using HRSEM, HRTEM, and AFM
              microscopies. Computer modeling also will be used to guide understanding of the
              column formation and growth processes.
%%%
The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having potential
              technological relevance. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the
              research is expected to contribute to improving the perform-ance of current and
              new electronic/photonic applications by providing a fundamental understanding
              and a basis for designing and producing improved nanostructured materials.  A
              variety of fundamental issues are to be addressed in these investigations.
              Central to the project is the training of graduate and undergraduate students
              to conduct research using state-of-the-art equipment and appropriate scientific
              methodology as they advance basic understanding of materials growth phenomena
              using materials having interesting and important applications. Thus the program
              integrates research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area.  
***

