Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Natural Experiments in Molecular
               Evolution; The Molecular Basis of Vision in Extreme Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9901395

Award Number: 9901395
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Belinda S. Chang chang@mcz.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5920,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901395
Chang
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide Dr. Belinda S. Chang with support
              for twelve months to work at the University of Rome Tor Vergata in Rome, Italy,
              with Professor Valerio Sbordoni.

Dr. Chang will do natural experiments in
              molecular evolution to study the molecular basis of vision in extreme
              environments.  Her aim is to molecularly clone the rhodopsin gene (Rh1) from
              organisms living in two extreme environments:  1) Extreme cold - by studying
              springtail insects in continental Antarctica and 2) Complete Darkness -by
              studying the Catopid beetles in caves of northeastern Italy.  Rhodopsin is a
              transmembrane receptor that when activated by light, forms the critical first
              step in vision. Both temperature and light availability dramatically affect
              this critical role.  Comparisons between these two cases would allow the
              identification of regions of the rhodopsin molecule and amino acid sites that
              are important in determining thermal stability.  Dr. Chang will clone rhodopsin
              genes from three Antarctic Collembola and an Italian cave-dwelling catopid
              beetle and then reconstruct a phylogenetic tree of these and already cloned
              insect rhodopsins, upon which rates of substitution among different lineages
              can be examined and tested.
Dr. Sbordoni is one of the leading world experts
              in studying the biology of organisms that live in these two extreme
              environments.  He is a renowned speleologist.  His lab has outstanding
              facilities for molecular biology, including one of the latest Applied
              Biosystems automated DNA sequencers (ABI Prism, model 310).
***

