Title       : SBIR Phase II: Micromachined Scintillating Pixel X-Ray Imaging Plate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9901902

Award Number: 9901902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles P. Beetz cbeetz@nanosciences.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NanoSystems
	      115 Hurley Road
	      Oxford, CT  064781037    203/881-2827

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II project focuses on x-ray
              and particle imaging of biological specimens using radionuclides, radiotracers
              or x-ray beams. An imaging detector requires:
unity detection efficiency,
              photon counting; high spatial resolution film; improved contrast due to
              insensitivity to scattered x-rays or particles; linear response; dynamic range;
              low noise; and, differential attenuation imaging using x-ray energies.  The
              research will address these issues with a novel form of high spatial precision
              imaging scintillator pixel plate, fabricated by micromachining of very high
              aspect ratio (length/diameter) holes in Si. The microchannels will be formed
              into dielectric waveguides (optical fibers) by forming a wall cladding film,
              for example, by oxidizing the walls to form SiO2. Because the Si/SiO2
              microchannels can be taken to high temperatures, crystalline scintillators such
              as BG0, Nal or
 Csl can be vacuum melted to fill the holes, along with the
              scintillating glasses, plastic scintillators, 
and nanocrystalline
              scintillators. The resulting scintillating pixel plate will have features fully
              adjustable in size by photolithographic techniques, with holes from one micron
              to one millimeter in diameter, and, plate thickness up to approximately two
              millimeters. The scintillator array is well matched to the precision and
              spatial resolution of optical pixel detectors including CCD, image
              intensifiers, and film.
     This program may lead to novel large area, high
              precision x-ray imagers, enabling replacement of film or enhancing film in
              medical and dental x-rays. It may also lead to ultra-high precision fiber-optic
              plates at low cost, and compact full aperture optical and x-ray
              collimators.



