Title       : NMR Studies of Dynamics and Structure of Penetrants and Polymers in High
               Permeability Membrane Materials and Barrier Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  2001     
File        : a9901416

Award Number: 9901416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan A. Jones ajones@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul T. Inglefield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9901416
Jones

Professor Jones and Inglefield will study high permeability
              polymers including substituted polyacetylenes and Amorphous Teflon (DuPont
              Trademark).  Typical interpretational approaches which will be used by them to
              understand permeability and sorption data are the dual mode model and free
              volume theory.  To obtain a more molecular view, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
              Spectroscopy ( NMR) will be the primary technique employed in their study.  NMR
              is capable of both the penetrant and the host matrix.  Specifically
              spin-lattice relaxation times and one and two-dimensional (2D) line shape
              experiments will be used to characterize reorientational motion of either the
              penetrants or the polymer backbone.  Deuterium and carbon-13 and xenon-129 have
              also been employed in this experiment by Jones and Inglefield at Clark.  At a
              molecular level, intermolecular dipole-dipole spin-lattice relaxation can
              provide information on translation as can one and two dimensional xenon-129
              line shape experiments.  Two levels of structural experiments will be
              performed.  The first class is proton spin-diffusion experiments to measure
              domain size of the regions containing penetrant molecules and also xenon-129
              chemical shift measurements which are sensitive to pore size and cluster size. 
              The second set of structural experiments is for local intermolecular structure
              such as 2D zero quantum spin exchange, REDOR and DRAMA.  These short range
              structure experiments may be especially interesting in high selectivity
              materials.  The information on local length scales will be meshed with long
              range measurements of mobility by PFG NMR or classical permeability.  The state
              of the polymer itself is relevant.  For instance, high concentrations of
              permeant can lower the glass transition of the matrix impairing the mechanical
              properties of the membrane.  In blends, selective swelling of domains by the
              penetrant can alter that changes of the matrix mobility with concentration can
              be established.  Systems based on blends, aerogels and polymer/aerogel
              composites will be studied with the same experimental strategy.  Some consider
              high free volume, high permeability polymers to behave more like silica
              aerogels so a direct comparison of molecular level mobility of permeants can be
              used to test this view.  In blend systems, the extent of dynamic coupling of
              the segmental motion of the polymer components can be compared with the nature
              of translational diffusion through the blend.  Domain size of concentration
              heterogeneities in the blend is expected to affect both permeant mobility and
              the level of dynamic coupling between polymer chains.  Barrier and highly
              selective materials will be studied as comparisons to the high permeability
              materials.

Professors Jones and Inglefield will further the molecular level
              understanding of structure and motion of gases and other small molecules in
              materials used as separation membranes and barrier films.  Industrial use of
              synthetic membranes to separate gases and liquids is already significant but
              there is continued development of new materials designed to improve efficiency
              through higher permeation rates and better selectivity.  Conventional polymers
              are currently used as the basis of many synthetic membranes but a new classical
              techniques involving extensions of standard descriptions employed for the more
              conventional polymers.

