Title       : SBIR Phase II: High-Pressure MOCVD System for Growth of III-V Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a9901767

Award Number: 9901767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1999   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt J. Linden klinden@spirecorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christian Hoepfner  (Principal Investigator former)
              Stanley M. Vernon  (Principal Investigator former)
              Anton C. Greenwald  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Spire Corporation
	      One Patriots Park
	      Bedford, MA  017302396    781/275-6000

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1502,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
              high-pressure metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) system to
              minimize the toxic waste generated during growth of III-V phosphides.  Spire
              will demonstrate this technology with its InP space solar cell process.  A
              reduction in use of phosphine by more than one order of magnitude is predicted.
               This technology will benefit the environment by minimizing phosphorus waste
              generated by MOCVD production of optoelectronic devices, and will benefit
              manufacturers of such devices by improving safety and reducing manufacturing
              costs associated with the use of phosphine. Phase I aimed at the improvement of
              the materials quality of GaN-based compounds and developed and successfully
              operated a high-pressure MOCVD system.   In previous work, Spire developed a
              high-pressure MOCVD system for InP growth; we successfully demonstrated InP
              films with excellent surface morphology at a V/Ill ratio of 1: 1, thereby
              drastically reducing the use of phosphine.  In Phase II,  an improved
              high-pressure MOCVD system will be designed and built.  The growth parameters
              will be  optimized to achieve device quality InP layers and fabricate InP solar
              cells to demonstrate a device application.

The reduction of phosphine usage
              for MOCVD growth of space solar cells promises significant savings in cost for
              phosphine and for waste disposal.  Once a commercial high-pressure MOCVD system
              is available, there will be  a demand for this technology in other areas, such
              as growth of GaInP-AlGainP redlight emitting diodes (LEDs) and GaN-based LEDs
              and lasers.

