Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Novel Array-Based Chemical Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9901867

Award Number: 9901867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George B. Vermont                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anuncia Gonzalez-Martin anuncia.gonzalez-martin@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    409/693-0017

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,9102,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project involves
              the development of a novel array-based chemical microsensor and a dedicated
              sampling system for the monitoring of organic contaminants in the subsurface. 
              Chlorinated hydrocarbons represent the most prevalent contaminants in the
              subsurface, threatening the quality of groundwater at aquifers.  Existing
              technologies for monitoring these contaminants require expensive,
              labor-intensive, methods of sample collection and analysis. In the proposed
              sensor, the chemical and electrical properties of the individual elements of
              the array will be controlled so that a unique fingerprint will identify each
              pollutant.  The output signals will be integrated into a software-based neural
              network for analyte identification.  The simple design, cost, fabrication, and
              operation requirements of the proposed sensor will overcome the limitations of
              other existing array sensors.  The development of a low-cost, reliable sampling
              and monitoring system would reduce the costs associated with sampling and
              contaminant monitoring.   Also, it would offer the possibility for automated
              and unattended monitoring of the migration of contaminant plumes.  A lab-scale
              version of the proposed sensor was successfully tested in the Phase I project,
              where it was incorporated into a hand-held unit.  During the Phase II project,
              a field deployable prototype instrument will be developed and demonstrated in a
              field test.
     The increasing emphasis on environmental issues, waste
              reduction, and improved efficiency for industrial processes has underlined the
              importance of the development of new chemical sensors for field or in-plant
              use. Specifically, sensors are needed to gauge the effectiveness of remediation
              efforts, to effect waste minimization, and to detect the presence of toxic,
              hazardous, or otherwise regulated chemicals in waste effluents, drinking water,
               and other environmental systems.  In addition, this proposed sensor will find
              wide application in the food, beverage and perfume industries for the
              determination of odors and aromas, as well as in the clinical (e.g., breath
              monitor) and agronomic industries (e.g., detection of pesticides).


