Title       : An Integrated Approach to Monitoring and Interpreting Ground Deformation at the
               Currently Active Hengill Volcanic System in Southwest Iceland, Using GIS to
               Analyze GPS, Seismic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1999  
File        : a9901486

Award Number: 9901486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy E. Clifton cliftona@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7137,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9901486
Clifton

The goal of the research is to quantify the evolution of
              fracture systems in oblique rift zones using a combination of measurements from
              scaled clay analog models and field data to determine length-frequency
              distribution, spatial distribution, geometry, linkage and, connectivity of
              fractures.  Numerous studies conducted during the past 10 years have led to a
              new and better understanding of how faults grow and how fault populations
              evolve in extensional tectonic settings.  In rifts that are highly oblique to
              the spreading, whereas in rifts of less obliquity spreading perpendicular
              faults make a greater contribution to strain accommodation.  Scaled physical
              models are ideal for time-series analysis that can reveal the temporal and
              spatial evolution of fault systems.  Analog models have charted the evolution
              of rift sub-parallel and spreading perpendicular fractures.  The field area
              selected for study of oblique rifting is the Reykjanes fissure swarm on the
              Reykjanes Peninsula in Iceland.  This first on-shore segment of the
              Mid-Atlantic Ridge consists of four en echelon fissure swarms.  The models
              represent distributed brittle deformation above a narrow discontinuity that
              deforms continuously, analogous to the deformation on the peninsula which
              comprises normal faults, opening mode fissures, and dike-induced grabens
              narrowly distributed over a volcanic system.  Using a combination of field data
              and data obtained from air photos, the investigator will deduce a temporal
              evolution similar to what is seen in clay models by analyzing fractures in lava
              flows of different ages. 

