Title       : Symmetric Cone Optimization Algorithmic and Structural Study Application
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9901991

Award Number: 9901991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250665             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farid Alizadeh alizadeh@rutcor.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The main goal of this project is to investigate all aspects of optimization
              problems over symmetric cones and extensions from algorithmic, numerical and
              software development points of view. Such optimization problems include and are
              closely related to semidefinite programming (SDP) and quadratically constrained
              
quadratic programming (QCQP). In the first part, general techniques for both
              degeneracy properties and their impact on numerical behavior of various
              algorithms will be studied thoroughly. Particular attention will be given to
              the problem of dealing with absences of strict complementarity which thus far
              has eluded satisfactory numerical behavior in all known algorithms. Next, the
              process of extending special proof techniques and tools which were originally
              developed for analysis of the semidefinite and convex quadratically constrained
              quadratic programs, to the more general venue of symmetric cone optimization
              will be carried out. The techniques developed by interior point researchers
              will be extended to all symmetric cone optimization problems. A potential
              impact of this aspect of the research will be unification of various efforts in
              
interior point studies, especially the primal-dual methods, to the more
              general area of symmetric cone optimization which includes linear,
              semidefinite, and quadratically constrained quadratic programming as special
              case.
 
Next, the central problem of using the optimal solution of an SDP (or
              a QCQP) to "warm start" another SDP (or QCQP) that differs from the original by
              one or few new constraints or variables will be investigated . This effort is
              central in order to make SDP or QCQP serious tools for solving large integer or
              mixed integer programs via branch and bound, cutting planes or similar
              techniques. A particular goal is to invent new dual based active set methods to
              carry out this goal. The project will start with perhaps the easier problem of
              investigating QCQP both in its own right and in order to gain insight in the
              
effort to tackle SDP and ultimately general symmetric cone optimization
              problems. Also there is a puzzling gap in using QCQP problems as relaxation of
              integer programs. While LP and SDP relaxation abound, the QCQP approach has
              been use only on limited problems such as plant location and Steiner trees. A
              general scheme to relax any (zero-one) integer program to QCQP is missing. A
              goal of this effort is to design such a general relaxation. The impact is
              potentially significant. While SDP at least in principle seems to be more
              powerful than LP to as a relaxation of integer programs, the difficulty of
              solving large scale problems, especially lack of satisfactory techniques to
              solve sparse problems, has so far limited its wide scale use. The limitations
              on QCQP are much less severe and a general relaxation scheme to these problems
              could have significant 
impact on at least some integer programming
              problems.

Next new relaxation of integer program to more general convex
              programs than the traditional linear programming or SDP will be studied. A
              particular scheme based on using norms more general than the Euclidean norm
              will potentially yield new class of cones to which one can extend SDP
              relaxation. This work will be 
theoretical and fundamental at the
              outset.

Numerical study and in particular use of sparse structure
              encompasses another aspect of the project. In particular unlike semidefinite
              programming and somewhat like linear programming there is an significant
              opportunity in taking advantage of sparsity in order to solve large scale QCQP
              problems with primal-dual interior point methods. The details are different
              than linear programming and present considerable challenge in designing
              numerically stable and efficient algorithms. 

Software development will also
              be a central part of the investigation. Especially due to the vast variety of
              formats that SDP and QCQP, and in general symmetric cone optimization problems
              arise in applications, a user friendly interface will be essential if the
              software will be of wide applicability. 
Therefore, in addition to
              implementing and fine tuning the "solver engine", an elaborate shell around the
              engine is planned. This interface ill be designed to accommodate various
              problems form eigenvalue optimization to sum of norms constraints. As much as
              possible format conversions will be automated.  Interface to popular public
              modeling languages such as AMPL is planned. In addition WEB based interaction
              between users and software (such as web based submission of data, or cross
              platform interaction between user's data and the software) is planned. In
              particular some preprocessing of the data may be 
done on the client side,
              before the data is submitted over the WEB to the server for solution.


