Title       : SBIR Phase II: Autonomous Data Relay System Utilizing Low-Earth Orbit Satellites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a9901790

Award Number: 9901790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ngoc Hoang NTH-NALResearch@starpower.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NAL Research
	      8708 Sudley Road
	      Manassas, VA  201104405    703/803-1418

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 5373,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will
              develop a data relay system utilizing the Iridium Low-Earth Orbit (LEO)
              satellites for telecommand, control, and data retrieval from remote science
              platforms in polar regions.  A variety of commercial LEO satellite
              communications systems produced by the private sector for voice and data relay
              of all types are now in, or will soon achieve, operational status. Being close
              to Earth, their low-power, lightweight transmitters and receivers and
              omni-antennas can be used.  Commercial LEO networks offer considerable
              opportunities for science platforms in remote regions, including two-way
              communications, real-time data transmissions, global coverage, and reduced
              costs.  As a result, science platforms can be monitored, adjusted, and
              re-calibrated by scientists in real-time at their home laboratories and
              institutions.  A prototype Iridium data relay system will be fabricated under
              Phase II.  In a collaboration with Antarctic Support Associates and the
              University of Maryland Institute for Physical Science and Technology, Phase II
              will integrate  the Iridium data relay system  into an Automated Geophysical
              Observatory to verify the operation of the data retrieval scheme and to
              demonstrate the feasibility of two-way communications.
     Potential
              applications are expected in polar research operations,  in relay of drifting
              buoy data for atmospheric and hydrological research, search and rescue
              operations, and command/control of unmanned aerial vehicles for environmental
              research and monitoring.  Other potential applications include the
              simplification of communications for business professionals, reporters for
              television networks, construction engineers, geologists, and people who live in
              thinly populated areas.

