Title       : Design and Testing of a Fiber Optic Radiometer to Study the Horizontal
               Convergence of Solar Fluxes in Clouds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a9901063

Award Number: 9901063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen K. Cox OMNET:  s.cox  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Observations of solar radiation entering clouds at the top and exiting at the
              bottom indicate that more energy is absorbed than predicted from the optical
              properties of the drops and gases of which the clouds are composed.  Several
              hypotheses have been proposed to explain this so-called "anomalous absorption"
              but none is generally accepted.  Part of the difficulty in resolving the
              apparent discrepancy is that the measurements available to now only tell part
              of the story.  At best, what is measured is the total downwards flux of energy
              (the irradiance) at cloud top and the same quantity simultaneously at cloud
              base.  The difference in irradiance is accounted for not only by the absorption
              and scattering of radiation along the line in the direction of the sun but also
              by the extinction of scattered radiation flowing in all other directions. 
              Information on the directional dependence of the radiant energy, or the
              radiance, is needed to get at the heart of the problem of anomalous cloud
              absorption.  This grant supports the development and testing of a radiometer of
              novel design to measure the radiance in approximately 50 different directions
              in the upwards or downwards hemisphere.  Recent developments in fiber optics
              and CCD technology will be employed.  Evaluation of the instrument will include
              comparisons with standard measurements of solar irradiance.  The ultimate
              application of the instrument will be the airborne measurement of radiances in
              clouds.


