Title       : SBIR Phase II: Search and Indexing of Syntactically and Semantically Related
               Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9901804

Award Number: 9901804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yves Schabes schabes@teragram.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Teragram Corporation
	      236 Huntington Ave
	      Boston, MA  021154701    617/369-0100

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from Teragram
              Corporation embodies the research and development in information retrieval and
              natural language processing that will locate within free text the precise
              answers to direct English questions, without relying on the traditional and
              unnatural search methods of keywords and Boolean search strings.  The project
              will yield a new generation of searching and indexing technologies, one that
              will empower users to target existing answers with intuitive full sentence
              queries.  In Phase II, Teragram will build a Question and Answer search engine
              whose performance will be inherently better than the generalized search engines
              in use today.  Strategies to capture English question-and-answer pairings will
              be automatic, precise, flexible, and scaleable to enable the mastery of the
              very large information resources now common on the internetl and many intranets
              as well.  The engine's indexing and matching processes will be uniquely
              sensitive to Q&A content so as to ensure the richest lookups possible.  The
              engine will comb the entire World Wide Web or just one site of Frequently Asked
              Questions (FAQS) with equal ease.  The effect will be to make the expert behind
              any good FAQs list, or similarly structured knowledge, come marvelously to life
              for the user's immediate benefits.
     Teragram Corporation developed natural
              language search tools, which have already yielded a large customer base.  These
              powerful functions have been successfully deployed by a major Internet search
              engine.  The research and development of Phase II for a Question-Answer search
              and indexing engine important for fact retrieval will have enormous commercial
              implications for Internet search engines, corporate Intranets, technical
              support systems, and other large scale documentation environments.


