Title       : SBIR Phase II: Liquid Dinitrogen Complexes for Heat Pumps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9901853

Award Number: 9901853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Thomas Feldman TomHTI@cs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : HySorb Technology, Inc
	      1704 Stanford Drive NE
	      Albuquerque, NM  87106    505/268-0154

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will further
              develop the nitrogen gas absorbing organic-metallic liquid absorbents, called
              NiSorb liquids, and the NiSorb heat pumps to be more compact, environmentally
              clean, and up to 70% more efficient than current systems.  Reversible
              absorption/desorption of nitrogen gas refrigerant was demonstrated in Phase I
              verifying the feasibility of the concept.  The research will optimize the
              NiSorb liquids to have the thermophysical properties that give maximum heat
              pump efficiency.  The analytical model from Phase I will be further developed
              so it can be used to determine ideal thermophysical properties and design heat
              pumps.  Larger quantities of NiSorb liquid will be made and methods for
              large-scale production will be developed with assistance from a large chemical
              manufacturing company.  A prototype NiSorb heat pump will be designed, built
              and tested and its performance compared to that of other competitive heat
              pumps.  A chemical manufacturing company will be identified to manufacture the
              NiSorb liquids and a heat pump manufacturing company will be identified to
              manufacture the NiSorb heat pumps in Phase III.  Two Phase III Follow-On-
              Funding commitments have been obtained.
     The environmentally clean NiSorb
              heat pump with the efficiency of 70% higher than current systems is deal for
              residential and commercial heat pumps, air conditioners, refrigerators, ice
              makers, electronic coolers, process heating and cooling and similar
              applications.  Cryogenic cooling is also possible with special liquid absorbent
              formulations and Joule-Thompson expansion of cold gas.  If this more efficient
              technology were fully implemented in the US the energy saving would be
              approximately 9.5 Quads or nearly 12.4% of US energy consumption.

