Title       : Growth of Gallium Nitride and Related Materials at Subatmospheric Pressures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a9901419

Award Number: 9901419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394702             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Angus jca3@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen Kash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses new methods for crystallization of the group III nitrides
              from the melt. Activities include: growth of bulk polycrystalline and single
              crystal gallium nitride and indium nitride; synthesis of thick and thin film
              GaN and InN on substrates; and optical, electronic, and structural
              characterization of the crystals. The aim is to provide an attractive
              alternative to the current high pressure process for synthesis of bulk group
              III nitrides; increased understanding of the phase relationships in the group
              III/nitrogen systems; and further insights into the role of alloying,
              impurities, defects, and grain boundaries on light emission from the group III
              nitrides. The approach is to use atomic nitrogen to produce saturated melts of
              gallium (or indium) from which GaN (or InN) can be crystallized. The
              decomposition of GaN and InN to the elements is suppressed at low pressures if
              the crystals are in contact with the nitrogen saturated melt. A main focus of
              the research will be to achieve stable growth of single crystals and single
              crystal films through control of temperature and concentration gradients.
              Horizontal gradient freezing and growth through thin liquid films (a form of
              liquid phase epitaxy) will be the principal methods employed. Third elements,
              e.g., In and Sn, will be used to suppress the liquidus temperature and enhance
              nitrogen solubility. Doping studies will be attempted by including small,
              controlled amounts of dopants, e.g., Mg and Si, in the original liquid metal.
              The synthetic work will be complemented by concurrent electrical, optical and
              structural characterization.
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues
              in a topical area of materials science having high potential technological
              relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
              fundamental level to important fabrication aspects of electronic/photonic
              devices.  New experimental materials science and optical tools are now
              available to allow new approaches which when better understood provide advances
              in fundamental science and technology. The basic knowledge and understanding
              gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving the
              perform-ance of advanced devices and circuits for computing and communications.
               An important feature of the program is the integration of research and
              education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area.
***

