Title       : Experiments, Modeling, and Automatic Planning for Fixturing and Gripping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a9901056

Award Number: 9901056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267296             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel W. Burdick jwb@robotics.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
 
IIS-9901056
Burdick, Joel
California Institute of
              Technology
$92,265 - 12 mos.

Experiments, Modeling, and Automatic Planning
              for Fixturing and Gripping

This is the first year funding of a three-year
              continuing award. The research is to investigate analytically and
              experimentally into problems of workpiece fixturing and related problems of
              object gripping. Prior efforts in automated fixture planning have largely been
              based on rigid-body models or ad-hoc models of compliant contact.  These models
              are too inaccurate for manufacturing operations that involve large forces and
              precision deflection tolerances. The first goal of this research is to extend
              work on compliant contact modelling to include other important contact
              phenomena, such as the effect of friction in nonlinearly compliant contacts,
              and global deformations in workpieces with slender internal structures. 
              Further, the PI plans to integrate the
relevant contact phenomena into a
              single effectively computable model. A second major goal is to construct a
              comprehensive experimental system that will be the first to measure the
              complete range of physical phenomena underlying the fixturing problem.  These
              experiments should not only validate and refine the models, but also help
              convince the community of fixturing researchers and practitioners that
              nonlinear compliance models are to be preferred over currently used ad-hoc
              models.  A third goal is to develop automated fixturing and gripping synthesis
              procedures that are based on the extended models.  These algorithms will be
              able to automatically generate fixture arrangements that guarantee meaningful
              performance criteria, such as deflection tolerance, in the presence of
              externally applied loads.  The PI also wishes to include design parameters,
              such as surface curvature and the minimal number of fixtures needed to
              guarantee task
performance criteria, that have not previously been addressed
              in the fixture synthesis literature.  In the long term, the PI's team plan to
              use these results to study active control of the fixture loading process so as
              to inherently ensure accurate part localization.  Since fixturing is closely
              related to gripping, these results should have a longer-term impact on the
              deployment of more sophisticated gripping devices.

