Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Closure of Thermodynamically Constrained Models for
               Multiphase Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9901432

Award Number: 9901432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116688             (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Gray gray.3@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9901432
Gray

Traditional models of multiphase flow in porous media are based
              in empiricism and correlation of experimental data. Over the past two decades
              significant effort has been expended in developing a theoretical basis for
              multiphase flow models grounded in conservation principles.  These approaches
              both reveal assumptions implicit in the current models and paths to more
              rigorous  and robust models.  One of the most elegant and conceptually
              satisfying approaches is the thermodynamically constrained averaging theory
              approach (TCATA).  Recent work with the TCATA has led to the formulation of a
              set of models for two-phase flow in porous media.  Additional steps, however,
              are required to develop the TCATA fully.  The goals of the current proposal are
              to move beyond pure theory and idealized porous media to the description of
              real systems to demonstrate the viability, importance, and necessity of the
              TCATA for describing the physics of multiphase flow in porous media.

To meet
              the goals of this project, we will use a combination of theoretical, pore scale
              morphology and modeling, continuum scale modeling, and laboratory experimental
              approaches.  This work will be accomplished by building upon and continuing an
              existing collaboration between Professor Cass T. Miller's group at the
              University of North Carolina and Professor William G. Gray's group at the
              University of Notre Dame.  This proposal describes the joint work of both
              groups, with each institution submitting directly to NSF requesting the
              resources needed to accomplish their share of the work.

This work will have
              additional applicability to any array of multiphase porous media systems in
              both natural and engineered systems.  We expect several significant
              accomplishments from this work: (1) the development of a theoretical framework
              that includes film flow and disjoining pressures; (2) the formulation of
              capillary pressure as a function of both saturation and interfacial area,
              thereby reducing or eliminating the hysteresis found when capillary pressure is
              represented as a function of saturation only; (3) the development of
              constitutive relations that include dynamic geometric parameters in expressing
              the functional dependence of relative permeability; (4) formulation and
              implementation of a numerical algorithm to solve the extended set of model
              equations; and (5) comparison of experimental data with model results to reveal
              the strengths and weaknesses of our approaches and the needs for further
              advancement of methods that account for the physics of multiphase flow.

