Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Thermal Hall Effect in Cuprate
               Superconductors at Very Low Termperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9901436

Award Number: 9901436
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sawako Nakamae   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5918,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901436
Nakamae
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide Dr. Sawako Nakamae with support for
              twelve months to work with Dr. Kamran Behnia at the Universite Paris-Sud in
              Orsay, France.
In recent years, unconventional behavior in the thermal
              conductivity of high-Tc cuprate superconductors at low temperature and in
              magnetic field was reported.  A conclusive theoretical explanation for the
              phenomena has not been found.  The goal of this research is to study the
              thermal Hall effect (thermal conductivity in the direction normal to the heat
              current and the applied magnetic field)  in cuprate superconductors to
              experimentally reveal the physics behind the phenomena.  These experiments
              should generate a greater understanding of this unique area of
              superconductivity and provide fundamental insights into the nature of this
              phenomena.  The experiment will also be used to study other types of
              unconventional superconductors such as organic and heavy fermion
              superconductors.
The Laboratoire de Physique des Solides at the Universite
              Paris-Sud has the equipment and facilities to conduct this research.  In
              addition, the host research group was one of the very first groups to
              observe/report these new phenomena in thermal conductivity of single crystal
              samples. 
***

