Title       : Information to the Membership of the American Anthropological Association
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1998   
File        : a9901470

Award Number: 9901470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel L. Carlos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St U Monterey Bay Fdn
	      100 Campus Drive
	      Seaside, CA  939558001    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project focuses on disseminating information to the members of the
              American Anthropological Association (AAA) on newly developed multimedia
              courseware for teaching undergraduates various key aspects of social scientific
              research in anthropology.  The session will feature the on-screen presentation
              of imaginative, visually engaging, and classroom tested applications of
              Internet, WEB, and CD-ROM based materials and computer facilitated approaches
              to the teaching of anthropology.

The materials include interactive
              multimedia packaged information on (1) ethnographic field research methods; (2)
              laboratory analysis of human physical diversity in physical anthropology, (3)
              an analysis of mummified and material culture remains and cultural organization
              in archaeology; (4) an analysis of ethno-palentological and material culture
              remains at a specif research project in Africa (Olduvial Gorge); and (5) fireld
              and laboratory archaeology that focuses on teaching archaeology undergraduates
              to acquire digital field data, transfer it to the computer, and then manipulate
              the data to carry out various kinds of analysis in a cummer field school
              setting.

The materials presented emphasize the learning and/or evaluation of
              social scientific research methods vby actural "hands-on" applications using
              computing facilitated instruction.

The five learning packages and teaching
              approaches mentioned above will be demonstrated at a four hour invited session
              of the annual national meetings of the AAA in Philadelphia on Decembe 1-6,
              1998.  The session is titled "Anthropology Courseware:  Teaching with
              Electronic Media."  The PI is the organizer of the session.

The PI expects
              that the session will reach as many as 150 anthropologists in the session
              audience and through them the session will reach a considerable number more. 
              The dissemination of information on courseware in anthropology is needed
              because there is little awareness, discussion or knowledge at a given moment
              about the applications of new media and electronic communications in
              undergraduate education within the profession.  Because of this, undergraduates
              in anthropology are currently not benefiting from interactive multimedia
              instruction.  
