Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Wireless Polyvinylidene Flouride (PVDF) Strain Sensor for
               Infrastructure Monitoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9901842

Award Number: 9901842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397299             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon R. L. Wang leonwang@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : InfraTech Inc
	      6 Valleyfield Court
	      Silver Spring, MD  20906    301/598-5101

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1498,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will fabricate a
              prototype PVDF strain sensor, which can be mounted on structures and embedded
              into composites. The Phase I project demonstrated that a polyvinylidene
              flouride (PVDF) film satisfactorily qualifies as a new sensor material. It was
              also determined that the sensor is very easy to fabricate and that the sensor
              output is highly repeatable and linear even at very high strains. Phase I
              research also found that two temperature related effects of PVDF film,
              pyroelectric effect and piezoelectric coefficients temperature dependence, can
              be corrected. Based on these results it was concluded that the material is
              strain sensitive and can be utilized to produce the strain sensing devices.  In
              Phase II, data telemetry and data acquisition and processing subsystems will be
              integrated with the sensor. The prototype of the wireless PVDF sensor system
              will be tested and evaluated in laboratory, by which numerous specialized
              sensors, such as accelerometer, displacement gauge, fatigue life counter, etc.,
              can be designed and fabricated for commercial applications. The tasks of study
              include: (1) Sensor design to study sensing element encasement for protection,
              sensor dimension for end application, elimination of temperature effect, IC
              based onboard signal amplification, frequency response characterization, and
              power requirements, (2) Durability of sensor under different environment
              conditions, such as temperature, humidity, and cyclic fatigue loading, (3) Data
              telemetry system including single and multi-channel wireless data transfer as
              well as scaling up of transmission range to over a mile, (4) Multi-channel data
              acquisition and processing including interfacing hardware into a system that is
              commercially viable and developing the software for storage and visualization,
              and (4) Field tests, application and evaluation of the wireless PVDF sensor
              system for infrastructure monitoring.
     Over one third (230,000) of all
              highway bridges existing in US are either structurally deficient or obsolete.
              About $5 billion is spent annually on the bridge rehabilitation nationwide.
              Monitoring infrastructures is important in determining precisely their health
              conditions and estimating their remaining life. The condition monitoring system
              can also be used as a warning system in emergency response to earthquake and
              other nature disaster events. Therefore, the commercial application of the
              wireless PVDF strain sensors for infrastructure monitoring is broad. The end
              users include governments at all levels, private companies and industries,
              building owners and infrastructure manages, and emergency response agencies for
              earthquakes and other natural disasters.

