Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Face Idenification System Using a Novel 3D Camera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9901880

Award Number: 9901880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399983             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason Geng geng@genextech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Genex Technologies, Incorp
	      10605 Concord Street, Suite 500
	      Kensington, MD  208952504    301/962-6565

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The primary aim of this SBIR Phase II project from Genex Technologies, Inc.
              (GTI) is the investigation of the feasibility of building, for the first time,
              an automatic 3D Face ID system with sophisticated 3D face matching capability
              using a novel 3D camera.  The key components of the 3D Face ID system include: 
               (1)A novel 3D camera that is capable of acquiring both 2D and 3D facial images
              in real-time; (2) Software based on an efficient 3D face identification
              algorithm; (3) 2D and 3D facial image database; and (4) A user-interface.  The
              human face is a three-dimensional (3D) geometric object, and each face has its
              unique 3D surface profile.  No two faces are exactly the same in 3D
              representation; therefore 3D features and surface profiles on a human face can
              be used for rapid and accurate face identification (face-ID).  Because of the
              lack of low-cost 3D imaging devices and effective 3D face-ID algorithms, almost
              all existing face-ID systems use only 2D gray-scale face images as their input.
               The 2D images are inherently vulnerable to changes in the light condition and
              the face orientation, because they cannot preserve the 3D geometric structure
              of a face.  This fundamental restriction greatly limits the capability of
              current face-ID systems to effectively perform face recognition functions.  As
              a result, the match-rate for existing face-ID systems in real-world
              applications is very low (below 90%).  However, with a 3D camera--an electronic
              3D imaging device-- that is able to produce a digital 3D profile measurement of
              the human face in one snap shot, the 3D facial images that are available in
              GTI's system provide accurate geometric information enabling much more accurate
              and efficient face identification.
     The commercial market for such a 3D
              camera as a component of, as well as apart from, automatic face identification
              systems is sizable, and applications are numerous, including in both military
              and civilian areas.  Security and ATM machines can use Face-ID to verify the
              identity of bankcard user, saving millions of dollars in false claims of
              cardholdership.  Computer access control can use the Face-ID system instead of
              a password to grant authority for computer usage.   Law enforcement agents can
              use the Face-ID system to preselect and capture fugitives based on their
              images.  Military can use the Face-ID system to control  access to restricted
              areas.  Valuable properties such as cars or boats could use the 3D Face-ID
              system to identify their owners.  Low cost 3D cameras can also be used for many
              other applications, such as manufactured parts inspection, robotics, autonomous
              vehicles, and virtual reality.  The rapid advances in video-conferencing and
              interactive television further broaden possible applications of 3D imaging
              technologies.
