Title       : SBIR Phase II: A Hybrid Organic/Inorganic Biodegradable Commodity Plastic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9901730

Award Number: 9901730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Cook cookrl@tda.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Georgette L. Siparsky  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : TDA Research, Inc
	      12345 West 52nd Avenue
	      Wheat Ridge, CO  800331917    303/940-2301

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,9102,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Research Phase II project addresses the problem of
              accumulated waste from food packaging material and provides a unique solution
              to the difficulties encountered in the development of biodegradable plastics. 
              These materials are generally made with environmentally degradable
              thermoplastics or starch-based composites, both of which have poor barrier
              properties and inadequate high temperature stability. TDA Research, Inc. has
              developed a biodegradable hybrid organic/ inorganic resin that can be used as a
              coating material that would provide these materials with structural integrity
              at high temperatures and significantly reduce their oxygen and water vapor
              permeability, allowing for packagec foods to remain fresh longer. Such a
              coating would also extend the market for the degradable packaging material to
              coffee and other hot beverage containers, significantly expanding the demand
              for biodegradable containers.  The coating may be applied by existing
              equipment, leading to greater manufacturer acceptability and minimal technology
              transfer costs. Moreover,  the coating is prepared with materials derived from
              renewable resources, benefiting the American farmer and the economy as a
              whole.
     The potential commercial applications of this hybrid material
              include coatings for paperboard/cardboard, biodegradable polymers such as
              polylactide and the starch-based composites used in the food packaging
              industry.  The high temperature stability of the organic/inorganic coating can
              extend the use temperature of these materials to include hot beverage
              containers.  Since the coating is practically impervious to oxygen, it can also
              be a substitute for metalized plastic sheeting used in other high barrier
              packaging applications such as electronics and pharmaceuticals.  The hybrid
              coating is also anticipated to benefit the farming community since it is
              prepared with materials derived from agricultural products.


