Title       : Development of Non-Contact Sensors for Pipe Inspection by Lamb Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9901221

Award Number: 9901221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tribikram Kundu tkundu@email.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The Main objective of this research is to theoretically explain the experimental
              results generated by different types of defects (dents, removed metal and
              gouge) in pipes and then use this knowledge to develop a non-contact sensor for
              inspecting damages in pipes by Lamb waves.  The two non-contact methods for
              generating elastic waves in pipes are: 1) Laser excitation and 2)
              Electro-magnetic Acoustic Transducer (EMAT) excitation.  Although it is
              possible to generate and detect Lamb waves in a pipe by laser beams, this
              method is very sensitive to small variations of the speciment geometry and
              cannot be used in rugged field conditioins.  The first step of this research is
              to identify the Lamb modes that should be generated in the pipe to detect a
              specific type of defect in good and corroded pipes with or without protective
              coatings.  The Lamb mode that is most sensitive to defects and least sensitive
              to the thickness variation of the pipe wall will be identified.  EMAT will be
              designed and fabricated to generate this Lamb mode.  A number of specimens will
              be tested with this device.  The specimens will include four types of commonly
              available pipes-steel pipe, copper pipe, aluminum pipe and nonmetalic PVC pipe.
              Three types of defective specimens will be fabricated specimens with removed
              metal, gouge and dent.  Size of these defects will be varied to experimentally
              investigage the defect sensitivity of different Lamb modes. 

The methods to
              be developed could offer an alternative if not a better approach to the current
              Magnetic Flux Leakage (MFL) method, which is commonly used by industries.

