Title       : SBIR Phase II: Delivery of Ultrashort Laser Pulses for the Treatment of Glaucoma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9901726

Award Number: 9901726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tibor Juhasz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IntraLase Corporation
	      2217 Vinewood
	      Ann Arbor, MI  48104    734/332-9978

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1402,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)Phase II project will develop
              an optimized ultra-short pulsed laser surgical device for high precision
              surgery in the sclera of the eye.  This tool may enable novel, office-based
              procedures to treat serious and common conditions, such as glaucoma and
              presbyopia.
Phase I study results will be used to guide development of a new
              solid-state high power femtosecond laser source and scanning optical delivery
              system.  Performance will be evaluated in ex vivo human and animal tissue.  It
              is anticipated that this tool will be used to test long-lasting and minimally
              invasive glaucoma and presbyopia surgical procedures performed in the sclera. 
              These procedures will be developed through follow-up in vivo evaluations
              conducted in collaboration with researchers at the University of Michigan (to
              whom the device will be made available).  By providing a tool for non-invasive
              scleral channel formation, investigators will be able to address long-standing
              questions about why current glaucoma surgery fails, as well as how the loss of
              accommodation can be reversed.  These developments will raise the possibility
              of direct intervention for the two million Americans who have glaucoma and the
              millions more who suffer from presbyopia.
     The market for glaucoma is
              estimated at over $5 billion, while the potential market for presbyopia is
              probably several times greater. Since both glaucoma and presbyopia are
              associated with aging, their incidence is expected to rise.  The potential for
              low cost, office-based surgical procedures that are more effective than any
              current technique offers a compelling business model for the anticipated result
              of this proposal.


