Title       : Transport Phenomena, Shrinkage, and Pore Formation during Solidification of a
               Dendritic Alloy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9901290

Award Number: 9901290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Poirier poirierd@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Juan C. Heinrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9901290
Poirier

Recent research has shown that microporosity is an important
              microstructural feature that relates to the mechanical behavior of aluminum
              casting alloys.  Micropores in aluminum casting alloys can nucleate during
              solidification with very little supersaturation.  This indicates the existence
              of pore-nucleating agents in the melt prior to solidification.  Such agents
              appear to be oxides, either in the form of skins or films that are often
              observed on fracture surfaces of fatigue specimens.  The research involves
              novel experiments for introducing oxides into aluminum melts in a systematic
              manner so that the number density of the oxides can be controlled and measured.
               Castings are then made from the melts and the porosity in the castings
              measured and compared to the number density of the oxides in the melts.  A
              second objective is to develop a computer simulator to predict the formation of
              porosity during solidification.  This effort requires innovation in how
              pressure during solidification relates to the population and size of pores and
              their locations in castings.  The permeability of a mushy zone in a solidifying
              alloy is treated with a stochastic permeability.  Such an approach has not been
              used previously for simulating solidification of dendritic alloys.  The
              formation of pores during solidification is related to the number density of
              the oxide skins as determined in the above-described experiments.  As a final
              step in the program experimental castings will be produced that have the
              potential for avoiding oxides and oxide-skins in aluminum castings. 
%%%
This
              grant supports interdisciplinary research involving faculty of Materials
              Science and Engineering and Aerospace and Mechanical Engineering at the
              University of Arizona. The solidification simulator will enable casting
              engineers to predict the population and size of pores and their locations in
              castings. Avoidance of casting defects eliminates a major culprit in initiating
              fatigue cracks in aluminum transportation castings.  The desired outcome of the
              research is a greater acceptance and use of aluminum castings in transportation
              vehicles where fatigue resistance is important.
***

