Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Intergroup Competition in Bonnet Macaques
               (Macaca Radiata)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a9901439

Award Number: 9901439
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11396              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : M,Cooper
	      235 Sycamore Drive, Apt. O-7
	      Athens, GA  30606    706/353-3429

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5919,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901439
Cooper
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide support for a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Matthew Cooper to work with Dr. Mewa Singh
              at the University of Mysore in India. Support for this project is provided by
              the U.S.-India Program.

Dr. Cooper will study the effect of intergroup
              competition on relationship quality in bonnet macaques.  Species with high
              levels of intergroup competition are expected to have valuable relationships
              with group members.  The project will examine the association between
              intergroup encounters and relationship quality, and its ability to account for
              variation in an array of aggressive and affiliative behavior.  During this
              study, he will provide field data to a comparative database on conflict
              resolution on this genus, he will quantify the level of encounters so that
              interspecific comparisons can be made, and finally to determine the flexibility
              of social relationships within a species in the face of variation in intergroup
              encounters.
Dr. Singh is currently working on a comparative study of the
              primates of South India.  He maintains a research site at the Indira Gandhi
              Wildlife Sanctuary in Tamil Nadu, India. He has located 32 bonnet groups on
              this reserve.  In addition to working with Dr. Singh and his group, Dr. Cooper
              will collaborate with Dr. Filippo Aureli, one of the few scientists with
              experience studying reconciliation in a forest group of monkeys in the wild. 
              He is affiliated with the Yerkes Regional Primate Center in Atlanta, GA, and
              will be at the University of Liverpool's Department of Biological
              Anthropology.
***

