Title       : SBIR Phase II: High Performance Cholesteric Liquid Crystal-Based Wide Angle
               Broadband Polarizers for Practical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9901683

Award Number: 9901683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $387813             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haiping Yu yu@reveo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Le Li  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Reveo Inc
	      3 Westchester Plaza
	      Elmsford, NY  105231609    914/345-9556

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 1517,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   The mission of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
              project is to implement the large-incident-angle performance enhancement of the
              reflective polarizing properties of Reveo's proprietary cholesteric liquid
              crystal (CLC)-based thin film polarizer to eliminate the last commercialization
              obstacle for several high market-pull technologies. In Phase I, Reveo
              discovered solutions to this obstacle through a greater understanding of the
              fundamental material properties, and several unexpected novel polarizer
              technologies were also developed.  In Phase II, Reveo proposes to apply these
              solutions to the polarizer components of its ultrahigh-brightness LCD, energy
              conservation window, and switchable privacy window technologies, leveraging
              $2.5 million in prior private sector strategic partner investments to rapidly
              commercialize these otherwise market-ready technologies.  This early private
              sector investment is dramatic evidence for the substantial market pull for
              these technologies.  The polarizer performance will be adapted and optimized
              for the specific needs of each application, and manufacturability issues will
              be addressed focusing on the polarizer enhancement features developed herein. 
              In commercializing these technologies, Reveo will follow its highly successful
              SBIR commercialization strategy of strategic partnerships that has leveraged 4
              SBIR Phase II grants to attract $37,000,000 and create 65 jobs to date.
    
              The CLC polarizers resulting from this program are superior in cost and
              performance to any other existing or proposed thin film reflective polarizer,
              and the enabled enhanced brightness LCD, energy conservation window, and
              switchable privacy window technologies are similarly of superior commercial
              potential.  In addition, unprecedented low cost broadband 45' reflective
              polarizers are a resulting newly enabled technology.
technology.
