Title       : Water-Rich Magmatic Systems: H2O and Silicate Solubility and Solubility
               Mechanisms in Hydrous Melts and Silicate-Saturated Aqueous Solutions at
               Pressures and Temperatures ...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9901886

Award Number: 9901886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76846              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bjorn O. Mysen mysen@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901886
Mysen
Laboratory data on melting, crystallization, and mass transport
              of magma and aqueous fluids in the Earth's crust and upper mantle will be
              employed to characterize materials recycling in the Earth.  The project
              integrates acquisition of solubility data and solubility behavior of H2O in
              magmatic liquids and of silicate in aqueous solutions in the pressure and
              temperature range of the Earth's crust and upper mantle. Solubility data and
              structural information will be obtained primarily in peralkaline
              aluminosilicate systems with a range of compositions so as to be able to model
              magmatic liquids including basalt, andesite, and rhyolite compositions. To this
              end, we will examine the effect of melt polymerization, the influence of Al2O3,
              and relative effects of metal cations (alkalis and alkaline earths) on both on
              the H2O solubility behavior in hydrous melts and the silicate solubility in
              aqueous solutions.  Solubility measurements will be carried out by combinations
              of instrumental techniques on quenched materials as well as phase equilibrium
              measurements when the melts and fluids to not quench to a homogeneous phase.
              Structural information on both melts and fluids will be obtained by using
              confocal microRaman spectroscopy in conjunction with the externally heated
              diamond anvil cell. Nuclear magnetic resonance will be employed when needed to
              assign Raman bands and to calibrate Raman band intensities to obtain
              quantitative information on the abundance of structural units in hydrous melt
              and silicate-rich fluids.  The results will be used to establish the links
              between melt and fluid structure on the one hand and properties such as
              composition-activity relations among structural units in melts and fluids,
              liquidus phase relations, density and viscosity of hydrous magmatic liquids and
              silicate-saturated aqueous solutions. 


