Title       : Spherical Hydrophilic Polymers: Synthesis, Characterization and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a9901393

Award Number: 9901393
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Newkome gnewkome@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9901393
Newkome

The proposed research described herein is a systematic and
              logical extension of the results obtained from prior NSF funding.  The
              overriding theme of this proposal concerns the investigation of the
              preparation, structural aspects, and chemical propeties of dendrimers that have
              been internally and externally modified via (1) combinatorial techinques to
              examine functional group cooperativity within branced architectures and (2) the
              incorporation of metal ligand binding sites for the construction of "higher
              order" dendritic networks and arrays.  Pursuant to this goal are the design and
              synthersis of application-oriented dendrimers accessed form utilitarian
              dendritic building blocks that can be prepared via directed- or
              statictical-type reaction shcemes and are based on well documented synthetic
              transformations.  Combinatorial techinques will facilitate the construction of
              novel dendrimer families possessing constitutionally diverse fundtionality. 
              Dendrimer construction efficiency and usefulness of the combinatorial
              techinique will be assessed by material analysis for catalytic activity(e.g.,
              phosphate ester hydrolysis).  Use of the internally modified dendrimers for the
              preparation of novel materials will also be exemplified by the modular
              construction of dendritic assemblies and networks.  Network preparation will be
              facilitated by the propensity of tetrahedral units to self-assemble when
              appropriately functionalized and the strict geometric positional control of
              binding lici provided by the iterative synthetic method.  Metal complex
              formation will be employed for the connectivity of the ordered arrays.  Project
              goals include:

Exploration of the potential physicochemical properties and
              applications of internal dendritic    environments.

Construction of
              functionally diverse dendrivers for use as recoverable, hydrolytic
              catalysts.

Construction of dendrimers with compartmentalized moieties
              capable of forming connections with other     dendrimers.

Preparation of
              functionally derivatized dendritic building blocks and dendrivers that are
              capable of being     used to demonstrate surface functional group
              mobility.

Combinatorial construction of dendrivers to meld the best traits
              of hypebranched and classical dendritic     synthetic techniques.
%%%
This
              research combines study of the chemistry associated with physicochemical
              properties of highly branched, specifically designed, macromolecule, with the
              attendant utility inherent in those properties.  Results of this research will
              expand foundations for understanding of chemical phenomena occurring within
              "designer" reaction environments.

