Title       : Alkali Aggregates on Cold Helium Droplets and in Free Jets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a9901291

Award Number: 9901291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang E. Ernst wee1@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry program of the
              Chemistry Division and the Atomic, Molecular, Optical, and Plasma Physics
              program of the Physics Division, Wolfgang Ernst of Pennsylvania State
              University will study intramolecular interactions in metallic aggregates,
              specifically, small alkali-atom clusters.  Molecular beam spectroscopy using
              narrow-band lasers and microwave radiation as well as laser ionization and mass
              selective detection will be used to investigate species produced using two
              different methods.  In the first technique free-jet expansions of alkali metal
              vapors will generate small alkali clusters that are studied at very high
              resolution using resonant two-photon ionization (R2PI) spectroscopy, ionization
              detected microwave spectroscopy, and optical-optical double resonance.  Insight
              into details of Jahn-Teller (JT) and pseudo Jahn-Teller potential energy
              surfaces will result, and questions about a Berry phase in the evolution of
              nuclear and electronic wavefunctions will be answered.  In the second set of
              experiments alkali aggregates will form on cold helium droplets, which act as
              inert substrates.  The metal aggregates acquire the 0.4 K temperature of the
              droplets, and the resulting simplified spectra will be studied by laser-induced
              fluorescence, laser-microwave double resonance, laser ionization, and
              time-of-flight mass spectroscopy.  Species investigated will include different
              alkali metals and products of reactions of alkalis with simple molecules. 


              Spectroscopy of atomic and molecular species on ultracold helium drops is
              similar to matrix isolation spectroscopy and can give correspondingly useful
              information about unstable chemical intermediates.  Results of this work can
              also be effective in testing quantum chemical calculations and molecular
              dynamics models, developing schemes for coherent control of molecules using
              femtosecond laser pulses, and understanding reactions involving other small
              gas-phase species, such as air pollutants and reactive intermediates of
              combustion processes.

