Title       : High Performance Analog-to-Digital Interfaces in CMOS Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a9901925

Award Number: 9901925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372601             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Hurst hurst@ece.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many signal-processing systems operate at least partly in the digital domain on
              signals that originate in analog form.  In implementing the required
              digital-signal-processing (DSP) circuits for such systems, CMOS technologies
              have become dominant because of their high densities and low power
              dissipations.  To reduce system cost and increases portability, both increased
              levels of integration and reduced power dissipations are required, forcing the
              associated analog interface circuits to use CMOS compatible technologies.  When
              implemented in CMOS technologies, however, such interface circuitry often
              limits the performance of the overall signal-processing systems.

Therefore,
              the theme of this research is to study techniques that can overcome the
              accuracy and speed limitations in CMOS analog interface circuits.  In
              particular, this research will focus on techniques to overcome the mismatches
              in high-speed, parallel, time-interleaved analog-to-digital converters and to
              improve linearity of analog-to-digital converters.  Specific objectives of the
              proposed research are:
1. to develop background-calibration techniques that
              can overcome the accuracy, linearity and/or conversion-rate limitations of
              analog interface circuits and
2. to demonstrate these techniques by
              fabricating prototypes.

