Title       : RUI: Nucleon Structure and Fundamental Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9901570

Award Number: 9901570
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr Decowski pdecowski@smith.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901570
Decowski
Number of longitudinally polarized electrons (i.e. electrons
              with spins
parallel or antiparallel to the direction of their motion)
              scattered from 
longitudinally polarized nucleons depends on relative
              orientation of electron and nucleon spins. Configuration in which the spin of
              the interacting electron and the spin of a residing in the nucleon struck quark
              are antiparallel is more favorable because of the spin carried away by virtual
              photon exchanged in the interaction. Hence, the precise measurement of
              asymmetry in scatttering of longitudinally polarized electrons from
              longitudinally polarized nucleons yields information on the composition of the
              nucleon spin. A very naive picture, based on symmetry arguments, suggests that
              such asymmetry should not be observed at small angles when the nucleon 
spin
              is oriented in the direction transverse to the direction of electron spin. 
              However, higher order effects involving subtle interference effects lead to a
              small nonzero asymmetry. Different theoretical calculations do not converge on
              the magnitude of this effect which is extremely sensitive to assumptions in
              various theoretical approaches. The purpose of the E155x experiment at SLAC is
              the precise measurement of this asymmetry in protons and neutrons. It will be
              
an important test of the existing theories based on the Standard Model. 
              Similarly, the very precise measurement of very small asymmetry caused by
              parity violating admixture in scattering of longitudinally polarized electrons
              from unpolarized electrons, the goal of the planned E158 experiment at SLAC,
              will yield another test of the Standard Model by precise tracing the dependence
              of this admixture on the transfered momentum.  The award will grant
              participation of a number of Smith College women students in both forefront
              experiments. They will be involved in most aspects of the E158 experiement,
              including "hands-on" work on building and testing the detection system during
              the summer months, and in part of the E155x data analysis. This awards affords
              an opportunity for young women at one of the premier womens colleges in the
              U.S. to participate in scientific research at the cutting edge.   

