Title       : Grains and Defects in Block Copolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9901951

Award Number: 9901951
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Garetz bgaretz@duke.poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nitash P. Balsara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9901951
Balsara
An experimental study, aimed at obtaining a fundamental
              understanding of the factors that control grain and defect structure in block
              copolymers, is proposed. Block copolymers belong to a general class of
              materials that exhibit a symmetry-breaking phase transition from a disordered
              phase to ordered nanostructures with liquid crystalline symmetry. Typical
              examples include lamellae, and cylinders arranged on a hexagonal lattice.
              However, coherent order in these materials is restricted to finite regions or
              grains, with concomitant defects. This proposal addresses three issues:
              nucleation of grains, defect dynamics, and the microscopic response of grains
              to macroscopic deformation. The primary tool that we will use to obtain the
              grain structure is depolarized light scattering. The relationship between
              optical properties and block copolymer grain structure (size, shape, and
              inter-grain correlations) was established in our laboratory. The optical
              experiments will be augmented by electron microscopy, neutron scattering, and
              rheology. Samples required for the initial studies have already been
              synthesized by high vacuum anionic polymerization; additional samples will be
              synthesized as necessary.

The students who will be supported by this grant
              will be educated in the areas of polymer synthesis, polymer characterization by
              spectroscopy and chromatography, scattering of light, X-rays, and neutrons, and
              condensed matter physics. Such interdisciplinary training is become
              increasingly important in government and industrial research
              laboratories.



