Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Physics of Interstellar Dust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9901347

Award Number: 9901347
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76652              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Weingartner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 0000,5956,5977,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901347
Weingartner
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.
This award will provide Dr. Joseph Weingartner
              with support for twenty-four months to work with Drs. Peter Martin and Alex
              Lazarian at the Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics (CITA) in
              Toronto, Ontario, Canada.  Twelve months is being supported by NSF's
              Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences' Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities.
This research will focus on the physics of interstellar dust,
              specifically in the construction of a dust model and the exploration of
              applications of gas-grain drift in photodissociation and ionized regions, as
              well as studying grain alignment.  An improved understanding of this dust will
              contribute to the elucidation of the structure and evolution of the galaxy and
              of the processes of star and planet formation.  The most basic goal in dust
              research is to accurately characterize the dust: its composition, size
              distribution, and shapes.  In addition to this research, Dr. Weingartner will
              study the interstellar medium and the star formation process.
Drs. Martin and
              Lazarian are leaders in the study of the interstellar medium.  The host
              institution, CITA, offers fast computing facilities as well as a community of
              researchers in diverse areas of astrophysics.
***

