Title       : SBIR Phase II: Development of Calcium Phosphate Microcarriers as Suspendable and
               Non-Suspendable, Mitogenic Substrates for Mammalian Cell Culture Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a9901798

Award Number: 9901798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399983             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Brian Starling jcapbio@cs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CaP Biotechnology Incorpor
	      6010 Wright Street
	      Arvada, CO  80004    303/277-1152

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will further
              develop and scale the ceramic processes for producing a variety of
              microcarriers for biotechnology and biomedical applications.  A need exists for
              a microcarrier capable of growing anchorage dependent, mammalian cells
              muftilayers thick with the ability to maintain phenotype over extended periods
              of time.  Likewise, for chromatography, a need exists for more efficient
              separations of bio-products using a more robust media.  In biomedical
              applications, a strong, low mass biomimetic substrate is required as a carrier
              for tissue growth factors and for extending the supply of demineralized bone
              matrix.  Each application will require tailored microcarrier properties with
              specific size and density ranges as primary objectives.  Developed
              microcarriers will be evaluated in appropriate sizes and types of bioreactors
              to determine the cost effectiveness and efficiencies of microcarriers for
              several biotechnology and biomedical applications.  The determination of the
              material and process economics is a primary objective of this grant.
    
              Three principle areas of application for this technology have been identified:
              (1) culturing of mammalian cells for pharmaceutical / bio-products; (2)
              substrates for tissue engineered products; and (3) chromatographic separations
              of bioproducts.  The primary customers will be pharmaceutical, biomedical
              device companies and tissue engineering markets.

