Title       : Automated Geometry Reasoning and Diagram Constructing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9901062

Award Number: 9901062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222634             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shang-Ching Chou chou@cs.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with automated geometry diagram constructing or
              geometric constraint solving, which is to draw a declaratively-described
              diagram or an engineering drawing automatically.  This kind of work is central
              to much of the current work of developing intelligent and parametric CAD
              systems and interactive constraint-based graphic systems.

Successful methods
              of automated geometry theorem proving and discovering which have been developed
              in recent years will be extended to methods of automated geometry diagram
              constructing, which in turn will be applied to the areas of intelligent CAD
              (computer aided design) and CAI (computer aided instruction).

New techniques
              for geometry constraint solving will be developed to advance the state of the
              art for CAD research and to provide better CAI systems.  New automated
              reasoning techniques will be explored for developing faster and more powerful
              automated diagram constructing methods by using more geometry predicates,
              introducing new drawing tools, and extending the 2D method to 3D.  The basis of
              the proposed research is the work on automated generation of human-readable
              proofs in geometry.  The global propagation method for automated generation of
              construction steps of geometry diagrams shows that the proposed work is
              feasible and may lead to significant improvement of the performance of CAD
              systems.  

Various optimization techniques, such as global optimization
              methods and multi-objective optimization methods will be used to develop more
              stable, flexible, and powerful numerical methods of geometric constraint
              solving.

New symbolic computation techniques will be used to enhance the
              power of constraint solving systems in certain special cases.  These techniques
              include block triangulation and elimination theories based on vector and
              geometric invariants.

Finally, integration techniques will be studied and
              used to build more practical and intelligent CAD and CAI systems by
              incorporation all the above methods.

