Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience
               Studies of Object and Spatial Representation in Human Infants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9901349

Award Number: 9901349
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jordy Kaufman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5946,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901349
Kaufman
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide support for a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Jordy Kaufman to work with Dr. Mark Henry
              Johnson at Birkbeck College, University of London in the UK.
Dr. Kaufman will
              do cognitive neuroscience studies of infant spatial and object representation. 
              A new technological and methodological advancement is a neuroimaging technique
              called high-density event-related potentials (HD-ERP) which can be used with
              infants to directly examine the neural pathways - dorsal and ventral cortical -
              to see how they are activated in a variety of cognitive tasks.  A large number
              of sensors are used in a geodesic net which is placed on the subject's head to
              provide excellent temporal resolution and spatial resolution which is better
              than that found with older methods.  For the first time, using this
              methodology, one can actually measure brain activation in infants during
              well-designed behavioral tasks.  The planned experiments will approach the
              problem of how brain development in human infants relates to the development of
              their cognitive abilities.
The host, Dr. Johnson, is one of the few scientists
              in the world who have the ability and materials to use high-density
              event-related potentials with human infants.  His lab also has access to
              William's Syndrome patients, which provides an extremely rare and valuable
              research opportunity.  He is well-known for his non-imaging studies.
***

