Title       : Studies of Local Structure and Transport Properties of Anionic Conductors and
               Battery Materials with Solid State NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2001    
File        : a9901308

Award Number: 9901308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare P. Grey cgrey@sbchem.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9901308 
Grey
Solid State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) will be used to
              probe local structure in fluoride-anion conductors, ferroelectric oxyfluorides,
              and lithium manganese oxide cathode materials. These are all systems where
              knowledge of local structure, and how it changes with temperature (fluorides)
              or charging/discharging of the battery cell (lithium manganese oxides) is
              critical to the understanding of the function of these materials. Mechanisms of
              fluoride-ion conduction in fluorides and oxyfluorides will be determined. The
              role of disorder and fluroride ion mobility in controlling ferroelectric to
              paraelectric phase transitions in ferroelectrics will be investigated. Lithium
              manganese oxides may be used as cathode materials for lithium rechargeable or
              "rocking chair" batteries. Since these electrode materials, however, suffer
              from reproducibility problems, combined with a loss of capacity after repeated
              charging and discharging of the electrochemical cell, NMR will be used to
              follow the changes in local structures (atomic and electronic) of the cathode
              during the charging/discharging. The aim is to determine which local lithium
              environments are deintercalated at a spec fic voltage, and which lithium local
              environments remain trapped in the solid.
%%%
Moderate to fast ionic
              conduction is critical in a wide range of devices or applications, which
              include fuel cells, sensors, and solid state electrolytes (and cathode
              materials) in batteries. An understanding of the mechanisms of conduction will
              help in the design and search for new and improved materials for these
              applications. The rechargeable battery in many computers (and electronic
              devices) typically represents the first component of the system to fail:
              research in this area is critical in order to keep pace with society's
              increased demand for electrically driven (computer controlled) machinery. The
              manganate cathodes represent more environmentally-friendly and cheaper
              alternatives to batteries currently in production.



