Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Entrepreneurial Networks and Economic
               Development in Mwanza, Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9901026

Award Number: 9901026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Malecki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Entrepreneurial networks are social interconnections among entrepreneurs
              participating in a given economic activity.  These networks can accelerate the
              transmission of information, facilitate innovation, and enhance systems of
              mutual assistance, although they can also limit access to new information or
              discourage learning if participation is dependent on specific characteristics
              like ethnicity or religion, if the network hierarchy is vertical, or if
              contacts are limited to a small, highly cohesive group.  By analyzing
              entrepreneurial networks, geographers and other social scientists obtain new
              insights into the cultural, political, and social contexts of economic systems
              and economic development.  This doctoral dissertation research project will use
              case studies of two entrepreneurial networks in and around Mwanza in northern
              Tanzania to characterize the conventions shaping interactions within the
              networks; to identify the bases of legitimacy affecting who participates in the
              network; to determine the importance of these networks for entrepreneurial
              innovation; to assess the levels of trust influencing the depth of
              relationships in the network; and to correlate business performance with
              network participation.  In-depth, semi-standardized interviews will be
              conducted with entrepreneurs in each network and field observations will be
              made of their business practices.  Statistical correlations will test the
              significance of relationships among enterprise, entrepreneur, and network
              characteristics, firm performance, and firm innovation, while qualitative
              analyses will detail significant social, cultural, political, and external
              influences on the networks and social relationships between entrepreneurs. 
              This research will increase knowledge of how small enterprise entrepreneurial
              networks relate to Tanzanian society and what role they have played in the
              success of economic development policies.  Beyond the Tanzanian context, the
              project will contribute to understandings of the potential for independent
              development in sub-Saharan Africa and will enhance insights into the role of
              social institutions in economic transformations.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

