Title       : Dissertation Research: T-box Genes and Evolution of Paired Appendages in
               Vertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9901943

Award Number: 9901943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6139               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee M. Silver lsilver@molbio.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Silver and Ruvinsky 9901943
	According to the fossil record, limb evolution of
              modern vertebrates from their limbless chordate ancestors proceeded in two
              major steps.  A set of paired appendages was initially acquired at the pectoral
              level.  This was followed by reiteration of a limb-outgrowth program at
              a
different axial level, giving rise to the second, pelvic, set.  However, the
              genetic systems associated with this process remain unknown.  We have recently
              discovered a novel gene family, the T-box genes, some of which are important
              for determining limb identity in tetrapods.  We established that a gene
              duplication resulting in the origin of limb-specific T-box genes happened
              roughly at the same time as the transition from one to two sets of paired
              appendages.  Therefore, we decided to investigate the connection between
              evolution of the T-box family and morphological evolution of vertebrates.
	We
              will attempt to isolate the T-box genes from "lower" vertebrates (jawless
              fishes and sharks) and the closest relative of vertebrates (amphioxus) to test
              the hypothesis that gene duplications temporally coincided with the advent of
              the second set of paired appendages.  We will examine genomic loci of the genes
              thought to be coordinately regulated to test for the evidence of  selection
              maintaining close linkage.  Finally, by investigating expression patterns of
              duplicated genes we will test a link between functional divergence and
              morphological evolution.
	The data acquired during this project will likely
              shed light on the molecular mechanisms underlying this critical step in
              vertebrate evolution.

