Title       : Photophysics of Mono-Disperse Metal-Organic Oligomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2001     
File        : a9901861

Award Number: 9901861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk S. Schanze kschanze@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports research on the optical properties of metal-organic pi-conjugated
              polymers by Dr. Kirk S. Schanze of the Department of Chemistry, University of
              Florida.  The photophysical properties of several homologous series of
              mono-disperse, metal-organic pi-conjugated oligomers will be determined as
              models for higher molecular weight polymeric counterparts.  The specifc
              compounds to be studied are mono-disperse phenyleneethynylene and
              phenylenevinylene type oligomers that contain bipyridine units that can bind a
              variety of transition metal ions, particularly rhenium (I) and ruthenium (II). 
              Low-lying metal to ligand charge transfer (MLCT) excited states delocalized
              over the entire oligomer are observed in these compounds.  In addition to the
              impact of the metal center on optical properties, the effects of oligomer
              topology, conjugation length and bandgap on the properties of the MLCT excited
              states will be investigated.  Some platinum-acetylide oligomers will also be
              studied.  Photophysical investigation will utilize absorption,
              photoluminescence, photoinduced absorption, transient FT-IR and FT-EPR
              spectroscopies and photoacoustic calorimetry.

Metal-organic polymers exhibit
              properties that are a combination of those expected for the metal and organic
              components.   For this reason, they have potential for use in electronic
              devices that require electrochromism or photorefractivity or in specific
              detection of metal ions.  Graduate and undergraduate students involved in this
              project will gain experience in many synthetic techniques and use of
              sophisticated instrumentation.

