Title       : SBIR Phase II: Facial Animation for Communication Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9901855

Award Number: 9901855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398526             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward M. Sims eds@vcom3d.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VCOM3D, Inc.
	      3452 Lake Lynda Drive
	      Orlando, FL  328170000    407/568-4924

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 6845,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project  will build
              on the Phase I proof-of-concept demonstration of the use of PC-based facial
              animations to supplement verbal and sign language communications.  Seamless
              Solutions will develop software tools and animation libraries that will enable
              users to author and disseminate multimedia content based on this technology. 
              Specifically, the project will (1) expand the "vocabulary" of facial expression
              animations; (2) develop a Markup Language and authoring tools that enable
              educators and other potential users to include American Sign Language (ASL) and
              other visual/gastrula communication in their multimedia content; and (3)
              develop an Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG-4)  interface and integrate the
              animations with the Sign Language Recognition system being developed at the
              University of Pennsylvania. MPEG is the international committee developing the
              standard for streaming compositie synthetic and natural video, audio, and 3D
              graphics.  MPEG-4 is the fourth international communication standard which
              includes the standard for streaming 3-D virtual humans for applications such as
              virtual teleconferencing.)  This project will build on Seamless Solution's key
              Animation Engine technology that allows the interactive, real-time composition
              of synchronized voice, gesture, and facial expression animations. The research
              plan culminates with classroom evaluation of prototype applications developed
              by experienced educators of the deaf.
     Facial animations, synchronized to
              voice, gesture, and signs, greatly enhance both the realism and the
              communications skills of computer-generated characters.  Seamless Solutions
              will develop applications of this technology not only for the Deaf, but also
              for interactive 3-D characters that can be embedded in educational software, in
              Web pages, and in virtual teleconference applications.


