Title       : CISE Postdoctoral Research Associates in Experimental Computer Science: Demand
               Propagation in Labeled Logic Programming Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9901602

Award Number: 9901602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66000              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. R. Ramakrishnan cram@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Kifer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              I. V. Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9192,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
9901602 
Ramakrishnan, C.R. 
Ramakrishnan, I.V.
Kifer, Michael
Warren,
              David S.
State University of New York at Stony Brook

CISE Postdoctoral
              Research Associates in Experimental Computer Science: Demand Propagation in
              Tabled Logic Programming Systems  

Tabled query evaluation - the defining
              feature of our XSB logic programming system - eliminates most of the drawbacks
              of Prolog-style SLDNF resolution.  When XSB runs in the tabled mode, the system
              automatically maintains a table of predicate invocations and their answers,
              using the table for all equivalent calls to the predicate made after the first
              call.  Current implementations of tabled logic programming systems compute all
              the answers to a tabled subgoal, regardless of whether all answers are actually
              needed to correctly answer the top goal.

We have identified a concept we
              call demand propagation which can form the basis of a theory and implementation
              of "don't care" nondeterminism in the context of tabled resolution.  In this
              approach a programmer can release demand on a goal (for example, after an
              answer has been returned which shows a negative subgoal in false), in which
              case that goal and its subgoals will only be evaluated if there are other
              demands for there answers.  This concept can elegantly solve several search
              problems that have arisen in our application of XSB.

The postdoctoral
              associate supported by the project is developing both the theoretical
              underpinnings as well as implementation of a tabled logic programming system
              based on demand propagation.  The resulting system will be used for doing
              sophisticated optimizations in two on-going research projects, namely, search
              space pruning using partial-order reduction in our XSB-based model checker, and
              reducing query evaluation times in deductive databases.



