Title       : Determine Patterns of Strain in the Hanging-Wall Rocks at Active Subduction
               Zones, and to Evaluate These Patterns in the Context of Relative Plate Motions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9901491

Award Number: 9901491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan C. Lewis lewis@geology.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7137,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9901491
Lewis

The relation between plate kinematics and hanging-wall
              deformation at subduction zones will be investigated.  The research aims to
              determine patterns of strain at the base of, and within, accretionary prisms at
              active subduction zones, and to evaluate these patterns in the context of
              relative plate motions.  This research is important for understanding active
              tectonic processes at oblique and normal subduction zones as well as the
              structures recorded in exhumed subduction complexes.  How forearc regions
              accommodate convergence at active margins is fundamentally important because
              these regions are subject to large magnitude earthquakes and related high
              strain rates, obvious concerns for populated areas.  The distribution of strain
              within deforming accretionary prisms has not been well constrained by
              observation, and previous efforts have relied on continuum theories that are
              not sufficiently general to account for block rotations known to occur at plate
              boundaries.  Kinematic inversions of focal mechanism solutions for shallow
              seismic events along the subducting plate boundary and within the overlying
              accretionary prism at subduction zones characterized by varying degrees of
              obliquity will be performed.  This approach enables determination of the
              orientation and relative magnitudes of the large-scale principal strain rates
              in rocks experiencing block rotations at shallow crustal levels.  Such analyses
              have recently provided significant insight into near-surface strain
              distributions at transpressional and transtensional margins and in the vicinity
              of a TFF triple junction, but have yet to be used at normal and oblique
              subduction zones.  Beyond the importance for understanding active margins, this
              research will have implications for interpreting the time-integrated
              deformation histories recorded in the exhumed accretionary prisms that mark
              ancient subduction zones.

