Title       : SGER- "El Nino Influence on Group Formation in Facultative Group-Living Species"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9901618

Award Number: 9901618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24934              (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Uetz GEORGE.UETZ@UC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald W. DeBry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Animal Behavior Program
Nontechnical Abstract


Proposal #:  IBN -
              9901618
PI:  Uetz, George W.
Title:  El Nino influence on group formation in
              facultative group-living species

Cyclic climatic events, such as the El
              Ni=F1o phenomenon, may have both direct and indirect impacts on natural
              ecosystems and the populations of organisms within. For example, increased
              rainfall and moisture along the California coast may influence plant survival
              and productivity directly, and influence animal species indirectly through the
              food chain. This research concerns the impact of El Ni=F1o on aggregative
              behavior of typically solitary animals. Increases in prey insect abundance
              during El Ni=F1o years have been demonstrated to result in higher density of
              spider populations, creating conditions favorable to aggregation and social
              behavior. The recent discovery of aggregations of the colonial web-building
              spider Metepeira spinipes on the Monterey peninsula in California, linked to
              the El Ni=F1o phenomenon, presents a unique research opportunity to understand
              the mechanism(s) responsible for group-living in spiders. The goal of the
              proposed research is the collection of pilot data on genetic structure of
              populations, to address hypotheses concerning group formation related to the El
              Ni=F1o cycle.  This will be accomplished with field studies, specimen
              collection, and the development of molecular techniques to analyze genetic
              similarity among colonies, and genetic relatedness among individuals within
              colonies. As social behavior is extremely rare in spiders, research on the few
              species that are "an exception to the rule" may yield valuable insights about
              the evolution of social behavior in=
animals.
