Title       : CISE Postdoctoral Research Associates in Experimental Computer Science:
               Challenges in Micromanipulation: Massively Parallel MEMS Algorithms and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9901407

Award Number: 9901407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Donald brd@cs.dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9192,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

9901407 
Donald, Bruce Randall 
Dartmouth College  

CISE Postdoctoral
              Research Associates in Experimental Computer Science Challenges in
              Micromanipulation: Massively Parallel MEMS Algorithms and Systems

As
              improvements in fabrication technology for MEMS (MicroElectoMechanical Systems)
              increase the availability and diversity of micromachines, engineers are
              defining a growing number of tasks to which they may be put. The idea of
              carrying out tasks using large coordinated systems of MEMS units motivates the
              development of automated, algorithmic methods for designing and controlling
              these groups of devices.  The research focuses on algorithms and systems that
              enable MEMS to perform distributed manipulation tasks, taking on the challenge
              of design, control, and programming of massively-parallel arrays of
              microactuators.

New algorithms and MEMS for massively parallel distributed
              manipulation are being developed.  This entails the design, fabrication, and
              control of new MEMS devices, together with the design, construction, and
              programming of new control systems, algorithms, and software for task-level
              manipulation.  Algorithms and systems are being developed for part orientation,
              singulation, sorting, and posing.  The primary focus of this research is to
              extend the theory of programmable vector fields to exploit sensor feedback, and
              investigate closed loop control algorithms, on-line algorithms, and
              distributed, local control of ciliary arrays.  A current quasi-static vector
              field model is being extended to a full dynamic model.  The effect of control
              uncertainty and error to develop motion planning paradigms that are effective
              under uncertainty are also being investigated.  This should result in a more
              realistic and robust geometric theory of planning and manipulation, which is
              being tested by implementing algorithms on physical MEMS array devices. 
              Finally, the application of massively-parallel micro-robotic systems to
              biomedical systems and human augmentation is being explored.



