Title       : Improving SASW Dispersion Measurements with Source Correlation and Receiver
               Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9901225

Award Number: 9901225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61364              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Bay Jim.bay@usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 

9901225 
PI:  James A. Bay 
Institution:  Utah State University
              
"Improving SASW Dispersion Measurements with Source Correlation and Receiver
              Arrays" 

The Spectral-Analysis-of Surface-Waves (SASW) method is a seismic
              technique for determining engineering properties of shallow soil and rock
              deposits.  It involves generating seismic waves at the ground surface and
              monitoring the motions of those waves with a number of receivers positioned on
              the ground surface.  One difficulty that is often encountered in SASW testing
              is that seismic energy from other sources, such as traffic, industrial
              facilities and even wind in trees is also measured by the receivers.  This
              unwanted seismic energy, or noise, contaminates SASW measurements and can lead
              to erroneous results.  This proposed research is to investigate two approaches
              to minimize the influence of noise on SASW measurements.  These methods should
              improve the quality of SASW measurements.   

The first proposed approach is
              to use source correlation.  This involves measuring the force applied to the
              ground by the SASW source, and correlating that forcing function with the
              signal measured at each receiver.  By repeating the measurement and averaging
              the correlated functions, the noise level in the SASW measurement will be
              decreased.  An additional benefit of using source correlation is SASW testing
              is that it will allow a statistical determination of the quality of
              experimental results. An added benefit to using this approach is that with
              source correlation, coherence functions calculated between the excitation
              function and each receiver will accurately quantify the spectral distribution
              of noise at each receiver.  With this information, the relationship between
              coherence level, number of averages, and the confidence interval of the
              measured phase can be determined statistically.  With this relationship an
              operator performing SASW testing will be able to determine how many averages
              will be required to achieve a desired measurement accuracy based upon the
              coherence level.   

The second approach is to reducing the influence of
              noise the use of receiver arrays to minimize the effects of noise on surface
              wave dispersion measurements.  A receiver array is a geometric distribution of
              number of receivers connected in series, so that signals from all the sensors
              are summed.  For decades, exploration geophysicists have used receiver arrays
              to minimize the effects of surface waves (which geophysicists refer to as
              ground roll) in deep reflection surveys.  By using different spatial
              distributions of the sensors, receiver arrays can be designed that will
              selectively measure the surface waves and eliminate noise emanating from points
              other than the source location.  


This research will result in higher
              quality SASW field measurements.  In addition, accurately quantifying noise
              levels in SASW measurements will provide a valuable tool for future research in
              assessing the resolution of final SASW results.   


