Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Pattern and Mode of Speciation in the
               Hawaiian Archipelago
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9901022

Award Number: 9901022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen C. Parker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The study of island biota has been central to the development of biogeography
              and evolutionary biology as modern disciplines.  Prior to Darwin, 19th century
              naturalist-explorers of the Pacific Basin simply catalogued the pattern of the
              distribution of flora and fauna.  It was not until the theory of descent with
              modification that the process responsible for the diversity within and among
              islands was described.  The study of island biota continues to play a major
              role in the understanding of evolutionary processes, particularly with regard
              to the process of speciation.  Traditionally, speciation is thought to be a
              gradual process whereby two populations split by a geographic barrier
              accumulate differences over time.  Theories of speciation based on founder
              events have suggested, however, that speciation can proceed much more rapidly
              than with the traditional model.  The gene complexes present in the parental
              species presumably become disrupted due to the random sampling and small number
              of founders.  Because of the breakup of gene complexes, many novel gene
              combinations may be present soon after the founder event as the population
              grows.  As selection acts on the growing population, a novel gene complex will
              form in the founding population, resulting in the creation of a new species. 
              Founder-mediated speciation may be the dominant mode of speciation within
              oceanic island groups owing to their isolated nature.  Previous efforts to find
              molecular genetic evidence supporting founder-event speciation models have been
              hampered by the limited number of loci that common genetic markers generated
              and by standard population genetic statistics, which were designed to describe
              gross genetic similarity among populations and not the nuances predicted by
              founder-effect models.  This doctoral dissertation research project will
              examine speciation in a small lineage of perennial herbs endemic to the
              Hawaiian islands, Lipochaeta section Aphanopappus.  Patterns of genetic
              diversity will be examined with the DNA technique of amplified fragment-length
              polymorphisms (AFLPs), which can generate an order of magnitude greater number
              of genetic markers than previously used techniques.  The doctoral candidate
              will examine evolutionary relationships among species to determine patterns of
              speciation in the islands, quantify genetic diversity within and among species,
              and examine patterns of genetic diversity for changes in gene complexes
              associated with speciation events.  For the latter analysis, she will use a
              statistical approach novel to the analysis of genetic data.  This project will
              provide basic information about genetic diversity that will enhance
              biogeographic theory.  The results also will be valuable for the management of
              endangered species within the group and may yield insights applicable to the
              management of other endangered Hawaiian biota.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.
