Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fire-Vegetation Dynamics in Highland Pine
               Forests of the Dominican Republic: An Investigation at Multiple Time Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9901080

Award Number: 9901080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9966               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally P. Horn shorn@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Numerous natural processes and many different forms of human activity have
              altered vegetation patterns in different parts of the world.  Among the factors
              that have dramatically altered vegetation regimes are fires, both
              human-generated as well as those arising from natural causes, especially
              lightning.  Some focused studies have examined natural fires during prehistoric
              periods when humans were absent from the study locales, while others have
              examined fires during historic time periods or as modern land-management
              practices.  Little attention has been given to examining the relationships
              between fires and vegetation in the same area from prehistoric to contemporary
              time periods.  This doctoral dissertation research project will integrate
              paleontological, dendrochronological, and ecological research to investigate
              fire-vegetation dynamics at multiple time scales in the central highlands of
              the Dominican Republic.  The student will use different approaches for each
              time scale.  The long-term history of fire as an agent of vegetation change
              over millennia will be undertaken by analyzing pollen and charcoal in
              sediments.  Fire histories over recent centuries will be examined through
              analysis of tree-ring cores from two stands of fire-scarred pines, and present
              vegetation regeneration over the last decade will be analyzed in these two and
              in eight other stands that recently burned.  The integration of these three
              research approaches will expand understandings of the evolutionary and
              ecological links between fire and vegetation in the Dominican highlands.  The
              study will provide information about fire-vegetation dynamics and will
              complement current and planned studies in the region aimed at explaining
              broader-scale vegetation patterns in the region.  The results of this research
              project should contribute to deeper theoretical understandings of successional
              pathways in tropical mountain forest communities, and it will provide practical
              information the can guide land managers in making decisions regarding the use
              and control of fire in highland environments.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.
