Title       : CISE Postdoctoral Research Associates in Experimental Computer Science:
               Experimental Evaluation of Active Caches For Fine Grain Multi-Threading Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1999    
File        : a9901553

Award Number: 9901553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60672              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guang R. Gao ggao@eecis.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9192,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9901553
Gao, Guang R.
University of Delaware

CISE Postdoctoral Associates
              in Experimental Computer Science: Experimental
Evaluation of Active Caches for
              Fine Grain Multi-Threading Systems

This research will investigate the effect
              of active cache memories on computer system performance.  An active cache is
              capable of controlling complex data transformations and data movements under
              the direction of a programmer or compiler.  This study, performed through
              system simulation, requires designing active caches, proposing performance
              models for the caches, and developing compiler mechanisms to support the
              percolation model of execution.

A percolation model of execution has been
              proposed in which the application requests that some data transformations be
              performed and that the transformed data be transferred to a higher level in the
              memory hierarchy.  A thread becomes ready for execution when the data that it
              needs has percolated.  The active caching mechanism is necessary in systems in
              which the latency to fetch a piece of data in a lower level of the memory
              hierarchy is much higher than the time required to process the data.

The
              effectiveness of caches that actively percolate data closer to the processing
              unit before the execution of a piece of code starts is being proposed.  This
              model is different from traditional pre-fetching because it
is not based in
              any prediction mechanism: the instructions requesting the percolation of a data
              block are inserted into the code either under the programmer direction or
              through compiler technology.  It is expecedt that the experimental study that
              demonstrates the viability of this idea will spur further research in the area
              of active hardware system components.




