Title       : Preparation and Properties of Lanthanide-Transition Metal Arrays: Reactions of
               Metal Complexes with Borane Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9901115

Award Number: 9901115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Earley                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon G. Shore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Sheldon G. Shore of the Chemistry Department, Ohio State University, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              to explore avenues for the preparation and study of inorganic complexes that
              are composed of lanthanide metals and transition metals, either linked by an
              intervening group such as cyanide ion or directly coupled by
              lanthanide-transition metal bonds. A further aim of the proposed research is to
              prepare and examine transition metal and lanthanide derivatives of selected
              borane ligands that contain one or two boron atoms.

Inorganic complexes that
              contain transition metals (such as nickel, palladium and platinum) display a
              great variety of interesting and useful properties. Many such compounds have
              the ability to catalyze important chemical transformations used in industrial
              processes and in the synthesis of new organic compounds, including
              pharmaceuticals. Compounds that contain both transition metal atoms and also
              lanthanide ("rare earth elements" such as ytterbium or gadolinium) atoms have
              heretofore been  rare. There are good reasons to expect that such compounds, if
              they could be prepared, would have novel, interesting and important properties,
              such as the ability to catalyze chemical reactions that cannot now be
              catalyzed.  Building on experience gained in successful research supported by
              NSF in the past, Shore and his colleagues will devise methods to prepare  new
              compounds containing both lanthanide and transition-metal atoms, characterize
              those compounds, and  explore their properties. In addition, new types of
              compounds containing groups of two interlinked boron atoms will also be
              prepared and their properties explored.  Graduate students involved in this
              work will acquire expertise in several aspects of metal and main group
              chemistry, as well as in related areas of engineering and geology. 



