Title       : Starter Grant: Phylogeography of Cryptic Rat Species in Pacific Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9901964

Award Number: 9901964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis X. Villablanca   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1036,1227,1228,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9901964
Villablanca
	The goal of the project is to determine whether there is
              a fourth species of rat (genus Rattus) in the Hawaiian islands. Currently,
              there are three recognized species of rats resident in Hawaii, the Polynesian
              rat R. exulans, the wharf rat R. norvegicus, and the roof rat R. rattus. All
              three species are strongly implicated in threatening native or endemic Hawaiian
              organisms with extinction. These three species are known to differ in ecology
              and in their impacts on native vegetation. Recently, the morphologically and
              chromosomally polymorphic roof rat was divided into two separate species, R.
              rattus and the "Asian rat" R. tanezumi. These two species co-occur on many
              Pacific oceanic islands, but in external morphology are very difficult to tell
              apart. Definitive methods of identification are a requisite first step
              ultimately to managing any invasive species or ecological pest. These two
              species are currently identified by their number of chromosomes; but
              karyotyping, or the preparation of chromosomes in order to study their shape
              and number, is only possible if animals are collected alive. This research is
              focused on analyzing nuclear and mitochondrial DNA from numerous samples of
              Pacific rat populations in order to discover genetic markers unique to each of
              the two species.
	The benefits of DNA-based methods include: (1) freshly
              caught, poorly preserved, and probably even museum specimens could be
              identified to species, assuming sufficient DNA remains for amplification and
              analysis; (2) surveys of natural ecosystems could be conducted more rapidly
              than with traditional karyotyping; (3) genetic data may provide additional
              information about population sizes and immigration rates, along with species
              identification. Precisely delimiting the geographic range of the Asian rat R.
              tanezumi in the Pacific region will allow studies of its ecology in areas where
              it has recently invaded.

