Title       : U.S.-Hungary: Workshop to Plan a Carpathian Basin ILTER Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9901106

Award Number: 9901106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32290              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kate Lajtha lajthak@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000908   Urban Problems                          
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5916,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              INT-9901106
Lajtha

This U.S.-Hungary workshop will examine the potential for
              a network of international long-term ecological research (LTER) sites within
              the Carpathian Basin of Europe.  It takes place in Budapest during June 1999. 
              Co-organizers Kate Lajtha of Oregon State University and Edit Kovacs-Lang with
              the Institute of Ecology and Botany of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences hope
              to promote a heightened level of exchange among regional scientists who
              traditionally focus their research on national questions rather than
              trans-boundary topics. Recognizing that the Carpathian Basin eco-region is a
              fairly consistent physico-geographical unit, with relatively high biodiversity,
              the workshop program features discussions directed toward finding ways to
              improve networking among researchers in the neighboring scientific communities
              from Poland, Ukraine, the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic, Hungary, and
              Romania.  The NSF-supported national LTER will serve as a working model and
              U.S. scientists will contribute to the workshop agenda.

The U.S. LTER
              network recognizes that cross-site research offers scientists the opportunity
              to generalize about ecological phenomena and test the validity of local
              findings. Drawing upon the U.S. LTER experience, this international workshop
              will bring together scientists from the regional countries and from the United
              States to: 1) introduce scientists from participant countries to each other and
              LTER concepts, 2) share research ideas, data management techniques and
              networking programs, and 3) plan linked experiments and measurements.  If
              successful, the workshop could lead to new collaborative research efforts in
              topics that test and expand models linking land use history to biogeochemical
              cycling and nutrient use, air pollution to ecosystem structure and function,
              and potentially, anthropogenic effects of air pollution and land use to
              biodiversity. 

This workshop featuring long-term ecological research in the
              Carpathian Basin fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
              knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to
              combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
              mutual interest and competence.
***

