Title       : Nuclear Structure Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9901133

Award Number: 9901133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3165000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Kolata kolata.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Umesh Garg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ani Aprahamian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alejandro Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Wiescher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901133
Kolata
The University of Notre Dame Nuclear Structure Laboratory (NSL)
              carries out a broad-range program in experimental nuclear physics. This work is
              centered around the NSL facilities, but also utilizes accelerators at other
              laboratories. The research program emphasizes extensive collaborations with
              experimental and theoretical physicists at other universities, often involving
              visits by these scientists and their students in order to use the NSL
              accelerator facilities.
The active areas of research at the NSL include
              reaction studies with short-lived radioactive nuclear beams, nuclear
              astrophysics, the study of weak interactions and related fundamental processes,
              and nuclear structure physics. These four topics span a large fraction of the
              frontiers of nuclear-physics research, and have a particularly large overlap
              with other areas of many-body physics. Yet, they are all closely related. For
              example, radioactive-beam physics is an important issue both for modern
              nuclear-astrophysics research and for the study of nuclear properties far from
              the valley of stability, while the properties of the nucleus as a quantal
              many-body system can and have been exploited to learn more about the laws of
              physics at the most fundamental level. The NSL is the site of pioneering work
              in the development of low-energy radioactive nuclear beams, and is an important
              center for research in nuclear astrophysics. In addition, local research groups
              in Atomic Physics and Radiation Chemistry carry out interdisciplinary programs
              using the NSL facilities.
Specific topics of current interest in nuclear
              astrophysics include the production of the elements in steady-state "nuclear
              burning" in main sequence stars, and in violent events such as nova and
              supernova explosions. The radioactive nuclear beam research is directed at
              achieving a better understanding of nuclear reaction processes relevant for
              solar neutrino physics, as well as the structure and reactions of weakly-bound
              "halo" nuclei which appear at the limits of nuclear stability and are believed
              to have very diffuse surfaces that are rich in either neutron or proton matter.
              The fundamental-interactions program emphasizes several issues relevant to the
              search for physics beyond the standard electroweak model of elementary particle
              physics, including the search for "scalar currents" in weak decays and the
              limits to time-reversal violation in the decay of the neutron. In addition, the
              weak decays of nuclei relevant for various aspects of solar neutrino physics
              are being explored. The nuclear structure program involves the study of static
              and dynamic nuclear phenomena, such as the harmonic and anharmonic vibrations
              of nuclei, the recently discovered "magnetic" and "anti-magnetic" rotation
              phenomena, and the attempt to obtain a more complete description of the
              structure of "super-deformed" nuclei.



