Title       : SBIR Phase II: Computation of Three-Dimensional Travel Times for Seismic
               Prospecting via the Fast Marching Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9901828

Award Number: 9901828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $392225             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander M. Popovici mihai@3dgeo.com                         www.3dgeo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : 3DGeo Development, Inc
	      465 Fairchild Drive, Suite 226
	      Mountain View, CA  940432251    415/969-3886

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 1271,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will
              commercialize innovative and significant recent advances in the applications of
              partial differential equations, viscosity theory of Hamilton-Jacobi equations,
              and hyperbolic conservation laws to problems of imaging seismic data volumes
              used in oil and gas exploration. In order to perform contemporary reservoir
              development and exploration, fast and accurate three-dimensional prestack depth
              migration is required, which itself requires successful parameterization of
              wave propagation phenomena with asymptotic Green's functions commonly generated
              by raytracing or finite difference traveltimes.  During Phase I, the firm
              analyzed the performance and capabilities of fast Marching Methods (FMM) for
              calculating the required asymptotic Green's functions.  FMM techniques compute
              the correct viscosity solution to the first arrival equation and are the
              fastest travel time computation schemes available.  They rely on a marriage of
              upwind finite difference operators for entropy-satisfying gradients, consistent
              entropy-satisfying approximations, and fast heap sort algorithms.  The methods
              are, unconditionally stable, require no time step, and are particularly
              well-suited for the large variations in velocities typical and inherent in
              oil/gas exploration.  Phase I results indicate that FMM techniques indeed offer
              significant advantages over previous techniques, and can be extended to
              calculate energetic and multivalued traveltimes.
     When coupled with
              migration software, the speed, robustness and accuracy of FMM allows
              significant increase in efficiency and accuracy of seismic imaging.  This has a
              direct and significant impact on the oil/gas industry by providing a fast,
              accurate and easy to use imaging method for the complex geological structures
              that are being explored and exploited in today's competitive exploration and
              production environment. 

