Title       : SBIR Phase II: Fiber Optic Affinity Ligand Sensor for Quantification of
               Petroleum and Bioremediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a9901833

Award Number: 9901833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396699             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Wavering waveringt@lunainnovations.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Jones  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Luna Innovations, Inc.
	      PO Box 11704
	      Blacksburg, VA  240621704    540/953-4267

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project will develop
              cost-effective optical fiber sensors for rapid detection of petroleum and
              microbial activity during bioremediation of contaminated sites.  Hazardous
              chemicals are found to contaminate the ground at fuel exploration, production,
              refinement, and storage sites.  Bioremediation techniques are now used to
              remove these hazardous chemicals.  However, monitoring these sites has been
              hindered by the expense and time delays inherent with current techniques
              capable of the necessary sensitivity and specificity.  Gas chromatography
              coupled with mass spectrometry (GC/MS), capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE),
              and high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) are used to monitor
              environmental exposure and microbial activity, while biomass assays are used to
              monitor remediation processes.  GC/MS, CZE, and HPLC all require expensive
              instrumentation, extensive operator expertise, and an off-site laboratory. 
              Biomass assays are time consuming, and specificity for the microbe of interest
              is not guaranteed.  Phase II will pursue a novel optical fiber sensor based on
              the revolutionary long-period grating (LPG), that can meet this need by
              detecting changes in refractive index resulting from target molecules binding
              to an affinity coating, thus enabling rapid quantitative detection.
     These
              optical fiber-based chemical and biological sensors have numerous advantages
              over current commercial environmental monitoring instrumentation, including
              lower cost, real-time measurement capability, portability for field
              applications, and high sensitivity and selectivity.  These advantages will
              allow optical fiber sensor instrumentation to penetrate the multibillion-dollar
              environmental testing, pharmaceutical research, and industrial process
              monitoring fields.


