Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Linking Regional Patterns of Faunal
               Turnover with Local Patterns of Speciation & Extinction in the Limon & Bocas
               Basins of Tropical America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9901335

Award Number: 9901335
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41881              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross H. Nehm   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5950,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901335
Nehm
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide Dr. Ross H. Nehm with support for
              twelve months to work with Dr. Peter Jung at the Naturhistorisches Museum in
              Basel, Switzerland.
Their project will be a comparative study of speciation
              and extinction in an abundant and richly preserved group of Neogene gastropods
              from the Limon Basin and Bocas del Toro Basin on the Caribbean coast of Central
              America through closure of the Panamanian Isthmus and the Plio-Pleistocene mass
              extinction.  Their goal is to investigate the processes that generate
              biodiversity during episodes of major geological and faunal change.  This
              project will work within the context of the Panama Paleontology Project (PPP),
              which is a large-scale multidisciplinary research program that has been
              investigating the geological and paleobiological changes in the Neogene of
              Tropical America for over a decade.  The PPP has laid the foundation for
              exploring the links between the rate and scale of geological and evolutionary
              change.
The Naturhistorisches Museum is the center of Panama Paleontology
              Project (PPP) mollusk research and contains the fossil material from the
              extensive geological surveys of the Caribbean coast of tropical America
              necessary for this research.  Dr. Jung is a member of the PPP who is actively
              involved in research on the evolution and extinction of the Caribbean mollusk
              fauna in tropical America.
***

