Title       : Preparation and Nanometer-scale Characterization of p-conjugated Organic Thin
               Film Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9901293

Award Number: 9901293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $396760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hamers rjhamers@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9901293 
Hamers 
The nanometer-scale growth, structure, and morphology of
              extensively conjugated p-electron systems will be investigated. This research
              is focused on conjugated p-electron systems such as sexithiophene, polypyrrole,
              and other solid materials that are organic conductors of electricity and/or
              have novel optical properties as a consequence of their conjugated p systems.
              The proposed research focuses on strategies for preparing and for
              characterizing conjugated systems in which the properties are highly
              anisotropic due to the local orientations of the molecules on the surface.
              Several schemes for achieving molecular orientation will be investigated,
              including the use of oriented bonds at the surface and the use of vicinal
              surfaces with high step densities. A wide variety of structural, chemical,
              electrical, and optical probes will be utilized to link the molecular structure
              and bonding with the resulting electrical and optical properties. Scanning
              tunneling microscopy will be used to investigate the structural order and the
              orientation of the films, while near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM)
              will be used to probe the local optical response. Reflectance-difference
              anisotropy spectroscopy will be used as a non-contact method for evaluating the
              degree of molecular orientation. 
%%% 
The proposed research will benefit
              society in several ways. First, through training of future scientists. The
              proposed research is quite interdisciplinary in scope, bridging gaps between
              synthetic chemistry, physical/analytical chemistry, and physics. Students and
              postdocs trained under this grant will receive the kind of interdiscplinary
              training that is needed for successful scientific careers. Secondly, the
              proposed research itself would benefit society in new ways. It is generally
              recognized that the advances in microelectronics technology over the last 25
              years that have lead to the "computer revolution" cannot continue indefinitely
              using conventional approaches; the use of molecules as fundamental building
              blocks represents a new paradigm for microelectronics that, if successful,
              might enable new types of devices orders of magnitude smaller than those
              existing today. Organic light emitting diodes, for example, can in principle
              have efficiencies much higher than existing light bulbs, with the promise of
              great savings in energy costs; successful fabrication of such structures
              requires a significant research effort into the electrical conductivity and
              optical properties of organic then films. This project is co-funded with the
              Chemistry Division and the Office of Multidisciplinary Affairs.


