Title       : Scheduling and Operating Systems for Real-Time and Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9901697

Award Number: 9901697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203776             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwei-Jay Lin klin@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Proposal Number: CCR-9901697

Title: Scheduling and Operating System Support
              for Real-Time and Embedded
Systems

Principal Investigator: Kwei-Jay Lin,
              University of California, Irvine

The design and implementation of a Linux
              kernel for real-time and embedded 
applications are proposed. The Real-time
              and Embedded Linux (RED-Linux) 
kernel is designed to support applications
              that have both real-time and 
non-real-time tasks with different QoS
              parameters. By integrating a 
micro-timer and inserting preemption points in
              the kernel, RED-Linux will 
provide a very short task dispatch latency and
              interrupt handling response 
time. A unified scheduling framework for
              supporting various scheduling 
paradigms (such as priority-driven, time-driven
              and share-driven) will be 
investigated. New scheduling algorithms will be
              studied as a result of the 
unified scheduling framework. Different from
              previous real-time Linux 
projects, RED-Linux will not implement a separate
              real-time kernel (which 
co-exists with the Linux kernel) to handle real-time
              tasks.  All real-time 
and non-real-time tasks are handled and scheduled by
              the same kernel. 
Real-time tasks are scheduled according to their real-time
              and QoS 
requirements.  Non-real-time tasks are scheduled with a fair share of
              
system time, sharing the resources used by real-time and other
              
non-real-time tasks. Finally, the project will investigate an open kernel
              
structure with modular components so that it can be used in different
              
embedded system environments by integrating components with specific
              
capabilities.


