Title       : Compact Fiber-Based Water Vapor Lidar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9901452

Award Number: 9901452
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187566             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Papen g-papen@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Water vapor is one of the most important trace gases in the atmosphere.  Not
              only is it central to the formation of clouds and precipitation, but it affects
              the transfer of both solar and terrestrial radiation and is a "greenhouse" gas
              in the same sense as carbon dioxide.  Unlike CO2, water vapor is highly
              variable in time and space; a continuing challenge has been to devise an
              accurate and reliable way of measuring the vertical profile of water vapor by
              some form of remote sensing.  To date the only methods that can do this with
              acceptable vertical resolution are based on lidar techniques, either Raman
              lidar or differential absorption lidar (DIAL).  The DIAL technique depends on
              the variation of the absorption coefficient of water vapor with wavelength. 
              Narrow-band coherent light is transmitted through the atmosphere at two
              wavelengths that are close together, but chosen so that one is at an absorption
              maximum and the other at a minimum.  The light is backscattered by atmospheric
              molecules and aerosols and collected at the lidar receiver.  The difference in
              signal intensity from a given range at the two wavelengths depends on the
              two-way integrated attenuation to the range and may be used to infer the
              concentration of water vapor as a function of position along the path.  DIAL
              systems tend to be large, heavy, and expensive because the delicate optical
              equipment they employ requires close climate control and shielding from
              vibration.  The purpose of this project is to develop a novel DIAL system based
              on recent advances in fiber-optics technology.  The transmitter is the unique
              aspect of the system.  It consists of  a laser diode master oscillator and a
              fiber power amplifier.  The result is a cheaper, lighter, and simpler lidar
              that produces a transmitted wave with greater spectral purity than a
              conventional lidar based on bulk optics.  The concept has been proven with a
              prototype model operating in the 940 nm water vapor band.  The goal of this
              project is to develop a fieldable version of the prototype by scaling the
              transmitted power upwards by about 30 dB and to evaluate the instrument by
              comparison with other remote sensing and in situ observations. 
