Title       : An accelerated research and study program for undergraduates in mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9901207

Award Number: 9901207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Mayer mayer@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lex G. Oversteegen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The process of encouraging undergraduates to select career choices in the
              mathematical sciences must begin as early as possible.  Mentoring by research
              faculty already in such career paths is indispensible in this process. We began
              such a pilot program in the Mathematics Department seven years ago. With
              support from NSF the last three years, and substantial commitment of new
              resources from UAB, the UAB Fast-Track Program in Mathematics has identified,
              supported, and mentored outstanding mathematics students as (and before) they
              enter the university. These students have been immersed in a stimulating
              research-oriented environment, one which keeps their interest in mathematics
              fresh as their competence grows.

The principal ingredients in the program
              are intensive mentoring by faculty who are outstanding in mathematics research,
              an independent research/study project each academic term for each student, a
              challenging mathematics curriculum, individual and group service projects, and
              seminars in mathematics and in the ethics of mathematical research.  The key
              words are intereaction and participation: among students and between students
              and mentors. Students complete a Bachelor's and a Master's degree in
              mathematics, meeting all liberal arts course requirements, and are
              well-prepared for, and eager to pursue, further graduate work and research in
              the mathematical sciences.

In the past three years, we have proven that our
              concept can work with a larger group of students.  We are requesting
              supplemental funding from NSF, with substantial new matching from UAB, to bring
              the program up to sustainable numbers (four to five new students per year,
              nearing 20 in all phases of the program).  The result will be a continuing
              program occupying a vital place in the fabric of the mathematical sciences at
              UAB and in the community.

