Title       : U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research: Queries in Inconsistent Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9901877

Award Number: 9901877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14209              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Chomicki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Monmouth University
	      
	      West Long Branch, NJ  07764    732/571-3502

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 0000,5974,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901877
Chomicki

This Americas Program award will fund a two year
              cooperative research project between Dr. Jan Chomicki, Monmouth College, NJ,
              and Dr. Leopoldo Bertossi, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, on a
              project to search for a logical characterization of consistent query answers in
              relational databases that may be inconsistent with the given integrity
              constraints.  Integrity constraints capture an important normative aspect of
              every database application, but often their satisfaction cannot be guaranteed
              and there may exist database instances that violate them.  It is important to
              know which query answers are consistent with the integrity constraints, and
              which are not. To answer this question the research will address a number of
              issues, including semantics of consistent query answers, procedures to compute
              consistent query answers and their implementation, formal analysis of the
              properties of such procedures, soundness, completeness, termination,
              computations, complexity, identification of classes of constraints with
              superior computational properties, and applications to data cleaning in data
              warehouses, information integration in heterogeneous databases, and triggers  
              Results of this study could be applied to a number of areas, including data
              warehousing (CD97), database integration and active and reactive databases. 
              

This cooperative project brings together Dr. Chomicki's expertise in
              database theory with Dr. Bertossi's  extensive background in mathematical logic
              and knowledge presentation.  This combination will greatly enhance the
              opportunity for a successful solution to the issues addressed by this study .
              

