Title       : RUI: White Dwarfs in Cataclysmic Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9901955

Award Number: 9901955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159639             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward M. Sion emsion@ucis.vill.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fuhua Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Godon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren M. Sparks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Sion   AST 99-01955

The white dwarf (WD) star in cataclysmic
              variables (CVs) and related binaries accumulates (accretes) hydrogen-rich gas
              from a very close sun-like star. This transferred gas, which carries angular
              momentum, forms a bright, swirling accretion disk around the WD. This accretion
              process is highly explosive as matter from the disk shears first into the WD
              surface layers bringing mass, energy and spin into the WD. The physics of this
              process is very poorly understood and until recently no direct spectroscopic
              observations of the WD were possible. However, during the quiescent intervals
              between the outbursts of dwarf novae and the low brightness states of nova-like
              variables, when the mass transfer rate is very low, the WD radiation can be
              directly detected. This is because the inner accretion disk is either much less
              prominent or absent.  Model atmospheres will be used to compare
              computer-generated spectra with observed spectra to determine WD surface
              temperatures, surface gravities, rotation rates, spinup, heating, cooling, and
              chemical abundances of their accreted atmospheres. In order to interpret this
              expanding body of empirical CV WD properties, a theoretical framework on how
              the WD responds to the injection of mass, energy and angular momentum is being
              constructed.  This theory framework is based upon the use of computer codes
              that produce time-dependent evolutionary WD model sequences in one dimension
              and two dimensions under conditions of time-variable accretion. The theoretical
              models, together with the derived empirical properties of CV WDs, will provide
              answers to the following questions:

(1) What are the physics, energy budget,
              heating depth and Kelvin time of accretion heating by downward photon
              irradiation, compression, and shear mixing of disk matter into the WD?

(2)
              How much spinup of the WD occurs through angular momentum transfer by the
              accreting disk gas?

(3) When matter is added only in the equatorial region
              of the WD, how does the heating with latitude and with depth compare with
              spherical accretion, i.e. how accurate are the 1D accretion studies? Does an
              accretion belt form and, if so, what is its surface area, depth, and spindown
              timescale?

(4) Do accretion belts formed via tangential disk accretion
              explain the weak or missing boundary layer luminosity (where the accreting gas
              first interacts with the WD), that is observed in most CVs?

(5) How much
              accretion heating of the WD has occurred since the onset of CV evolution? What
              are typical CV lifetimes? Do CVs evolve across the observed orbital period gap
              between periods of 2 and 3 hours?

(6) What is the physical interpretation of
              the observed distribution of CV WD rotational velocities? How do their cooling
              rates compare with single white dwarfs? Do WDs in non-magnetic CVs cool
              differently than magnetic ones? 

(7)  What is the global picture of CV WD
              properties and evolution from the standpoint of their surface temperatures,
              luminosities, rotational velocities, and chemical abundance patterns versus
              accretion rate, CV subtype and orbital period?

The results from the research
              carried out in this project will provide physical insights on tangential (disk)
              accretion in cataclysmic variable star systems.  The results may also provide
              important applications in the broader context of (equatorial) accretion flows
              onto central compact objects in other accreting binaries and disk accreting
              objects.
 


