Title       : CISE Experimental Partnerships: Processing/Communication/ Interface Tradeoffs to
               Optimize Energy Locality in Mobile Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9901321

Award Number: 9901321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $948035             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Siewiorek dps@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip J. Koopman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4725,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              99-01321
Siewiorek, Daniel
Koopman, Philip
Carnegie Mellon University

CISE
              Experimental Partnerships: Processing/Communication/Interface
Tradeoffs to
              Optimize Energy Locality in Mobile Systems

As computers continue to shrink,
              research and commercial interest in mobile/wearable computing is rapidly
              growing.  Unlike traditional desktop computing in which the user is required to
              come to the computer, mobile computing brings the computer to the user.  One of
              the key problems with mobile/wearable computing is energy consumption.  Battery
              weight for mobile/wearable computers often exceeds the weight of all other
              components combined.  In order to make mobile/wearable computing widely
              applicable, major advances in reducing power consumption and battery weight are
              needed.  In this research a testbed, Infocator, is being developed to study
              energy issues in mobile/wearable computing.

Mobile/wearable systems are
              typically comprised of both computing and communications systems.  While power
              consumption required by the computing component is rapidly decreasing, power
              consumption required by the communications component is not keeping pace.  It
              is estimated that by the year 2001, nearly 80% of the power consumed by
              mobile/wearable will be due to communications.

Trading off energy-expensive
              communication for energy cheap computation through effective partitioning of
              control and data can result in significant energy savings.  Methods for
              determining the ideal control/data
partitioning are being developed and
              codified in a Theory of Energy Locality.  To realize the partitioning and
              facilitate control movement, a generic application independent framework for
              proxies is also being
developed.  

To maximize the effectiveness of
              wearable systems in mobile computing environments, the interface design  ust be
              carefully matched with user tasks and balanced against energy consumption. 
              Many complex and interrelated issues determine the balance between ease-of-use
              and power consumption.  Simply trading off  ase-of-use for lower per operation
              power consumption may result in higher task energy consumption due to the
              increase in the number of operations needed to traverse a less intuitive
              interface.  The effect of user interface on energy consumption is also being
              evaluated by developing several different interfaces for  nfocator and
              measuring and comparing the ease-of-use and energy consumption.  


