Title       : Molecular Aspects of Flow Effects on Crystallization in iPP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a9901403

Award Number: 9901403
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia A. Kornfield jak@cheme.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9901403	
Kornfield

In spite of intensive research over the past three
              decades, the fundamental basis of the effects of processing on structure
              development in semicrystalline polymers remains elusive.  Processing alters the
              rate, form and anisotropy of crystallization.  The goal of the proposed
              research is to establish the interplay of the conformational relaxation
              dynamics of the molten chains, the distortion of segmental orientation created
              by flow, the kinetics and anisotropy of nucleation from a distorted melt and
              their effects on the subsequent kinetics and morphology of crystallization.  A
              unique apparatus has been developed to create a precisely controlled flow and
              thermal history and to monitor structure development in real time.  It can
              subject a subcooled melt to precisely controlled intervals of shear at stress
              levels similar to those encountered in industrial processes.  The response
              during and after shear is continuously monitored in situ using an arsenal of
              different probes of structure.  Polarimetry, light and x-ray scattering will be
              used in real time, in situ to characterize the interplay of relaxation dynamics
              and deformation history that is manifested in the effect of flow on
              crystallization kinetics and morphology.  The apparatus facilitates removal of
              the sample at the conclusion of the experiment to enable thorough
              characterization of the final structure.  Optical and electron microscopies and
              x-ray scattering will be used ex situ to determine the final solidified
              structure.  Model polymer systems will be used that have controlled stereo
              regularity and systematically varied distribution of chain lengths and
              corresponding relaxation times.  Guided by evidence that polydispersity
              strongly affects the dependence of crystallization on flow history, bidisperse
              samples will be prepared that can reveal the role of the slowest relaxing
              species (the long chains) in producing flow-enhanced nucleation and anisotropic
              growth.

Our society is heavily dependent on advances in the development of
              materials with desired combinations of properties: strong but light, flexible
              but impermeable, stiff but tough.  Semicrystalline polymers are a class of
              materials that has proved extremely versatile in achieving these powerful
              combinations of properties, precisely because they spontaneously form a
              nanostructured composite with plate-like crystallites separated by
              noncrystalline regions.  This research will improve our ability to optimize
              these polymers by clarifying the link form molecular design to processing
              behavior, and from there to structure development, which ultimately controls
              their material properties.  The potential impact is large, both economically
              and in terms of quality of life, since semicrystalline polymers are very widely
              used-over 125 billion pounds a year of polyolefins alone are used worldwide.

