Title       : Doctoral Dissertation: Maya Mountains Ritual Caves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9901265

Award Number: 9901265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11649              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don S. Rice drice@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Don Rice, Mr. Keith Prufer will collect data for his
              doctoral dissertation. Mr. Prufer will continue his research as part of an
              archaeological team conducting excavations in the southern Maya Mountains
              region of Belize. Work to date has revealed a large number of Mayan sites with
              house mounds, burials, shrines and other features. What makes this region of
              particular interest however and forms the core of Mr. Prufer's research is the
              presence of many caves which are located on cliff faces and are very difficult
              to reach. Previous work by Mr. Prufer has shown that some served ritual
              purposes and contain censers, deliberately broken ceramic vessels, human
              skeletal material and other religious items. Both ethnohistoric and
              ethnographic data show that Mayan peoples regard caves as supernatural sites
              and religious ceremonies are still conducted in these contexts. Preliminary
              archaeological data indicate similarities between ancient and modern
              practices.

With National Science Foundation support Mr. Prufer will conduct
              a survey to locate additional sites and excavate them. He will analyze the
              materials thus recovered, particularly botanical remains which have ceremonial
              significance, within the context of known ethnographic and historic parallels.
              He will determine the extent of variation among cave assemblages since it is
              possible that different sites were used for different purposes. During the
              course of non-cave excavation team members have identified areas within sites
              which likely served religious purposes. Because remains from many different
              activities are often intermingled in such situations, Mr. Prufer plans to
              compare cave and non-cave ritual assemblages both to determine how the latter
              may best be identified and to learn how ritual relates to spatial context.
              

It is extremely unusual to find Mayan ritual caves and the data Mr. Prufer
              collects will be of interest to many archaeologists. Better specification of
              what constitutes a "ritual assemblage" will be useful to Mayanist
              archaeologists at many sites. This award will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

