Title       : SBIR Phase II: Parallel Non-Blocking Routing Algorithm Implementation for
               Free-Space All-Optical Interconnect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a9901685

Award Number: 9901685
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio Mersching mertsching@reveo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory J. Hamlin  (Principal Investigator former)
              Zhan He  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Reveo Inc
	      3 Westchester Plaza
	      Elmsford, NY  105231609    914/345-9556

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4096,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The mission of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase II program is
              to commercialize the world's first scalable all-optical free space
              terabit/second interconnect technology. There is no other viable low latency,
              ultrahigh bandwidth all-optical interconnect technology that can scale up in
              the number of I/O ports at low additional cost in response to the ever
              increasing worldwide bandwidth demand.  Indeed, a viable all-optical
              interconnect has been identified as the critical enabling technology for a true
              All-Optical Network.  Within this Phase II project Reveo will develop hardware
              and software that will configure and manage Reveo's novel interconnect
              technology in order to provide a commercially successful, low cost, ultrahigh
              bandwidth interconnect system.  In this project, Reveo will build a storage
              area network test bed, developing both the software drivers and the
              interconnect hardware controllers. This work will culminate in the testing and
              evaluation of an all-optical eight-port interconnect demonstrating the
              unprecedented elegance and simplicity of this technology (as few as 10
              switching elements for an 8x8 interconnect, scaling as O(Nlog2N)).  The
              required optical hardware for the 8x8 interconnect will be simultaneously
              fabricated as part of the parallel synergistic Phase II project, but assembled
              as a complete interconnect system herein.
     This revolutionary all optical
              interconnect technology will provide high speed, high bandwidth interconnects
              that find applications in both the circuit-switched and packet switched markets
              of all-optical telecommunications, optical computing and networking, and
              military and aerospace applications.

