Title       : Nonlinear Waves, Optics, and Coupled Oscillators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1999      
File        : a9901897

Award Number: 9901897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Holmes pholmes@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project supports an NSF-Industrial Postdoctoral Fellow, Deborah Alterman,
              to carry out research jointly in the Program in Applied and Computational
              Mathematics at Princeton University and Lucent-Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill,
              NJ. The Faculty Mentor will be Philip Holmes, Professor of Mechanics and
              Applied Mathematics, and the Supervisor at Lucent Technologies will be Dr
              Michael Weinstein who has recently joined the Mathematical Sciences Research
              Center (Fundamental Mathematics Department). We envisage two principal areas of
              research: (1) Nonlinear wave theory applied to problems of optical
              communications, and (2) Coupled oscillators as models of neural networks. The
              mathematical tools to be used and developed include dynamical systems and
              bifurcation theory, ordinary and partial differential equations, asymptotics,
              and nonlinear wave and stability theory.  A pervasive theme is the reduction of
              dynamical systems with infinite or high dimensional phase spaces, describing
              distributed phenomena, to simpler ``amplitude'' partial differential or
              ``modal'' ordinary differential equations. Such reduced models lead to improved
              understanding of the underlying physics, and offer shortcuts in predictions and
              design.  This GOALI project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences
              (DMS).


