Title       : SBIR Phase II: Zirconia for Ultrafast Analytical Chromagraphy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a9901750

Award Number: 9901750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clayton V. McNeff mcnef002@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ZirChrom Separations, Inc.
	      617 Pierce Street
	      Anoka, MN  55303    763/421-5264

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1948,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will produce
              nonporous zirconia microspheres to act as high performance liquid
              chromatographic (HPLC) supports that can revolutionize a wide variety of
              analyses including environmental pollutants and pharmaceutical substances.
              Current state-of-the-art HPLC supports limit the speed and resolution in
              analyzing samples.  They further require a great deal of solvent because they
              are porous and they can not tolerate high temperature. Nonporous zirconia,
              coated by Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) with carbon, will overcome these
              problems. We will synthesize these zirconia microspheres using zirconium
              alkoxides. The chief goal is to provide commercial quality nonporous
              monodisperse spherical zirconia particles with sufficient reproducibility and
              stability to produce ultrafast chromatography columns. This particle synthesis
              work will produce benefits for other industries as well (e.g., ceramic
              synthesis, catalysis). During Phase II nonporous carbon coated zirconia columns
              will be used for the fast separation of samples including herbicides,
              insecticides, nitroaromatics, chloronated phenols, and common carboxylate drugs
              such as salicylic acid, ibuprofen, and acetaminophen at column temperatures up
              to 2000 degrees C. The use of these columns should have a twofold benefit; it
              will speed analysis by at least an order of magnitude, and it will
              significantly  reduce the amount of organic solvent needed.
     The primary
              commercial application of this research will be the reduction of organic
              solvent use in reversed-phase separation of environmentally impactive
              substances
by using ultrafast nonporous carbon clad zirconia at column
              temperatures as high
as 200 degrees Celcius.

