Title       : Adaptive Antennas and Diversity Techniques for Wireless Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a9901361

Award Number: 9901361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tapan K. Sarkar tksarkar@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pramod K. Varshney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9901361
Sarkar
The objective of this research proposal is to develop and
              evaluate the performance of novel communication techniques based on adaptive
              antenna and diversity methodologies for transmission of data and images over
              wireless channels. Adaptive techniques consist of relatively simple
              computational steps but are quite time consuming as they generally employ
              iterative procedures to extract the signal from interference. Diversity
              techniques, on the other hand, require statistical information and may involve
              complex computational steps especially for image communication but they are
              direct or non-iterative in nature. The goal of this research project is to
              study and comparatively evaluate the performance of these two methodologies for
              data and image transmission.  Performance metrics to be employed will include
              computational time and accuracy of results. The first part of the proposal
              deals with adaptive antennas where the electromagnetic characterization of
              antennas is integrated with adaptive signal processing algorithms to enhance
              the performance of systems in the presence of near-field coupling and using
              unequally spaced receiving elements.  The Performance of this methodology in
              blind adaptive equalization will also be considered.  The second part of the
              proposal deals with the development of diversity reception schemes for data
              images.  For data, the concept of predetection and post detection diversity
              combining schemes with memory that exploits channel memory will be
              investigated.  channel memory will be investigated. For uncompressed as well as
              compressed images, diversity combining schemes based on image fusion concepts
              will be developed.  Finite-state Markov channel models will be used for
              performance evaluation. Integration of these two methodologies with each other
              and with other methods that combat the effects of wireless channel impairments
              will also be explored.
***

