Title       : Paleontology: Developmental Analysis of a Speciation Event in the Fossil Record
               Using the New Geometric Morphometric Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9901484

Award Number: 9901484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross H. Nehm   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7137,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9901484
Nehm

The research will establish a role for invertebrate
              paleontology in the evolutionary developmental synthesis by employing
              geological, paleontological, evolutionary, and developmental data to address
              several fundamental questions about developmental evolution and speciation: 1)
              How does ontogeny (growth) evolve before, during, and after speciation?  2) How
              do ontogenetic patterns and microstructural composition differ within and
              between species?  3) How does the integration of morphological and
              microstructural features during ontogeny constrain the direction of potential
              change during speciation?  4) What paleoecological, sedimentalogical, and
              biological variables contribute to the duration, direction, and tempo of
              speciation in this lineage?  These questions will be addresses using a new
              morphmetric analysis technique (geometric morphometric analysis) that is
              considered by many to be a revolutionary advance in morphological and
              developmental analysis.  This technique has yet to be used extensively by
              invertebrate paleontologists, despite its success in many other fields of
              evolutionary inquiry.  Investigating the evolution of development through
              speciation in the fossil record using a new morphometric approach provides an
              opportunity for invertebrate paleontology to contribute uniquely to
              evolutionary developmental biology and demonstrate the power of geometric
              morphometric analysis in paleontological research.

