Title       : Enforcing the Chinese Exclusion Laws, 1882-1907: Administrative Discretion and
               Law's Contradictions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1997       
File        : a9707024

Award Number: 9707024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52738              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kitty C. Calavita kccalavi@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Calavita  9707024  This research undertakes ethnohistorical analyses
              focusing on issues surrounding the 1882 Chinese Exclusion Act barring the entry
              into the U.S. of all Chinese laborers.  Merchants and other upper-class
              individuals were exempt from the exclusion.  The primary focus of the research
              is on the conflicts encountered by enforcement personnel who had to implement
              the Law.  Ambiguities in the Act and gaps in the statute plus the inspectors'
              preconceptions converged to make the task discretionary.  The omission of any
              mention of the status of women, assumptions about race as a biological state,
              offset by social status, notions about the relation between physical appearance
              and one's identity, and the clash between identity and social constructions all
              converge in this project.  Data  from the Congressional Record, Congressional
              Hearings and Reports, and the Annual Reports of the Immigration and
              Naturalization Service provide information on the enforcement of the exclusion
              laws and on intra-agency decisionmaking as well as the official records of the
              law's enactment.  Documentation from letters, notes, memos, and circulars from
              and to immigration inspectors and their supervisors will comprise an additional
              primary source of data.. conflicts and dilemmas surrounding the enforcement of
              the Law and will provide insights into current conceptions of race, and the
              intersections of race, class, and gender.  This work contributes to our basic
              understanding of the enforcement of legal rules.    %%%  This research
              undertakes ethnohistorical analyses focusing on issues surrounding the 1882
              Chinese Exclusion Act barring the entry into the U.S. of all Chinese laborers. 
              Merchants and other upper-class individuals were exempt from the exclusion. 
              The primary focus of the research is on the conflicts encountered by
              enforcement personnel who had to implement the Law.  Ambiguities in the Act and
              gaps in the statute plus the inspectors' preconceptions converged to make the
              task discretionary.   The omission of any mention of the status of women,
              assumptions about race as a biological state, offset by social status, notions
              about the relation between physical appearance and one's identity, and the
              clash between identity and social constructions all converge in this project. 
              Data  from the Congressional Record, Congressional Hearings and Reports, and
              the Annual Reports of the Immigration and Naturalization Service provide
              information on the enforcement of the exclusion laws and on intra-agency
              decisionmaking as well as the official records of the law's enactment. 
              Documentation from letters, notes, memos, and circulars from and to immigration
              inspectors and their supervisors will comprise an additional primary source of
              data.. conflicts and dilemmas surrounding the enforcement of the Law and will
              provide insights into current conceptions of race, and the intersections of
              race, class, and gender.  This work contributes to our basic understanding of
              the enforcement of legal rules.      ***
