Title       : RPG: An Investigation of Mate Choice Discrimination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9707349

Award Number: 9707349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shawn E. Nordell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308309    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707349  Nordell  One of the most important decisions that an animal must make 
              during it's  lifetime is determining which individual(s) to choose as a  mate. 
              This  decision is often made by the female since she usually  incurs the higher
               cost in reproduction and is therefore very choosy in her  selection of a 
              mate.  The mate will provide genetic material for the  offspring and  perhaps
              other resources as well (such as food, care,  defense, etc.)  therefore it is
              important to choose the best possible  individual.  How do  individuals decide
              who to mate with?  The mate choice  decision involves a  decision about which
              individuals to reject and which  individuals to select  as mates.  This
              research will address the question of how  individuals  assess the quality of
              potential mates.  Prior theoretical  work assumes  that females can perfectly
              assess the quality of potential  mates and that  they should mate with the
              first male whose quality is  greater than the  expected quality of future
              potential males (One-Step  decision rule).  However, empirical studies often
              find that females sample n  males and then  select the one of the highest
              quality (Best-of-n decision  rule).  One  explanation for the discrepancy
              between theoretical  predictions and  observed behavior is that females can not
              perfectly assess  the quality of  potential mates.  This research will
              specifically address  the ability of  female guppies to discriminate between
              pairs of males that  differ only  slightly in their quality.  This research
              will allow a  better  understanding of the discriminatory ability of individual
               female guppies  and therefore their mate choice decision process. 
              Understanding how  animals make mate choice decisions is an important aspect of
               the  management and conservation of species.
