Title       : Estimating the Age of the Common Ancestor of a Population
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9707567

Award Number: 9707567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yun-Xin Fu yunxin.fu@uth.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC Houston
	      P.O.Box 20036
	      Houston, TX  772250036    713/500-9352

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9707567   Fu    The pattern of segregating nucleotides in a sample of DNA
              sequences from multiple individuals of a population contains rich information
              about the history of that population, and can therefore be used to make
              inferences on various aspects of the population history. The goal of the
              project is to develop methods for estimating the age of the most recent common
              ancestor (MRCA) of a population. The methods will be developed based on
              coalescent theory and computer simulation, and will make full use of the
              pattern of segregating sites in a sample. Several population genetics models
              will be considered, including the neutral Wright-Fisher model and population
              growth. Various degrees of uncertainty in the values of population parameters
              that are required for estimating the age of the MRCA will be incorporated into
              the methods. The methods developed will be applied to available data,
              particularly those from humans. The computer programs resulted from this
              project will be available to researchers through the World Wide Web.    The age
              of the MRCA of a population is an useful quantity for studying the evolution of
              that population. For the origin of modern humans, the age of the MRCA is
              crucial for distinguishing the two major hypotheses, the "out of Africa"
              hypothesis, which postulates an African population rapidly and completely
              replaced the populations in all other regions of the world, and the
              "multiregional" hypothesis", which postulates a gradual and simultaneous
              transformation of archaic regional human populations into modern populations.
              Since the methods developed in this project make use of the pattern of
              segregating sites, which is highly informative, and do not require haplotype
              information, which is costly and time-consuming to obtain, they will be
              particularly useful for samples from a nuclear genome. The project will
              contribute to the theory and methods for the inference on the age of the MRCA
              of a population, and will facilitate the study of human evolution in
              particular.
