Title       : RPG: Neuromodulation in an Invertebrate Neuromotor System: Comparative and
               Evolutionary Aspects of the Crayfish Stomatogastric Nervous System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9707325

Award Number: 9707325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann J. Tierney atierney@center.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Lay Abstract    PI: Tierney, Ann  Proposal Number: IBN-9707325    All animals
              perform rhythmic movements, such as walking,  chewing and breathing. These
              movements are produced within  the central nervous system by circuits of cells
              called  central pattern generators (CPGs).  Neurobiologists have  studied CPGs
              for several decades and have learned a great  deal about how these relatively
              limited circuits program  movements.  Recent research has shown that even
              simple  circuits are very flexible and can program a wide array of  related
              movements.  On a cellular level, this flexibility is  produced by
              neuromodulators, endogenous compounds that alter  the activity of individual
              CPG cells, and consequently alter  the output of the circuit.  This project
              describes the  distribution of neuromodulatory inputs (including serotonin, 
              dopamine, and two peptides)  and  investigates how these  compounds alter the
              motor program produced by the two CPGs.  Seven species (four from a single
              genus and three from  different genera) will be studied to determine how
              modulator  type, location, or function might change as species and  general
              evolve.  This systematic comparison of motor pattern  modulation in a set of
              closely related species is designed  to contribute to knowledge of neuromotor
              system evolution  and to the understanding of the coordination of simple 
              rhythmic movements.  Simple systems like the ones  investigated here are
              studied in the hope that the  underlying mechanisms discovered can be applied
              to more  complicated systems, such as those used in vertebrate  locomotor
              control, including the control of walking in  humans.
