Title       : Late Holocene Human Impacts on Pacific Coast Bird Populations: Evidence from the
               Emeryville Shellmound Avifauna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9707997

Award Number: 9707997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55614              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack M. Broughton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Jack Broughton will analyze faunal
              remains recovered from archaeological excavation at the Emeryville Shellmound
              located  the shoreline of San Francisco Bay.  This deeply stratified site was
              first occupied ca. 2,600 years ago and it records human habitation and use of
              local resources over a roughly 2,000 year period. Prehistoric Native Americans
              lived at the site and the faunal remains they discarded provide detailed
              insight into their hunting and subsistence practices. Such materials are both
              abundant and extremely well preserved. In his doctoral dissertation work, also
              funded by NSF, Dr. Broughton analyzed fish and mammalian faunas. In this
              current project he will extend his study to avian materials. From prior work it
              is clear that people hunted birds extensively and large numbers of both
              individuals and species are present in the archaeological collections. Dr.
              Broughton will identify materials to a species level. He will also develop a
              method to determine the age at which cormorants were harvested and thus be able
              to examine the age structure of the population. Given the stratified nature of
              the site it will be possible to determine how harvesting practices changed over
              time.  Both archaeologists and paeloecologists wish to understand the effect of
              Native American hunter-gatherers on the prey they hunted. Paleoecologists wish
              to know whether the environment which the first colonists observed was
              `natural` and essentially unaffected by humans or whether, in fact, hunter and
              gatherers at relatively low population densities had a significant impact.
              Archaeologists want to determine whether such populations were affected by
              human-induced resource scarcities and thus needed to change their subsistence
              strategies over time. Dr. Broughton's research should provide important insight
              into this question. Through the use of models derived from optimum foraging
              theory one can predict how species composition and age structure change when
              bird populations are stressed and their numbers decrease. Thus,  this analysis
              will provide direct insight on human impact on the environment and, in turn,
              the effect this change had on subsequent human behavior.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
