Title       : GOALI: Resonant Holographic Interferometry: Diagnostic Capabilities in
               Multi-Phase Flame Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9707727

Award Number: 9707727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Derek Dunn-Rankin ddunnran@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Dunn-Rankin      This is an industry-university cooperative research
              project between the     University of California at Irvine and Metro Laser of
              Irvine, CA.      Resonant holographic interferometry (RHI) is a laser-based
              diagnostic that     combines the three-dimensional imaging capability of
              holography, the phase-    sensitive detection of interferometry, and the
              species specificity of resonance     spectroscopy.  It accomplishes this by
              recording two simultaneous holograms     at two different wavelengths, one
              tuned near an absorption line and the other     tuned off this feature.  Upon
              reconstruction, the resulting interference fringes     correspond uniquely to
              the  density of the species under interrogation while     phase contributions
              from background species, thermal and pressure     instabilities and optical
              aberrations are subtracted out.  The approach has     been successfully
              demonstrated in gas-phase combustion systems.  In this     effort, RHI is
              applied to multiphase systems for the first time.  Specifically,     products
              from droplet and spray combustion systems will be analyzed     quantitatively. 
                            Now intrusive optical diagnostic techniques are commonly used in
              study of     gas-phase combustion systems and other reacting flow systems. 
              These     methods are also being considered for incorporation in active control
              systems.      However, most such techniques are limited to single-phase
              systems, making     them unsuitable for many important combustion systems that
              use liquid fuels.      It is speculated that RHI can overcome this hurdle.
