Title       : Ecological Consequences of Global Environmental Change: Plant-Insect
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9707263

Award Number: 9707263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Lindroth lindroth@entomology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sherry Roth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators propose to examine the effect of elevated levels of carbon
              dioxide and ozone on plant chemical composition and insect performance in
              common tree and insect species of the midwestern deciduous forest.  Experiments
              will focus on the interaction between carbon dioxide and ozone.  Estimates of
              the effects on insect populations will be made by measuring performance over
              several generations.  The proposed research will provide insights into how
              elevated carbon dioxide will affect species interactions in forest communities.
               It will improve understanding of how trophic interactions will be altered and
              the consequences of such changes for insect populations and tree productivity. 
              As part of a multidisciplinary Free Air Carbon Exchange (FACE) study this work
              will enhance the development of increasingly realistic models of carbon budgets
              in terrestrial ecosystems.     Understanding the ecological consequences of
              enriched atmospheric carbon dioxide is of considerable national and
              international importance, especially as the international community becomes
              embroiled in debate over emission restrictions.  Although increasing
              concentrations of atmospheric carbon dioxide are anticipated to exert
              significant impacts on forest ecosystems over the next 50-100 years, little is
              known about how these changes will affect ecological interactions, and how
              these in turn will feed back to affect forest structure and function.  This
              work is of critical importance as the United States evaluates the environmental
              and economic consequences of global environmental change, and implements
              policies to address such issues.  Moreover, this research will enhance our
              understanding of basic ecological problems such as how resource availability
              alters chemical composition and carbon partitioning in plants, and the  effects
              of such changes on plant-insect interactions.
