Title       : Phylogeny and Rates of Evolution of the Carnivora (Mammalia)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9707225

Award Number: 9707225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Flynn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Nedbal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707225  Flynn     The Carnivora (Mammalia) are an extremely important group for
              biological studies for several reasons, including (i) occurrence in all land
              masses except Antarctica, (ii) position as keystone predators in a variety of
              terrestrial and aquatic habitats, (iii) possession of a broad variety of
              well-documented behavioral (including social), feeding, and other (often
              unique) adaptations, and (iv) an extensive fossil record.  Investigators John
              Flynn and Michael Nedbal will examine a large suite of new, high-quality
              cranial and postcranial characters from fossil carnivorans to better determine
              the pattern and timing of radiation in early carnivoran groups - this will
              provide a critical framework from which diversification and genealogical
              relationships among modern carnivoran assemblages.  Flynn and Nedbal also will
              acquire and examine about 125,000 base pairs of DNA sampled from roughly 30
              representative carnivoran taxa.  The DNA sequences will come from two genes
              encoded by the mitochondria and two genes encoded in the nucleus.  The DNA
              sequences will provide an independent data source from which genealogical
              relationships among Carnivora will be inferred.  Finally, Flynn and Nedbal will
              map each gene sequence onto the best-supported genealogies in order to test
              hypotheses of molecular change.  Specifically, they will examine the issue of
              whether molecular change occurs more-or-less homogeneously through time (the
              "molecular-clock" theory) or whether change is episodic.  Results from the
              study will have far-reaching implications relative to the processes and
              patterns of carnivoran and molecular diversification.
