Title       : Determining the Internal Pack Ice Stress and Its Relationship to Ice Deformation
               During SHEBA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2000  
File        : a9707375

Award Number: 9707375
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline A. Richter-Menge   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This research project will be conducted as an ancillary program in conjunction
              with a large, coordinated, multi-investigator program, Surface Heat Budget of
              the Arctic (SHEBA) Ocean.  The research program will be conducted for 14 months
              from a ship frozen into the ice pack. This investigator will determine the
              stresses in the sea ice that result from the dynamics of the permanent ice pack
              through a full annual cycle.  This research will be important for the
              determination of the effects of dynamic stresses created by the thermal
              stresses due to the flux of incoming heat radiating onto the ice floe as a
              function of changing atmospheric and oceanic conditions.  These measurements
              are important to understanding how the ice flow responds as heat is reflected
              or absorbed by the ice that melts in the summer and thickens in the winter in
              response to seasonal variations in climate. The sea-ice dynamic stress
              measurement program makes an important contribution to the SHEBA team of
              researchers who will measure atmospheric variables with a large array of
              instruments on the ice floe and from aircraft flying above as well as ice and
              ocean property measurements made on and below the ice floe. The combined set of
              measurements in SHEBA will allow refinement of climate models for the Arctic
              region. Those improved models will lead to better predictions of the climate
              and the permanence of the Arctic ice cap under a proposed global warming that
              could occur if atmospheric carbon dioxide levels are increased above present
              levels.
