Title       : Phylogenetic Systematics of North American Fossil Caninae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1997    
File        : a9707555

Award Number: 9707555
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John R. Gold                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Tedford tedford@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoming Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707555  Tedford     The living members of the dog family (Canidae) consist of a
              diverse group of predators (foxes, jackals, wolves, hunting dogs, and domestic
              dogs) that belong to a closely knit group, the subfamily Caninae.  The dog
              family includes two other subfamilies (Hesperocyoninae and Borophahinae), both
              of which are extinct.  Tedford and Wang of the American Museum of Natural
              History will undertake a comprehensive study of the phylogenetic relationships
              and biostratigraphy of North American fossil canines as the final chapter of
              their long-term, high-resolution study of the evolution of the family Canidae
              from the late Eocene (roughly 40 million years ago) until present.  They will
              acquire morphological data from both fossil and extant canines and will utilize
              recently-available molecular phylogenies to describe new taxa and to document
              canine diversity, biochronology, and zoogeography.  The material for the study
              will come from several collections of fossil mammals, including the
              comprehensive Childs Frick Collection at the American Museum.  The project
              thoroughly delineates the history of Caninae in North America and permits
              analysis and documentation of their complex movements to and from other
              continents.  The project also will engender a database that will allow
              investigation of a number of topics including geological succession, functional
              morphology, and response to short and long-term environmental change.
