Title       : Classic Maya Elite Households: Extensive Excavations of Rapidly Abandoned
               Structures at Aguateca, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9707950

Award Number: 9707950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183458             (Estimated)
Investigator: Takeshi Inomata   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Takeshi Inomata will conduct three
              seasons of archaeological research at the Mayan site of Aguateca which is
              located in the Petexbatun region of Guatemala. The large multiroom site
              includes an extensive and complex system of defensive walls. Its epicenter
              contains a main plaza, causeway and a `palace group` which was the possible
              residence of a royal family. Surrounding this are elite residential areas.
              Previous work at the site by Inomata suggested that this elite area was burned
              during an attack by enemies during the Late Classic period ca. 800 A.D. The
              residents fled leaving most of their belongings behind. Preliminary excavations
              of the abandoned structures revealed the richest floor assemblages ever found
              at a lowland Classic Maya center. More extensive excavations of the
              artifact-rich buildings planned for the next three years will provide an
              extraordinary opportunity to study Maya households. This site offers a unique
              opportunity since at most sites room materials which archaeologists recover
              represent worn-out and abandoned artifacts which provide only the most limited
              and biased insights into prehistoric lives. Substantial areas will be exposed
              and excavators will point plot artifacts using a total station system and
              handheld computers. The analysis of paleobotanical samples, soil chemical
              signatures and small discarded objects will contribute to the understanding of
              lifeways and use of space in and around houses. Laboratory work will include
              residue analysis on ceramics, the composition study of ceramic pastes, use-wear
              analysis of lithics and the examination of human and faunal osteological
              remains.  Both archaeologists and cultural anthropologists have come, in recent
              years, to realize that in traditional societies households are the basic units
              of subsistence and production and to understand how groups such as the Maya
              functioned it is necessary to reconstruct activities on a household level. It
              is through comparison of individual well documented household groups that
              insight into social hierarchies and economic and political organization can
              best be understood. This project is directed at this goal and poses three
              immediate questions: how were Classic period Maya households organized?; What
              kind of activities did their members conduct in and around their dwellings?;
              and how were households articulated with higher-level political, economic and
              social organizations. In this first three year phase of the research, Dr.
              Inomata will focus on `elite` households and in following seasons he will
              expand the scope to include a range of socioeconomic groups.  This research is
              important for several reasons. Because of the extraordinary nature of the site,
              it will provide a unique insight into Maya life and produce data of interest to
              many archaeologists. It should also shed new light on how with a relatively
              simple technology and in harsh environmental conditions the Mayan civilization
              arose and was maintained.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
