Title       : Host Specificity and Species Richness of Tropical Insect Herbivores in New
               Guinea: An Outcome of Ecological Factors or Evolutionary History
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a9707928

Award Number: 9707928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212727             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Orsak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yves Basset  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Allison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vojtech Novotny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bernice P Bishop Museum
	      1525 Bernice Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968172704    808/847-3511

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              MILLER  9707928    Despite far reaching implications for rain forest
              conservation and management, understanding of host specificity of plant-feeding
              tropical insects remains more of a matter of conjecture than hard data.  The
              investigators' approach overcomes three major problems associated with previous
              studies: (1) overlooking the importance of "transient" species that are not
              actually part of the community under study; (2) inadequate sampling programs
              without rearing and observation of live insects; and (3) need for "long-term"
              presence in the tropics with sufficient sampling effort. The methodology of the
              investigators, which includes testing live insects to see what plants they will
              actually feed on, allows exclusion of transient species and builds on the solid
              infrastructure, technical assistance and relationships developed with local
              villagers near Madang, Papua New Guinea.  The specific goals of the
              investigators are to complete the sampling scheme initiated two years ago by
              adding 15 species of Rubiaceae and 25 additional species of Moraceae, then (1)
              compare local faunistic composition, species-richness and host specificity of
              leaf-chewing insects feeding on the unrelated plant families (Moraceae  figs , 
              Euphorbiaceae, and Rubicaceae); (2) compare species abundance distribution
              among the 45 communities of leaf-chewing insects studied; and (3) explore
              relationships of local insect variables (species richness, host specificity and
              abundance) to local host variables (abundance, leaf production patterns, other
              physical and biological characteristics).    Forest management and conservation
              strategies that maximize maintenance of insect diversity depend greatly on how
              that diversity is distributed, including how dependent the insects are on
              specific plants.  In other words, how much of the host plant diversity must be
              preserved in order to maintain the insect community?  Besides the obvious
              conservation importance, the same principles extend to management of forest
              insect pests and biologic al control agents. This project represents a
              significant example of the integration of taxonomic expertise in answering
              essential questions in community ecology and conservation biology, with links
              to training and resource management.
