Title       : Mixing Processes and their Influence on Drop Size Distribution in Florida Cumuli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1999 
File        : a9707301

Award Number: 9707301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121591             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald R. North   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Zipser  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zipser/Abstract       ATM-9707301         In this project we will examine
              factores responsible for  broadening the size distributions of cloud droplets
              in small  cumulus clouds, with special attention to the roles of mixing and 
              entrainment in that process.  The main budget item is support for  a graduate
              student, Richard Igau, who will work under the guidance  of Drs. Ed Zipser of
              Texas A&M University and W. A. Cooper of the  National Center or Atmospheric
              Research.         The primary data source will be the Small Cumulus
              Microphysics  Study (SCMS), a field program in Florida that used the NCAR CP2 
              dual-wavelength radar and three instrumented research aircraft.   Many small
              cumulus clouds developed witin 10-20 km of this rdar  during the project, and a
              good sample of these were studied by the  three instrumented research aircraft.
               Conventional Forward  Scattering Spectrometer Probes (FSSPs) and King liquid
              water probes  were present on all aircraft, and in addition the Fast FSSP
              (FFSSP)  of Brenguier et al.  (1996), the Cloud Droplet Spectrometer (CDS)  of
              Lawson and Cormack (1995), the Droplet Spaceing Monitor (DSM) of  Baumgardner
              et al. (1993), and the PVM-100 liquid water content  probe of Gerber et al. 
              (1994) were all used in the SCMS.  These  new instruments provide much improved
              resolution in droplet size  and in space, and so should help overcome the
              limitations of the  standard FSSP which have compromised many past studies, and
              so  should help overcome the limitatins of the standard FSSP which have 
              compromised many past studies of droplet size distributions.         In the
              course of this resesarch, we will assess ofthe  characteristics and value of
              the new instruments for measuring  droplet size distributions, will
              characterize typical droplet size  distribuions in unmixed and mixed regions of
              cloud, and will  compare the widths of these size distributions to theoretical 
              predicitions.  We will also study the entrainment and mixing  process, as a
              topic in itself as well as for its  influence on  droplet size distributions. 
              The new instruments should provide  better characterization of droplet sizes
              than has been available to  similiar  studies in the past, and the goood
              simultaneous  observations by a very sensitive radar should support better 
              interpretation of the microphysical observations in terms of the  life history
              and dynamics of the clouds.  It should therefore be  possible to test
              theoretical predictions critically, and so to  develop an improveed
              understanding of how droplet size  distributions develop in cumulus clouds.
