Title       : Magnetic Microstructure and Information Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9707033

Award Number: 9707033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319927             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald S. Indeck rsi@ee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcel W. Muller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9707033  Indeck  Magnetic information storage density is still some three orders
              of magnitude from the room temperature superparamagnetic limit, but the volume
              of storage medium per stored bit is shrinking rapidly.  The research proposed
              here addresses issues of storage density and stability related to the magnetic
              microstructure of storage media.    A microstructural magnetic unit of a medium
              is the smallest piece of the medium whose magnetization can be altered. 
              Magnetic units may or may not coincide with the medium's physical
              microstructural units (particles, grains).  Each stored bit in most existing or
              proposed magnetic storage systems comprises many microstructural magnetic
              units, and in all practical and economically viable systems the microstructural
              units have widely varying characteristics (particle, grain, or cluster size,
              orientation, etc.). In a given medium we can infer the size of the
              micromagnetic unit from electron or probe microscopic images, or indirectly
              from macroscopic experiments or modeling results.  We propose to develop an
              additional direct measurement using the anomalous H the storage medium
              environment the stored bit is subjected to forces that shorten its thermal
              decay lifetime.  We will all effect.  In experimentally quantify the effect of
              temperature on the write process, medium noise, and stability.    The
              experimental work will be paralleled by sophisticated modeling.  In this
              modeling a planar medium is represented as a tessellation of uniformly
              magnetized tiles.  We have pioneered a new (Voronoi) tessellation that avoids
              the artifacts introduced by the almost universally used regular tiling, and we
              will use our model for studies of the temporal and thermal effects on the write
              process, noise, and stability.  We are working on ways to deduce the intrinsic
              medium properties required for modeling from measurements of extrinsic
              parameters.    Our demonstration of the determinism of medium noise has been
              the seed of a separate noise precompensation that offers the  promise of a
              major storage capacity increase.  This program will be supported with
              experimental results on media and transducers.  ***
