Title       : RPG: Population Dynamics and Life History Evolution in Metapopulations of Social
               Spiders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9707474

Award Number: 9707474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leticia Aviles laviles@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1228,9169,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Aviles  9707474         Plant and animal populations are naturally subdivided. 
              Except for the occasional exchange of migrants or the recolonization of vacated
              sites with members of existing subunits, population subdivision in some species
              is strong enough that the subunits are largely independent from one another. 
              An extreme example of such metapopulation structure are the social spiders,
              organisms that form   colonies that are both social groups and relatively
              small, self-sustaining, and largely isolated populations.  Using social spiders
              in the genus Anelosimus as a model system, the study that will follow the
              planning activities described here will investigate how parameters that govern
              the growth of local populations (in this case, colonies) can also affect the
              structure and stability of the entire   metapopulation.  The study will compare
              species that exhibit a three-fold difference in the size of their brood, but
              are similar in other aspects of their biology.  A hypothesis that this study
              will test is that larger brood sizes lead to colonies that oscillate in size
              and undergo more frequent dispersal and extinction events. Computer simulations
              will complement this empirical study by exploring whether life history
              parameters that lead to local unstable dynamics can evolve   in a
              metapopulation and whether stability at the metapopulation level is possible
              given different levels of instability of the local populations.  This planning
              grant will make it possible to (1) explore alternative species and field sites
              to be included in the study, (2) test the feasibility of manipulative
              experiments to study colony extinction and dispersal in these social spiders,
              and (3) explore   alternative ways of analyzing the type of data to be
              collected in the   field.  The field aspects of this project involve visits to
              two tropical rainforest areas in Ecuador and one in Peru and the participation
              of American, Ecuadorian, and Peruvian students.    In addition to addressing
              intriguing aspects of the biology o f social spiders, this study will (1)
              provide a test to the theory that large rates of growth, in combination with
              density-dependence and time delays, can lead to unstable population dynamics or
              chaos; (2) shed light on the causes and consequences of local population
              extinction and dispersal; (3) provide insights into the interplay between group
              and individual selection in the evolution of life history traits in  
              metapopulations. These are issues of broad significance in ecology and
              evolution and of relevance to the conservation of species in fragmented
              landscapes.
