Title       : Scalable Program-Analysis-Based Testing and Maintenance: Infrastructure and
               Experimentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9707792

Award Number: 9707792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1553149            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Harrold   (Principal Investigator current)
              Adam A. Porter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Renee J. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg Rothermel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Maintenance and testing of software are expensive.  Program  analysis
              techniques, which analyze source code to obtain  information about software,
              promise to reduce this expense  by providing information that helps software
              engineers  perform specific maintenance and testing tasks such as  program
              understanding, impact analysis, and regression  testing.  However, to be
              adopted or even considered for  adoption, program-analysis-based testing and
              maintenance  techniques must be empirically demonstrated to scale to  large
              software systems.   The primary goal of this reqearch  is to empirically
              investigate the applicability of program-  analysis-based testing and
              maintenance techniques to large-  scale systems.  The research involves three
              overall efforts:  (1) construction of an extensible experimental 
              infrastructure including a software system and repository of  subject systems;
              (2) development of program-analysis  techniques that support testing and
              maintenance  of large-  scale systems; (3) rigorous empirical evaluation of the
               infrastructure, and of the program-analysis-based testing  and maintenance
              techniques. The principal results expected  from this work are an improved
              understanding of, and  improved techniques for, program-analysis-based testing 
               and maintenance -- founded on hard empirical data.  The  work will also
              provide a publicly available infrastructure,  that will support future tool
              development for,  experimentation with, and education in program-analysis- 
              based testing and maintenance techniques throughout the  software engineering
              community.
