Title       : RPG: Mechanisms of Integrin Gene Regulation during Trophoblast Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9707692

Award Number: 9707692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann E. Sutherland as9n@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sutherland  9707692    The overall goal of this research is to understand the
              molecular mechanisms that regulate trophoblast differentiation in the
              implanting mouse embryo. After reaching the blastocyst stage, the mammalian
              embryo must develop an external source of nutrients in order to continue its
              development. The mouse embryo accomplishes this by implanting into the stroma
              of the uterus and forming connections with the maternal blood supply, a process
              that is mediated by a specialized population of cells known as trophoblast.
              Trophoblast cells have many functions: they anchor the embryo in the uterine
              stroma, they form blood vessels that connect with the maternal system and
              direct nutrient-rich blood to the periphery of the embryo, they secrete
              hormones that redirect the maternal endocrine system to maintain the pregnancy,
              and they form part of the definitive chorioallantoic placenta. Trophoblast
              cells are absolutely essential for the further development of the embryo; they
              are the first lineage to be established during mammalian development, and it is
              only after they have successfully differentiated that the embryonic lineages
              begin to develop. Therefore, it is important to understand the process of
              trophoblast differentiation, both from the standpoint of knowing more about
              these cells themselves, but also from the standpoint of understanding a
              critical regulatory event in the development of the embryo. A major aspect of
              trophoblast function is invasive interaction with the extracellular matrix of
              the uterus; to facilitate this they express a unique repertoire of
              extracellular matrix receptors of the integrin family. The expression of
              several integrin receptor subunits is associated with trophoblast
              differentiation: two subunits are first expressed at the time of commitment
              ((7, (6), while the expression of two others ((1, (6) is appositely regulated
              at the onset of invasion. Very little is known about the molecular mechanisms
              that control their differentiation, despite their importance to d evelopment.
              The hypothesis being tested is that the developmentally regulated action of
              specific transcription factors on these (and other) promoters results in the
              differentiation of epithelial trophectoderm cells into invasive trophoblast
              giant cells. The specific aims of the overall grant will be 1). to characterize
              the promoters of integrin genes that are specifically expressed at different
              stages of trophoblast differentiation, 2). to define the transcription factors
              that regulate their expression, and 3). to identify the external factors that
              control their activity and/or expression during the peri-implantation stages of
              development. In order to prepare for the full research proposal, the following
              aims are proposed for the planning period: 1). to clone and identify the
              promoter regions of the integrin al and a6 subunits, and 2). to test the
              ability of the cloned regions to direct trophoblast-specific expression in the
              rat trophoblast cell line Rcho-1. Understanding the mechanisms underlying
              integrin gene regulation in differentiating trophoblast will provide a broader
              understanding of the process of trophoblast differentiation as well as new
              tools with which to probe the the developmental regulation of trophoblast
              motility, and the cellular mechanisms underlying invasive behavior more
              generally.
