Title       : RPG: Phylogeny and Evolution of Mitochondrial DNA in ExtinctMalagasy Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1997    
File        : a9707559

Award Number: 9707559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne D. Yoder ayoder@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Yoder   9707559  RPG      The proposed research project will exploit ancient-DNA
              (A-DNA) techniques in order to understand the evolutionary origins and demise
              of a diverse assemblage of extinct primates.  Mitochondrial DNA will be  
              extracted, amplified, and sequenced for a comprehensive sample of subfossil
              Malagasy lemurs.  The samples to be tested range in age from approximately 650
              years before present (b.p.) to more than 10,000 years b.p.  DNA sequences will
              be analyzed with phylogenetic, molecular evolutionary, and   population genetic
              methods in order to reconstruct the evolutionary relationships of the
              large-bodied extinct lemurs relative to the smaller-bodied extant lemurs and in
              order to investigate the forces that led   to the extinction of these unique
              mammals.  The comparison of time-interval DNA sequences within a single species
              lineage will permit the observation of molecular evolutionary patterns in "real
              time", thus contributing a novel perspective to the field of molecular
              evolution.          The study of changes in DNA sequence and structure over
              time (i.e.,molecular evolution) is an increasingly valuable field of scientific
              investigation.  Such studies have applications for fields as diverse as the
              analysis and control of organic pathogens (e.g., the AIDS virus), biogeography,
              phylogenetics, physiology, and conservation biology --- just to name a few. 
              The techniques that are being developed within the community of A-DNA
              researchers permit scientists to directly observe changes in DNA structure that
              had previously been confined to the realm of extrapolation through the
              comparison of DNA from living organisms.Although there is no real theoretical
              or conceptual principle that unites   the A-DNA discipline, the stringency and
              difficulty of the laboratory methods that are employed has created a community
              of researchers for whom intercommunication is essential.  The proposed research
              will add to this growing body of knowledge and will generate an unprecedented
              amount of DNA   seque nce data from extinct, non-human primates.  Questions
              will be addressed on both macro- and microevolutionary levels, thereby going
              beyond "technological curiosity" to analyze larger questions. First, the
              project will contribute to the goal of recovering the phylogeny of all endemic
              Malagasy primates.  The achievement of this goal is significant for
              understanding the biogeographic history of Madagascar and Africa as well as for
              understanding morphological and ecological evolution in an extremely   diverse
              assemblage of mammals.  Second, the project will allow a fine-grained analysis
              of molecular-evolutionary phenomena such as mutation rate and patterns of
              nucleotide substitutions.  Third, time-interval sampling of intra-population
              genetic diversity throughout a known extinction window could help guide future
              conservation efforts by identifying dangerous levels of genetic homogeneity.
