Title       : Sitio Conte, Panama Archaeological Expedition Records Research Access and
               Archival Preservation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9707808

Award Number: 9707808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63380              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy A. Sabloff jsabloff@ccat.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip G. Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clark Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas M. Haller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In 1940 the University of Pennsylvania Museum initiated archaeological
              excavations at the site of Sitio Conte, located about one hundred miles west of
              Panama City, Panama. This extremely important pre-Columbian site yielded about
              thirty burials and caches ranging from grave lots with a few vessels to burials
              of ten feet square containing hundreds of pottery vessels as well as objects of
              stone, carved bone, gold and other materials. In the most elaborate burial
              twenty three individuals were recovered. In sum, the materials afford an
              unprecedented look into the elite ruling class of this complex stratified
              society and in conjunction with the skeletons allow researchers to address a
              number of significant anthropological issues. For example it is possible to
              examine the relationships between social status, nutrition and gender.   The
              documentation in the form of written records and photographs is excellent and
              forms an essential part of the research collection. However it is not well
              catalogued and is difficult to use. This award permits the University Museum to
              catalog the material and to enter it in digital form into an Argus storage
              system. Both photographs and written records will then be made available over
              the internet for research purposes. The project is important because it will
              make an anthropologically significant research collection widely available for
              research purposes. It also breaks new ground in museum storage and distribution
              of information and, if successful, will provide a model of potentially wide
              use.                                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
