Title       : Statistical Models for Detecting Gene Conversion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9707045

Award Number: 9707045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley A. Sawyer sawyer@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sawyer  9707045       The investigator develops statistical tests for detecting 
              gene conversion.  Gene conversion is any process in biology that  causes a
              segment of DNA to be copied to another DNA segment.  Gene  conversion is an
              important process in evolution, and also has  consequences for human health. 
              For example, it can cause the  transference of pathogenic traits between
              bacteria and parts of  viral genomes between viruses.  Statistical tests for
              detecting  gene conversion in aligned DNA or amino acid sequences are  studied
              and extended.  Particular emphasis is given to permutation  or permutation-like
              tests that can evaluate unusually long  segments on which two sequences are
              similar, or else on which a  single sequence is unusually divergent. (This
              includes tests of  Karlin-Altschul type, which are faster to perform but are
              not as  accurate as permutation tests.) Some specific aims of the  proposal
              are: (i) to extend these tests to allow occasional  mismatches and alignment
              gaps by finding high-scoring segments  for a similarity score rather than
              segment length, (ii) develop  ways to improve the power and effectiveness of
              these tests, (iii)  compare statistical procedures for detecting gene
              conversion in  regards to efficiency and power, and (iv) make the resulting 
              improved software available to the biological community on a Web  site.      
              Human HIV and influenza viruses belong to a family of  viruses (RNA
              retroviruses) that not only are highly changeable,  but can also exchange
              pieces of genetic material among  themselves.  Viruses that can exchange blocks
              of genetic material  are more dangerous since the more adaptive parts of the
              virus can  spread rapidly, and since vaccines that target only part of the 
              virus can become rapidly obsolete.  There are also several  families of plant
              viruses in this viral family that cause damage  to food crops of economic
              importance.  The project extends a  statistical test that can detect a history
              of such exchanges from  a sample of genetic sequ ences and assign measures of
              statistical  likelihood to the most likely events.  This will help to 
              understand the nature of the evolution of these particular  viruses.  The work
              extends earlier work of the investigator that  looked for possible exchange
              events in aligned DNA sequences  under the assumption that the exchanged
              material had not  undergone later mutation.  This assumption does not hold for
              these  highly mutable viruses.  In addition, recent work has shown that  the
              earlier test has biases in some of its procedures that can  hide evidence for
              some exchange (or gene conversion) events.  This  bias is removed.  Finally,
              computer software that implements the  improved procedures, including listing
              the most likely exchange  events and their statistical likelihood, is made more
              available  on the internet for the biological community. (Software that 
              implements the earlier procedures has been widely used.)
