Title       : The Development of Maritime Adaptations on Santa Cruz Island
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9707765

Award Number: 9707765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82093              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Glassow glassow@sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Glassow will conduct
              archaeological research at a series of sites located on Santa Cruz, one of the
              Channel Islands off  California coast. Excavations indicate that this area was
              occupied by Native American people as early as 8,000 years ago and that
              habitation continued into historic times. As a result of his previous research
              Dr. Glassow has located a series of sites which fall within the time interval
              of 6700 to 4500 years before the present and with student assistance he shall
              conduct test excavations at five of them. Radiocarbon samples will be collected
              from an additional three sites. The goal of the research is to determine how
              subsistence practices changed over time and to accomplish this the team will
              focus their efforts on the recovery of faunal and floral remains which are
              identifiable to genus and species.  They will also collect and analyze samples
              of subsistence-related artifacts and tool manufacturing waste. Clam and mussel
              valves which are abundant on island sites provide information on both the
              season of year in which they were collected and the water temperature in which
              they grew. Bulk soil samples will be collected and flotation procedures applied
              to recover micro-plant remains. On the basis of this evidence it will be
              possible to trace environmental changes over a ca. 2,000 year period and
              determine how the human population responded to these.  The Channel Islands
              have long been of archaeological interest because the populations which
              inhabited them reached a population density and level of social complexity
              which was rare among hunting and gathering societies. It seems likely that
              abundant marine resources which include both fish and shellfish are, in some
              way, responsible for this phenomenon. Paleoecologists have reconstructed
              changes in water temperature over this period and have therefore provided an
              excellent environmental context in which to study human adaptation. Different
              species of shellfish have specific tightly controlled environmental limitations
              and through analysis of species compositions recovered in archaeological sites
              it is possible to tie individual sites with environmental conditions. Dr.
              Glassow has noted that population density of Santa Cruz appears to have
              increased significantly about 5,500 years ago and he wishes to understand both
              the causes and the consequences of this change.  Using concepts derived from
              optimum foraging theory he has predicted how such groups at a simple level of
              technology adapted their subsistence to increased density and the data he
              collects will allow him to test these ideas.  This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide important information on how humans respond
              and adapt to environmental change. It will yield data of interest to many
              archaeologists and assist in training students who are intimately involved in
              this research.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
