Title       : ABR: Molecular Systematics of Grass Symbionts of the Fungal Family
               Clavicipitaceae (Hypocreales)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2000        
File        : a9707427

Award Number: 9707427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Schardl   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707427  Schardl   Building upon an impressive record of recent research, Dr.
              Schardl of the University of Kentucky continues his taxonomic and ecological
              studies of symbiotic ascomycetous fungi that infect grass plants. These fungal
              relatives of the infamous 'ergot' fungus live inside various turf grasses and
              other species, and transmit their spores either asexually through the grass
              seed ("vertical" infection of the grass's progeny) or following sexual
              reproduction, through fly-mediated contagion ("horizontal" infection of other
              grasses in the habitat). The sexually reproducing fungal species have usually
              been classified in the genus Epichloe, of the Clavicipitaceae family, while the
              asexual or conidial anamorphs have usually been named in the genus
              Neotyphodium. Confusion in the taxonomy has, until now, obscured the
              interesting symbiotic ecology of the fungus and its grass hosts. With DNA
              sequencing of several targeted nuclear genes, of samples collected over a wide
              geographical range, and with laboratory and garden tests of mating success
              between fungal isolates, Dr. Schardl continues to analyze the phylogenetic
              relationships of Epichloe and Neotyphodium species and suspected relatives. In
              turn, these genealogically related groups or clades of fungi are correlated
              with their host grass plants, to determine whether this symbiotic association
              has closely tracked the history of speciation of the grasses ("co-speciation")
              or whether new grass hosts are infected, and if so, whether mostly by sexual or
              by asexual forms of the fungus.    New molecular methods of DNA sequencing
              allow fine-scale analysis of genealogical or phylogenetic relationships among
              the separately named sexual and asexual forms of fungi, and are being applied
              by Dr. Schardl in imaginative ways to an ecologically fascinating system of
              fungal symbionts of turf grasses and related grass species. Whether the fungi
              "track" the history of speciation of their grass hosts, whether asexual morphs
              originate from sexual fungal forms or th e opposite, and whether fungal species
              hybridize to produce some of the currently documented Neotyphodium anamorphs,
              are just some of the questions being pursued in this renewed award.
