Title       : Development and Application of Quantum Chemical Methods for Molecular Potential
               Surfaces and Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9707202

Award Number: 9707202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Pulay pulay@mail.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9707202  PULAY  The Theoretical and Computational chemistry program is
              supporting Prof.   Pulay of the University of Arkansas for work to improve the
              efficiency of   SCF and density functional methods: the multi-Fock technique,
              and novel   basis sets.  In another project, further development of the local  
              correlation method is proposed: gradients and a simplified treatment of  
              distant pairs.  The latter constitute the majority of electron pairs in   large
              molecules.  Density functional theory (DFT), in spite of its   convincing
              success for ground states, is still not applicable to excited   states.  A
              project uill explore the use of empirical correlation terms,   borrowed from
              DFT, together with exact exchange, to describe excited   states and diradicals.
               Pulay proposes to build a powerful parallel   computer system for quantum
              chemical calculations, using commodity PC   parts.  The price of the proposed
              system is estimated to be about a tenth   of a comparable system using
              workstations.  Several applications are   proposed: (1) geometries, force
              fields and vibrational spectra of   porphyrins, (2) systematic calculation and
              parameterization of NMR shifts   in peptides as functions of the backbone
              torsional angles, (3)   parameterization of the vibrational force fields of 200
              organic   molecules, generated under the preceding grant, (4) search for novel 
               stable molecules, such as the cyclic polymers of phosgene and related  
              molecules.    The effort during this award is aimed at increasing the
              efficiency and   accuracy of quantum mechanical simulation of molecular
              systems.  Such   simulations are likely to lead to fundamental innovations in
              chemistry,   biochemistry and materials science in the future, by allowing the
              rapid   computational determination of the properties of chemical systems and  
              materials.  Accurate solutions of the quantum mechanical equations for   larger
              molecules requires very much computer power, and has become   possible only
              recently due to the development of new  algorithms and   inexpensive fast
              computers.  The proposal lists several projects that, if   successful, will
              increase the efficiency of molecular quantum   calculations, or extend the
              applicability of present methods, for   example. to excited electronic states. 
              The work includes the   construction of a parallel computer, based on commodity
              personal computer   parts.       ***
