Title       : Collaborative Research: Experimental and Theoretical Study of Crack Dynamics in
               Sea Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9707052

Award Number: 9707052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183111             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor F. Petrenko   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Experimental studies of the physical processes that govern the dynamic fracture
              of ice will be conducted.  The study is motivated by the need to understand the
              striking difference between velocities of cracks in freshwater ice and in
              saline ice (one-to-three orders of magnitude).  Besides its importance for the
              ice physics, the study is essential for engineering problems involving
              ice-structure interactions and ice-breaking operations.  Several groups of
              researchers recently discovered that maximal speeds of fracture propagation in
              the saline ice are one-to-three orders of magnitude lower than the ones in the
              freshwater ice.  Low crack speeds in the saline ice may significantly increase
              the ice forces (due to low rates of ice fragmentation).  They should also be
              taken into account in dynamics of very large masses of ice (motion of glaciers,
              drift of sea ice).    The experimental results recently obtained at Ice
              Research Laboratory of Dartmouth College clearly indicate that the liquid
              inclusions of unfrozen saline water in saline ice strongly retard crack
              propagation. Yet, the physical mechanisms of this retardation are not
              understood.  The data and its preliminary analysis point to several possible
              mechanisms of crack deceleration: elastic interactions between cracks and
              liquid inclusions; dissipation of energy due to diffusive motion of liquid in
              the network of pores and cracks; sonic wave attenuation in liquid inclusions;
              inertia effects due to movements of water in pores; negative capillary pressure
              of liquid "patches' left behind the crack tip. These mechanisms will be
              examined in carefully designed experiments and, in parallel, by a theoretical
              analysis.    The experiments to be conducted at Dartmouth ( Ice Research
              Laboratory), will include measurements of crack velocity in and the dynamic
              fracture toughness of ice samples with artificial pores of various sizes and
              shapes that are filled with liquids of different density, viscosity and surface
              tension.  A parallel theoretical investigation , to be done at Tufts
              University, will include thorough analyses of the physical mechanisms listed
              above.  Close collaboration between the theoretical work at Tufts and the
              experimental program at Dartmouth  is planned.  Theoretical ideas will be
              tested in experiments designed to identify the relative importance of several
              micromechanisms.  The acquired data will then feed and correct the theoretical
              modeling. The combined experimental-theoretical approach is necessary due to
              the difficulty of the problem of dynamic interaction between cracks and fluids
              in pores, and due to the multiplicity of possible micro mechanisms.    When
              accomplished, the study will explain and quantitatively model very slow crack
              speeds in sea ice.  This will have important engineering applications.  High
              resistance of sea water ice to dynamic fracture and very slow crack speeds (as
              compared to the ones in  fresh water ice) determine dynamic forces in ice
              during its crushing and fragmentation (ice-structure interactions; ice breaking
              operations and their limitations due to very slow crack speed, etc.).  The
              results will also be relevant for the dynamic fracture of materials other than
              ice that are either fluid-saturated or contain fine liquid droplets.  The
              examples are rocks and, possibly, concrete.  Another possible application is
              the dynamic fracture of geomaterials containing inclusions of oil or kerosene.
