Title       : Uniqueness for Multiple Trigonometric Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a9707011

Award Number: 9707011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall Ash mash@condor.depaul.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gang Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePaul University
	      1 East Jackson Boulevard
	      Chicago, IL  606042218    312/341-8000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Ash-Wang      Ash and Wang first major goal is to generalized
              theorems of Victor   Shapiro and Jean Bourgain concerning uniqueness of
              representation   by spherically convergent multiple trigonometric series. 
              Shapiro   proved that if a multiple trigonometric series is everywhere Abel  
              spherically summable to an integrable function and if Shapiro's   condition
              holds, then it is the Fourier series of that function.    Shapiro's condition
              states that the ratio of the sum of the absolute   values of the coefficients
              lying in an annulus of unit thickness   to the radius tends to zero as the
              radius tends to infinity. A  more natural condition is Connes' condition: that
              the sum of the   squares of the coefficients lying on the surface of a sphere
              tends   to zero as the radius tends to infinity. Since Connes' condition   is a
              consequence of everywhere convergence, Bourgain was able to   avoid any
              coefficient growth assumptions when he proved that a   multiple trigonometric
              series everywhere spherically convergent to   zero is the zero function. Ash
              and Wang will try to prove Shapiro's   result with  Connes' condition replacing
              Shapiro's condition in the   hypothesis. A corollary of this theorem would be
              spherical uniqueness   for trigonometric series that converge everywhere to an
              integrable   function. Furthermore, Ash and Wang would like to lighten the  
              hypothesis of everywhere convergence, by allowing an exceptional set   on which
              convergence is not assumed.  Such a set is called a set of   uniqueness. Ash
              and Wang would like to show that all countable sets   and certain uncountable 
              sets are sets of uniqueness.      Almost any surface is composed of simpler
              ones by a process called  multiple Fourier analysis. A major long standing
              problem in pure   mathematics is to show that this construction can be
              accomplished   in only one way. This is called the problem of uniqueness. There
              are   about a half dozen main varieties of this problem depending on just   how
              the simpler surfaces are c ombined to make the general surface.   In
              particular, Ash and Wang will try to determine if uniqueness   holds for square
              convergent double trigonometric series.  Ash and Wang will also try to  show
              that certain thin sets may be   ignored when considering the question of
              uniqueness for spherically   convergent multiple trigonometric series.  Since
              we live in a four   dimensional world of space and time, it is also necessary
              to study   a higher dimensional version of a surface.  Such an object is called
                a manifold.  Just as surfaces are associated with double   trigonometric
              series, manifolds are associated with  multiple trigonometric series. Thus, Ash
              and Wang will also try to   determine if uniqueness holds for spherically
              convergent   multiple trigonometric series.
