Title       : Improvement of Storage and Access to Native American Basket Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2000   
File        : a9707621

Award Number: 9707621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick V. Kirch kirch@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rosemary A. Joyce  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1395      SYSTEMATIC ANTHROPOLOGICAL COL
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the Phoebe Hearst Museum of
              Anthropology at the University of California, Berkeley will purchase a
              compactor shelving system with 147 cabinets, each supplied with internal
              shelving and hinged doors. These will be used to store the museum's collection
              of Native American baskets. The largest portion consists of 9,014 specimens
              from California. An additional 2,235 derive from other areas in North America.
              The first entry in the collection's catalogue dates to 1901 and the museum has
              worked consistently to the present time to collect materials which document the
              variability and change over time of this artifact class. The materials are
              accompanied by excellent documentation which in some cases this includes not
              only finished product, but also the raw materials from which it was made along
              with information on details of the manufacturing process. The collection has
              been widely used for research purposes and each year many scholars request
              access to this material.  Because of limited space these baskets have been
              improperly stored. Items are stacked one inside the other, a practice which can
              lead to deformation in shape. This also means that to retrieve a single
              specimen, many must be moved and the result is an unacceptable degree of wear
              and tear. The University has made additional space available which, if properly
              used, will alleviate the overcrowding problem. Compactors provide an excellent
              and widely employed means to store large amounts of material in a relatively
              small space and this grant will permit the baskets to be stored without
              stacking. This will result in enhanced preservation of the materials and
              improve access to anthropologists who wish to study them.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
