Title       : Effects of a Founder Event on Genetic Diversity in the Fire Ant Solenopsis
               invicta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9707331

Award Number: 9707331
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89925              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Ross kenross@arches.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurent Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9707331  Ross  Considerable attention has focused recently on the
              reduction in genetic diversity that follows founder events and other types of
              severe reductions in population size (bottlenecks).  One reason for this
              interest is that reduced genetic variation may affect the subsequent ability of
              populations to respond to natural selection.  Moreover, changes in the nature
              and extent of genetic variation following a bottleneck may lead to genetic
              incompatibilities between parental and founder populations, one outcome of
              which may be speciation.  Thus, the genetic changes accompanying bottlenecks
              are of basic scientific interest because of their possible role in the natural
              processes of adaptation and species diversification, and of applied interest
              because endangered species subjected to bottlenecks may lack the ability to
              respond to subsequent environmental change.  The aim of this project is to
              describe the effects of a well-documented founder event on variation in five
              different classes of genetic markers in wild populations of the fire ant
              Solenopsis invicta.  The markers to be used are 78 nuclear markers derived from
              protein electrophoresis, seven microsatellite DNA loci, 64 RAPD DNA markers,
              the locus or loci responsible for sex determination, and markers of the
              mitochondrial DNA.  Results from these five sets of markers are complementary
              for studying the effects of a bottleneck because they have different genetic
              architectures, are under different selective regimes, and have different modes
              of inheritance. Electrophoretic markers represent protein-encoding nuclear loci
              with modest variation that generally are not under strong selection. 
              Microsatellites are repetitive nuclear sequences in non-coding regions that
              harbor extensive polymorphism.  RAPDs are randomly amplified nuclear sequences
              also assumed to be in non-coding regions that display simple presence/absence
              polymorphisms.  The sex-determining locus is a regulatory element under strong
              selection that maintains extensive polym orphism comparable to or even
              surpassing that of microsatellites.  Finally, mitochondrial DNA provides a set
              of markers that are maternally inherited, in contrast to the biparental
              inheritance of the four classes of nuclear genes.    The composite results will
              be used to test theories that predict how bottlenecks affect various classes of
              genes and how the evolutionary potential of bottlenecked populations is
              altered.  The results also may allow estimation of the number of fire ant
              queens constituting the original founder population in the U.S.
