Title       : Vibrational Spectral Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9707773

Award Number: 9707773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Prasad L. Polavarapu prasad.l.polavarapu@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Prasad Polavarapu of Vanderbilt University is supported by the   Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program and the Office of   Multidisciplinary Activities to
              (i) develop a step-scan polarization   division interferometer with double
              polarization modulation and digital   signal processing capabilities, and (ii)
              use this instrument to   investigate protein-anesthetic interactions and
              host-guest interactions   for carcinogens encapsulated in cyclodextrin
              cavities.  Enantiomers of   chiral molecules show differences in their
              effectiveness as anesthetics.    To better understand the stereospecific
              interactions at the molecular   level, the PI will study the absolute
              configurations of chiral   enantiomers and the conformations in which the
              anesthetic molecules   exist.  For elucidating guest-host interactions, a
              series of substituted   oxiranes will serve as guest molecules trapped in
              cyclodextrin cavities.    Isotopic substitution will be exploited to isolate
              the spectral bands due   to the guest molecule, and to determine the
              perturbations imposed by the   host.  The PI will probe the vibrational
              transitions of chiral molecules   using circularly polarized light.    These
              studies have tremendously important implications in the area of   drug design,
              where differences in the effectiveness of enantiomers can be   quite dramatic. 
              For example, one enantiomer of the infamous drug,   thalidomide, is known to be
              a sedative while the other causes severe   birth defects.  Why two molecules of
              `nearly` identical structure could   have such completely different effects on
              the human body is not at all   clear.  This is fundamental chemistry, the
              results of which will have a   significant impact in the area of biotechnology.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
