Title       : Geochronology and Paleoenvironment of Sheriden Cave, Wyandot County, Ohio
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1997       
File        : a9707984

Award Number: 9707984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth B. Tankersley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kenneth Tankersley and his
              colleagues will conduct one season of archaeological research at the site of
              Sheriden Cave which is located in Wyandot County, Ohio. The cave opening was
              exposed by a bulldozer in the course of commercial operations and discovered to
              contain deeply stratified deposits rich in paleontological remains. During the
              early course of digging by multiple excavators the site was believed to be of
              paleontological significance only. However the 1995 discovery of a carved,
              incised and beveled bone object clearly indicated a human presence. In
              subsequent work Dr. Tankersley recovered flaked stone artifacts. Radiocarbon
              dates have yielded an age of between 11,000 and 12,000 years ago which makes
              the site unique for the Eastern part of the United States in terms of both
              antiquity and the very rich stratigraphic sequence it contains. The deposits
              are endangered because the remaining sediment is exposed, drying and subject to
              attack by insects and other biological agents.  Dr. Tankersley will undertake a
              15 week season of fieldwork followed by laboratory analysis. He will remove a 2
              meter square column from the floor of Sheriden Cave to bedrock. He will
              systematically map and sample standing profiles and assess and radiocarbon date
              the stratigraphy and material remains exposed in the excavation and profiles.
              The bone object will be dated and raw material identified to species. A plan
              will be developed to protect the sediments which remain.  Because sites with
              well preserved remains in good stratigraphic context are extremely rare in the
              eastern United States, little is known about the lifeways of the earliest
              Native American inhabitants. In the Southwestern US at ca. 11,000 to 12,000
              years ago contemporaries focused on hunting large game and carefully crafted
              projectile points indicate a specialized subsistence adaptation. However it is
              not known whether this is a regional specialization brought and maintained,
              perhaps from Asia, or whether it can be explained in local terms. For this
              reason data from a different part of North America and a different
              environmental context is important. This research will provide such information
              and be of interest to many archaeologists. It will also help to protect an
              endangered and important archaeological site.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
