Title       : CAA: Anaysis of Endocytosis in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9707583

Award Number: 9707583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49944              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra K. Lemmon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9707583  Lemmon     This is a Career Advancement Award for Women Scientists and
              Engineers.  A major long-term   goal of Dr. Lemmon's laboratory is to
              understand the function of clathrin-mediated vesicular   transport and to
              identify and characterize the proteins involved in this pathway.  Studies in
              her   laboratory have taken advantage of the powerful molecular genetic methods
              available in yeast to   analyze the function of clathrin.  In the last several
              years, her studies of yeast clathrin have led to   the identification of a
              number of additional gene products that may be involved in vesicular  
              transport at late stages of the secretory / endocytic pathway.  Two new classes
              of genes are being   studied.  The first group encodes homologues of subunits
              of the clathrin adaptor (AP) complexes.    The adaptors are involved in the
              capture of specific membrane proteins into clathrin coated pits   and they
              facilitate the assembly of clathrin onto membranes, which drives vesicle
              budding.    There is evidence for up to four distinct AP complexes in yeast,
              yet the function of these   adaptors is still not clear.  The second group of
              genes was identified on the basis of their ability   to rescue the inviability
              of lethal strains of clathrin heavy chain-deficient yeast.  These genes are  
              referred to as suppressors of clathrin deficiency (SCD genes).  The five SCD
              genes encode two   novel proteins, two that had been previously identified in
              yeast, and one that encodes a member   of the widely distributed 14-3-3 protein
              family.  Mutants and biochemical reagents have been   developed that will
              enable Dr. Lemmon to further examine the function of these gene products   and
              their role in clathrin-mediated transport pathways.  However, her laboratory
              currently lacks   the expertise to carry out an in depth investigation of the
              role of these proteins in endocytosis.    Therefore, she has arranged to spend
              a sabbatical year in the laboratory of Dr. Howard Riezman   at the Biozentrum
              of the University of Basel, Sw itzerland.  Dr. Riezman's group has made many  
              of the most significant advances in our understanding of endocytosis in yeast
              and has developed   methods to study both the internalization and
              post-internalization steps of uptake from the cell   surface.  The goal of this
              sabbatical project is to combine the efforts of these two scientists and  
              examine in detail the potential endocytic roles of the adaptor complexes and
              the Scd proteins.  In   addition, a more complete analysis of endocytosis in
              clathrin mutants will be performed.  Studies   to be carried out during this
              sabbatical will enable them to dissect the specific steps in the   endocytic
              pathway requiring clathrin function.        Endocytosis is a fundamental
              function of most eukaryotic cells.  The group of proteins   collectively known
              as clathrin is important for endocytosis of many nutrients and signal  
              transducing receptors and for sorting or retention at the trans Golgi.  This
              collaboration should   provide new information on the machinery required for
              endocytosis and uncover new regulatory   mechanisms in the endocytic pathway. 
              Pursuing these studies during a sabbatical year in Dr.   Riezman's laboratory
              will also allow the rapid development of the project and will enable Dr.  
              Lemmon to acquire important expertise that is crucial for the continuing
              research in her own   laboratory.    ***
