Title       : A New Concept in Glacier Mass Balance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9707515

Award Number: 9707515
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Echelmeyer   (Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Harrison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Glacier mass balance provides an important link between climate and changes
              in the size and shape or a glacier.  Here the investigators propose a new
              concept for mass balance, the reference-surface' balance rate, which is
              independent of the changing geometry of a glacier.  This is a three year
              project with two goals:    (1)  To define and to show the importance of this
              new type of balance, and to determine how to measure it within the context of
              conventional mass balance programs.    (2)  To improve the theory of the
              response of a glacier or ice cap to changes in climate.    The first goal is
              motivated by the problem that the mass balance of a glacier depends not only
              upon climate, but upon the geometry of the glacier surface.  This is a serious
              complication in finding a connection between balance and climate.  The proposed
              reference-surface balance rate is directly connected with climate, and its
              measurement could become a part of ongoing balance programs.   The second goal
              is an outgrowth of preliminary work on defining the reference-surface balance
              rate.  It is a convenient starting point for several extensions of the theory
              of the response of a glacier to climate change.  It includes the effects of the
              dependence of mass balance upon elevation and upon the three dimensional nature
              of the surface.  The problems to be studied include the effects of a glacier's
              geometry on the stability and magnitude of its response to climate change, the
              effects of observed geometrical asymmetry during advance and retreat, and the
              possibility of deducing the reference-surface balance rate from conventional
              mass balance rate.
