Title       : Robust Control of Non-Minimum Phase Non-Linear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9707891

Award Number: 9707891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto Isidori isidori@zach.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9707891  Isidori    In the last few years, new powerful ideas and concepts
              have contributed to the development of a number of systematic methods for
              global analysis and design of nonlinear feedback systems.  A common goal of
              these research efforts has been the synthesis of feedback controllers yielding
              asymptotic stability (with prescribed region of attraction) and/or asymptotic
              tracking (rejection) of selected exogenous commands (disturbances), in the
              presence of structured uncertainties, such as parameter variations, and/or
              unstructured uncertainties, such has unmodeled dynamics.  The actual setup in
              which these robust design methods have to be implemented is that in which only
              a set of variables (and not the full state) is available for feedback.  In this
              case the entire design problem becomes of course more demanding, in view of the
              need of including; some kind of "state observer" in the feedback architecture. 
              This problem is particularly felt in the case of tracking, when the most
              realistic situation is indeed the one in which only the "tracking error" (and
              not the entire reference trajectory) would be available for control purposes. 
              As it happens for any design scheme dealing with the selection of specific
              output maps, the possibility of implementing the above-mentioned methods for
              feedback design is deeply influenced by the asymptotic properties of the
              so-called "zero dynamics" of the system (the dynamics which arise internally in
              a system when input and initial state are such as to constrain the output to be
              identically zero).  More precisely, a consistent number of these methods for
              feedback design require the zero dynamics to be asymptotically stable: systems
              having this property are - in analogy with a terminology en vogue for linear
              systems called "minimum phase systems".  In particular, if a system is minimum
              phase it is possible to achieve an arbitrarily small level of attenuation
              between disturbances and output, with obvious positive consequences on the
              ability of solving pr oblems of robust stabilization in the case of unmodeled
              dynamics.  However, many physical systems exhibit a non-minimum phase behavior.
               Motivated by the importance of being able to robustly control also non-minimum
              phase nonlinear systems and by the scarcity of available results in this area,
              this research will focus on two directions.  The first one deals with problems
              of robust stabilization of non-minimum phase nonlinear systems, in the presence
              of unmodeled dynamics.  Robustness with respect to this kind of uncertainty is
              usually dealt with by looking at the controlled system as to the feedback
              interconnection of two subsystems, only one of which is accurately modeled, and
              then seeking a control law which lowers, as much as possible, some suitably
              defined "gain" of the interconnection modeled/unmodeled component.  In this
              setup, the research will address the problem of finding, for various classes of
              non-minimum phase systems, estimates of the lowest achievable "gains" (so as to
              reduce the conservativeness of the design).  The other direction is to study
              problems of robust tracking in the presence of parametric uncertainties. 
              Unlike the case of linear systems, where the presence of unstable zero dynamics
              is generally not an obstruction to asymptotic tracking of prescribed families
              of trajectories, in the case of non-minimum phase nonlinear system no method is
              available yet to achieve asymptotic tracking, in the presence of large
              parameter uncertainties and for arbitrarily large initial conditions.  This
              part of the proposed research is directed toward the development of systematic
              methods yielding semiglobal robust tracking for nonlinear systems having
              unstable zero dynamics.
