Title       : Mathematical Models for Cell Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9707750

Award Number: 9707750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Mogilner mogilner@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mogilner  9707750       Certain kinds of cellular movements are driven by actin 
              polymerization.  The most conspicuous examples are the  lamellipodia of
              spreading and migrating embryonic and metastatic  cells.  A variety of
              pathogenic bacteria also propel themselves by  constructing behind them a
              polymerized tail of cross-linked actin  filaments.  Collective cellular
              movements mediated by cell-cell  interactions can generate interesting spatial
              patterns.  These  patterns can shed light on intercellular communication and
              can be  used as novel assays for understanding the molecular mechanisms  of
              cell signaling.  The goal of this research is to understand at  the molecular
              level (i) the mechanochemical basis of force  generation by polymerizing and
              depolymerizing actin networks,  (ii) the mechanisms of spatio-angular
              cytoskeletal organization,  (iii) patterns of collective cell motion.  The
              investigator and  his colleagues formulate a mechanochemical theory of how the 
              thermal fluctuations of the filament tips and the membrane can be  rectified by
              actin polymerization to generate a propulsive force.  This force is controlled
              by soluble and transmembrane proteins  that stimulate actin polymerization. 
              The investigators also  formulate a theory for retrograde flow of lamellar
              cytoplasm.  This theory is based on two sources of contractile force: (i) the 
              contraction of the actin gel that must accompany  depolymerization, and (ii)
              actin filament contraction driven by  myosin.  The results of these models
              determine the relative roles  of actin polymerization and myosin crosslinking
              and contraction  during cell locomotion.  These studies help forge a link
              between  the basic biophysics of cell motility and the chemical control of 
              cell motion.       The crawling of cells over surfaces is the basis for the 
              vitally important phenomena of phagocytosis and the migration of  metastatic
              cells.  Despite the ubiquity of cellular motions, the  molecular mechanisms
              underlying these movements remain  mysterious.   The investigators undertake
              theoretical modeling that  provides a solid quantitative basis for
              understanding the  detailed working cycle of the cell's molecular engines. 
              This  description provides a new interdisciplinary level of  understanding cell
              movements and new methods of predicting cell  behavior in medically and
              technologically important situations.
