Title       : Methods for Matrix Optimization Problems in Control and Statistical Signal
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9707111

Award Number: 9707111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Boyd boyd@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Donoho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Saunders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9707111  Boyd    Powerful new methods for various convex matrix optimization
              problems have emerged over the last few years.  Most of this research has
              concentrated on the semidefinite programming problem (SDP), i. e., the problem
              of minimizing a linear cost function over linear matrix inequalities (LMIs). 
              SDPs are convex optimization problems that can be solved with great efficiency
              using recently developed interior-point algorithms.  These matrix optimization
              methods have had immediate practical and theoretical impact in several fields,
              notably control systems and combinatorial optimization.  In control theory, the
              basic idea is to formulate the analysis or synthesis problem in terms of convex
              matrix optimization problems, which are then solved numerically.  The current
              state of research on LMIs in control can be summarized:    There has been
              intensive research on identifying control problems that can be cast in terms of
              LMIS, and those for which an LM1 formulation is unlikely to exist.  In the
              latter case, bilinear matrix inequalities (BMIS) have been recognized as a
              unifying form.    The combined activity in mathematical programming and control
              theory has led to very rapid progress in interior-point algorithms for solving
              SDPS, focusing on local convergence rates, worst-case complexity, etc., and on
              extending to SDP the sophisticated and efficient primal-dual interior-point
              methods developed for linear programming (LP).    Several basic software
              implementations of interior-point methods for SDP have become available.  These
              codes have proven useful for small to medium-sized problems, but tend to be too
              slow for larger problems, since they exploit little or no problem structure. 
              LMls are becoming basic tools in control, much the way Riccati equations became
              basic tools in the 1960s.  Thus, LMI/SDP solvers are becoming part of the
              infrastructure of control (computation and practice), just as Riccati equation
              solvers are now.  The same techniques can be applied in several other fields. 
              In  statistical signal processing, for example, SDP allows one to define
              optimization problems that involve representation and decomposition of
              covariance matrices.  Here many challenges are still to be found in the problem
              formulation area (i.e., identifying statistical signal processing problems that
              can be cast in this framework) but it is already clear that the approach will
              be rewarding.  Perhaps even more than in control, practical use of matrix
              optimization in statistics will require efficient algorithms for large-scale
              problems.  This proposal brings together researchers in the three key areas
              involved: control theory, statistics, and large-scale numerical optimization,
              in order to address the next logical areas of research: identification of the
              problems in statistical signal processing that can be formulated in terms of
              LMIS, and the development of more powerful algorithms (and practical codes) for
              the matrix optimization problems that arise in control and statistical signal
              processing.  The research effort will be complemented with a strong educational
              component, by integrating the effort with the newly developed course Convex
              Optimization with Engineering Applications.  We will transition new research
              results in statistical signal processing directly into the course material,
              which will help broaden the range of applications presented in the course.  The
              new research on numerical methods will enter the course in two important ways:
              first, as an advanced topic on implementation (missing from the current
              course), and second, by providing tools that students can use during the
              course, especially in projects.  Another important (but less direct)
              educational goal is to train two PhD students in a completely interdisciplinary
              fashion, equipping them with skills that range from, say, robust control theory
              or statistics, to optimization theory and implementation of large-scale
              numerical algorithms.  As the power of computing continues its exponential
              rise, researchers with this background will  be increasingly valuable.
