Title       : The Evolution of Dioecy and Sexual Dimorphism: An Integrative Approach Using a
               Gynodioecious Strawberry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9707247

Award Number: 9707247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tia-Lynn Ashman tia1@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9707247  Ashman   Separate male and female flowering plants (dioecy) have
              evolved from hermaphrodite ancestors independently in numerous lineages,
              leading evolutionary biologists to conclude that such a transition is a central
              problem in biology. However, we do not have a complete picture of how this
              transition occurs.  An intensively modeled theory predicts that populations
              with females and hermaphrodites are an intermediate step to dioecy. The
              presence of females is expected to result in selection on hermaphrodites to
              become more male in gender, and if certain genetic conditions exist then dioecy
              can evolve.  This research will address the potential for dioecy to evolve by
              characterizing the genetic architecture of a model system, the wild strawberry
              (Fragaria virginiana), that   exhibits a transitional breeding system and
              among-population variation in a fundamental aspect of the selective environment
              (the frequency of females). By characterizing the genetic relationships among
              reproductive traits (pollen production, fruit set, and petals) in four
              populations of wild strawberry (two from each end of the female frequency
              continuum), this research will not only reveal the potential for response to
              selection, but it will also evaluate the assumptions and the robustness of
              theoretical models of reproductive evolution. Furthermore, among-population
              comparisons will yield information on the constancy of genetic parameters and
              the consequences of such constancy for evolutionary change.    This research
              will provide information on the evolution of reproductive systems, information
              that is fundamentally relevant to evolutionary biology because all organisms
              face allocation decisions similar to the reproductive allocation decisions
              studied here. Plant reproductive systems are like many other systems where
              organs are functionally and structurally homologous, and thus necessarily have
              a shared developmental and genetic basis. Gaining an understanding of the
              constraints imposed by genetic architectur e on the   evolution of individual
              phenotype and sexual dimorphism is an essential aspect of evolutionary biology.
              Furthermore, comparisons among populations will provide information on the
              lability of genetic architecture and will make a significant contribution to
              testing the assumptions of quantitative genetics as applied to evolutionary
              questions.
