Title       : Genetic Basis of Niche Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9707649

Award Number: 9707649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Stratton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                        9707649   Stratton   The fundamental niche of an organism can be
              quantified by a performance curve, relating fitness to underlying resource
              gradients. This project will measure genetic variation in parameters of fitness
              reaction norms of Arabidopsis thaliana over gradients of light, water, and
              nutrients.   Components of genetic variance for the shape of those reaction
              norms will be estimated to test the hypotheses that 1) there is more genetic
              variation for niche position than niche width.  2) that there are negative
              genetic correlations between the breadth of performance curves and maximum
              fitness (the jack of all trades is master of none hypothesis) and 3) that such
              tradeoffs are most apparent in comparisons among populations rather than
              within.    Although the standing genetic variance governs the short-term
              response to selection, long term constraints depend on pleiotropic effects of
              individual loci.  Thus, quantitative trait loci affecting the shape of fitness
              reaction norms will be mapped using a recombinant inbred population of
              Arabidopsis to test the hypothesis 4) that loci which affect fitness at one end
              of the resource gradient have negative pleiotropic effects maximal fitness or
              on performance at the other extreme.   Populations can respond to changes in
              the environment by shifting their niche position or by increasing niche
              breadth.  Despite a long history of theoretical work, predicting the response
              of real populations is an empirical problem which depends on the amount and
              pattern of genetic variation in parameters of the fitness reaction norm. 
              Tradeoffs between maximal fitness and breadth of adaptation are often assumed
              but rarely documented.  Moreover, the possibility that independent loci affect
              performance at different ends of the resource gradient means that populations
              may be able to expand their niche without detrimental effects on performance in
              other environments.
