Title       : Tracing Upper Arctic Circulation Via Barium, Oxygen Isotopesand DOM Fluorescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9707459

Award Number: 9707459
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113693             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly K. Falkner kfalkner@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Approximately ten percent of the world's total river discharge flows into the
              Arctic Ocean, strongly influencing its physical and chemical properties. 
              Determining the fate of river waters flowing into the Arctic is necessary for
              understanding oceanic circulation in the Arctic and its links to global
              climate, and for assessing the transport of radioactive and industrial wastes
              dumped into the rivers and shallow marginal seas of the Arctic.  A variety of
              physical and chemical tracers, including temperature, salinity, alkalinity,
              3He, tritium, halocarbons, nutrients, and oxygen isotopes, have been applied to
              investigations of Arctic circulation. These tracers have been successfully used
              with simple linear mixing models to distinguish the riverine component from
              sea-ice meltwater, Pacific, and Atlantic components of Arctic Ocean waters. 
              None of these tracers, however, are able to distinguish between waters from
              different rivers within the Arctic.    Past work has shown the utility of
              dissolved barium (Ba) as  a naturally occurring geochemical tracer that can
              offer new insights into oceanic circulation in the Arctic, particularly with
              regards to its riverine component.  Ba concentrations are highly elevated in
              the Mackenzie River (the only major North American river flowing directly into
              the Arctic) relative to any of the Eurasian Arctic rivers (i.e. the other nine
              of the ten largest rivers flowing directly into the Arctic).  The investigators
              will analyze water samples collected from 1993 to 1996 to verify that the
              geographical distribution of Ba in the surface waters of the Arctic Ocean
              reflect the significant difference between Ba concentrations in the Mackenzie
              and Eurasian Arctic rivers, and that Ba can be used to distinguish between
              North American and Eurasian sources of river discharge to the Arctic and thus
              provide information not available from other tracers of oceanic circulation in
              the Arctic.    Ba data will also be combined with other tracer fields obtained
              over the same period of ti me to quantitatively map freshwater contributions
              throughout the upper Arctic.  Using this background information, the
              investigators will examine continuous UV-fluorescence records generated from
              sensors mounted on the hull of the nuclear submarine USS Pogy in 1996 during
              the SCICEX96 expedition throughout the Arctic interior.  These data will
              provide information about the distributions of both marine and terrestrial
              derived dissolved organic matter (DOM).  Terrestrial DOM may prove useful as a
              tracer of riverine discharge to the Arctic Ocean and the simultaneous,
              continuous records of both components will improve our knowledge of carbon
              cycling within the Arctic.
