Title       : Unified Algorithms and Architectures for Low-Power Wireless Video
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9707742

Award Number: 9707742
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Jones dl-jones@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Naresh Shanbhag  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kannan Ramchandran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The demand for real-time image and video communications places unprecedented 
              demands on power and data-rate-limited communication links.  Present day 
              communication systems are primarily designed for data communications at a fixed
               rate and are poorly matched to video data, which is more tolerant of errors
              and  is characterized by fluctuating rates.  The quality of wireless channels
              can also  vary greatly, and the video coding and transmission should be adapted
              to these  changing conditions.  Existing hardware implementations are equally
              inflexible,  being designed independently for pre-specified conditions and a
              fixed power  consumption.  The match between current video compressors,
              wireless modems, and  their hardware is thus often very poor.  This research
              addresses the joint design  of video communication components to maximize the
              overall system design of video  communication components to maximize the
              overall system performance.  While  achieving unprecedented performance in
              low-power image and video transmission  over wireless channels, this research
              also develops a powerful and general new  methodology for directly coupling
              chip design with signal processing algorithms  and overall system optimization.
                 The research obtains dramatic improvements in end-to-end video transport
              over  wireless communication links through adaptive, joint optimization of
              source  coding, channel coding, and VLSI computation.  Instead of selecting
              fixed  operating points for the source coder, channel coder, and the VLSI
              hardware,  dynamically adjustable coders and hardware supporting a variety of
              operating  points is being developed.  Specific research tasks to achieve this
              overall  system goal include: (1) the development of rate-distortion-optimized
              coders  based on multi-resolution data structures and tolerance to bit errors;
              (2) multi-  resolution channel coding methods supporting variable
              rate-vs.-quality data  transmission for multiple channels; (3) real-time
              reconfigurable hardware via  Dynamic Algorit hm Transformations (DAT) to
              achieve low-power operation at various  operating points, and, (4) joint
              optimization of the above three components  subject to overall system power
              constraints.
