Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Noncommutative Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9707965

Award Number: 9707965
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308515             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mariusz Wodzicki wodzicki@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT   Wodzicki     In this project Wodzicki shall study K-theory  and 
              cyclic  homology  of operator  ideals, and also the Hochschild homology of the
              algebra of bounded operators  on a Hilbert space with coefficients in  an
              ideal. In particular, he will study: determinants, regulators, higher analytic
              and topological index invariants, the commutator  structure  of  bounded linear
              operators  on a Hilbert space, and a connection with the K-theory of algebraic
              varieties.   This combination of topics naturally results  from  the  previous
              work  of the principal investigator.  The approach joins together several areas
              of mathematics with a special focus on  homological study  of  (noncommutative)
               algebras  of  analytic and geometric  significance and on the development of
              suitable  homological  and homotopical tools.         The project touches upon 
              the  fundamental  directions  in  which modern  mathematics  is  developing 
              and  addresses  questions of fundamental importance and interest in
              mathematics.  As such,  it is a "pure research".  However, it may have a
              considerable impact in the future in such areas  as,  e.g.  High-Energy  and 
              Nuclear Physics.  The  current  project  is  a  natural  continuation and
              development of the principal investigator's  research  program  of last  15 
              years.   His  earlier  results obtained in this program  already find
              application in the recent work of several physicists (especially  those
              associated with CERN -- European Laboratory of Particle Physics in Geneve).
