Title       : Response to Light Quality and Photoperiod in Arabidopsis: Plasticity and
               Pleiotropy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1998     
File        : a9707552

Award Number: 9707552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Massimo Pigliucci pigliucci@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hilary Callahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pigliucci  9707552         Molecular geneticists and physiologists working with
              the  model system Arabidopsis thaliana have achieved a detailed  mechanistic
              understanding of two distinct forms of phenotypic  plasticity: the response to
              light quality and the response to  photoperiod. These analyses have clearly
              established that there is  extensive overlap among the genes that regulate
              these two forms of  plasticity, raising questions about the evolutionary
              origins and  ecological implications of pleiotropy and genetic redundancy. The 
              PIs' understanding of these genetic details allows us to address a  complex
              question: how do plants integrate a suite of cues that  provide information
              about different aspects of multifactor  selective environments?         For
              annual plants, light quality serves as a specific and  reliable cue for present
              and imminent competition for light,  because encroaching competitors alter
              light quality (i.e., the  ratio of red to far-red light - R:FR). Similarly, in
              the temperate  regions where A. thaliana grows, the length of the photoperiod
              is  an indicator of seasonality. Can natural populations of A.  thaliana
              respond to selection on the ability to sense and respond  to light quality
              cues? How strong is the relationship, if any,  between the
              R:FR-mediatedplasticity syndrome,  andphotoperiod-mediated plasticity?        
              The PIs will propose a short-term selection experiment with  replicated
              selection and control lines. The PIs will work with a  large natural population
              already under intensive study in East  Tennessee. We will select directly on
              the R:FR-mediated plasticity  of flowering time. While assessing the response
              to this direct  selection, we will also examine two forms of indirect response.
               First, was there a response in the R:FR-mediated plasticity of  other traits?
              Second, was there a response in the  photoperiod-mediated plasticity (i.e., a
              different cue) of the  same trait, flowering time?         The PIs' plan to
              address the interaction among traits and  be tween R:FR- and
              photoperiodmediated plasticity in a series of  mutant lines. These mutants lack
              specific photoreceptor genes that  affect a suite of traits, including
              reproductive fitness.  Furthermore, in these mutant lines and their associated
              wild  types, normal and altered patterns of plasticity occur in the same 
              genetic background. Thus, it is possible to make strong inferences  about how a
              gene (or genes) controlling plasticity affects the  whole organism, including
              its performance or fitness (pleiotropy).
