Title       : U.S-Japan Cooperative Science: Research on Strategic Cycle Time of World Class
               Manufacturing Companies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2000  
File        : a9707862

Award Number: 9707862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger G. Schroeder rschroeder@csom.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9707862  Schroeder    This award supports a two-year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Roger Schroeder of the University  of Minnesota and
              Professor Michiya Morita of Gakushuin  University in Japan.  The researchers
              will undertake a study  on the effect of development cycle time and production
              cycle  time on manufacturing effectiveness in both the U.S. and  Japan. 
              Additionally, they will study the effect of  manufacturing strategy and quality
              in the two countries on  the resulting cycle time.  Reduction of cycle time and
              the  associated manufacturing strategy has been an important  objective of
              companies in both countries.  They will attempt  to determine:  1) why
              similarities and differences exist;  2) how cycle time reduction facilitates
              competition and  cooperation among firms; and  3) how quality and cycle time 
              are interrelated.  The researchers will visit factories in  the U.S. and Japan
              to develop case studies in order to  extract theoretical propositions and
              implications.    This collaboration consists of researchers who are very 
              knowledgeable in their field and will be invaluable to each  other in gaining
              access to the companies they plan to  survey.  This research has significance
              to industry because  it will suggest the best practices for maximizing plant 
              performance, using a broad set of performance criteria.  It  is important to
              academia because it will advance knowledge  by using multiple theories and
              multiple disciplines to  address a question of trade-offs, which have not been 
              effectively addressed by previous research.  Through the  exchange of ideas and
              technology, this project will broaden  our base of basic knowledge and promote
              international  understanding and cooperation.  ***
