Title       : Dissertation Research: Residential Architecture and Warfare in the Northern Maya
               Lowlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9707012

Award Number: 9707012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2621               (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Freidel dfreidel@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. David Freidel, Mr. Travis Stanton will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. Building on Dr. Freidel's prior work, Mr.
              Stanton will analyze material collected during archaeological excavation at the
              Mayan site of Yaxuna located in the Northern Peten region of Mexico. Through an
              analysis of changes in architectural style over time it will, Mr. Stanton
              postulates, be possible to determine the extent to which site layout and
              building techniques reflect the organization of regional political power. The
              core area of Yaxuna covers approximately one square kilometer and includes an
              acropolis, causeways and raised stone structures as well as numerous smaller
              earthen mounds. Although significant in size, Yaxuna was never a dominant
              regional power and over its long prehistory the Mayan inhabitants fell within
              the sphere of three larger political groups. Extensive burning and destruction
              of structures indicates that the city was conquered more than once. Mr. Stanton
              wishes to determine the extent to which the spatial and physical organization
              was reorganized after the first of these conquests and to accomplish this goal
              he will compare the architectural configuration of the site and the design of
              individual buildings to those of the conquering power as well as to its
              pre-conquest counterpart. In addition, analysis of material remains will
              provide insight into how social organization developed in pre-conquest times
              and how it was subsequently transformed.  Archaeologists recognize that
              individual Mayan sites were integrated into larger political networks and that
              by discovering the extent of each and tracing how they changed over time it is
              possible to understand the principles which underlie political organization. At
              Yaxuna, non-architectural data strongly suggest how site domination changed
              over time and this provides an excellent controlled context to determine
              whether architecture in fact reflects these changing power patterns. If such,
              in fact, is the case, it will provide an powerful tool for archaeological
              analysis. The project will also assist in training a promising young scientist.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
