Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Spectral Properties of Random Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9707049

Award Number: 9707049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79051              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Hislop hislop@ms.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9707049    Hislop    Localization at band-edge energies for Schroedinger
              operators  is now reasonably well understood  for simple models of disorder,
              like Anderson-type potentials.  A part of this project is directed towards
              extending these  results to other interesting systems for which disorder
              strongly  affects wave propagation: acoustic, electromagnetic, and elastic 
              waves. Another goal is to extend the types of disorder allowed  to more
              realistic models such as the Poisson and random  displacement models. This will
              require an improvement of the  Wegner estimate obtained in previous works. 
              These techniques will be useful in studying the question of  correlated systems
              and high-energy localization for  two-dimensional disordered system.    The
              propagation of classical acoustic and electromagnetic waves  and of a single
              electron in perfectly ordered media, like a  crystal, is well understood. There
              are allowed and forbidden  energies of propagation for the waves. At the
              allowed energies,  the waves propagate out to infinity behaving almost as if 
              they were free waves. The effects of randomly distributed  impurities in
              solids, or randomly distributed defects in an  otherwise perfect material, is
              profound: the particles and waves  no longer propagate out to infinity. Rather,
              at many energies,  the transport of energy will be completely suppressed. This
              is  effect is referred to as localization. The goal of this research  is to
              better understand the mechanisms of localization for  classical and quantum
              mechanical systems for many models of disorder.  These results have
              applications to many engineering devices such  as the effect of random
              imperfections in wave guides, photonic  crystals, and superlattices.
