Title       : Student Travel Support for the International Symposium on Si-Heterostructures,
               Barga, Italy, September 9-12, 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1997  
File        : a9707180

Award Number: 9707180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Pearsall Pearsall@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9531816  Pearsall  The goal of  this project is to achieve new fundamental
              understanding of  thin film deposition from the gas phase through non-invasive
              monitoring and to determine how this information can improve real-time control
              of chemistry in gas-phase semiconductor processing.    Nearly all semiconductor
              manufacturing involves etching or deposition of thin films via gasphase
              chemistry.  There is wide agreement that in-situ, non-invasive process
              monitoring and real-time control will improve  manufacturing yield and
              throughput, and that more research is needed to develop suitable methods.  For
              example, in recent (8/94) review the editor of  Semiconductor International 
              remarked, "Real-time monitoring remains a highly desirable, but somewhat
              distant goal".  The key is a robust, quantitative technique that tracks the
              chemical reactions occurring at or near the surface of a semiconductor wafer. 
              A method based on ultra-violet (UV) spectroscopy is focus of the proposed work.
               Simultaneous tests of control strategies will determine whether the
              measurements have enough information to be of practical use.    The
              experimental environment will be an existing chemical beam expitaxy reactor
              with calibrated flow, pressure, and wafer temperature monitoring.  It supports
              processing conditions from ultra-high vacuum (10-10 Torr) to 10-4  Torr 
              pressure.  A co-located chemical vapor deposition reactor allows additional
              experiments in the pressure range   10-4 Torr to atmospheric pressure.   
              Experiments will determine whether UV spectroscopy can provide positive
              identification and  quantitation of multiple chemical components at realistic
              operating conditions.  This method has sufficient sensitivity to be used in
              ultra-high vacuum deposition conditions where the gas density is lowest. 
              Quantitation depends on an accurate baseline for the optical signal, so a new
              nonclouding window will be used in combination with techniques that compensate
              for drift in source intensity and optical transparency.    Mechanis tic
              modeling will provide the basis for estimation of unmeasured parameters  and
              for feedback control.  Linear and non-linear model-based control methods will
              be used.  Initial work will test the system's ability to track time-varying
              setpoints for compositions of 1 to 3 dilute reactants in an excess of another,
              and to provide uniform temperature across the wafer surface.  The system will
              then be used to control deposition of compounds of GaAs with Al and In. 
              Experiments will determine where the UV beam should be located (relative to the
              wafer surface) in order to optimize the information content.  The efficacy of
              the control strategy will be measured by independent (off-line) chemical
              analysis of the deposited film.  ***
