Title       : RUI: Phylogenetic Analyses in Trifolieae, Subtribe Trigonellinae (Leguminosae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2000     
File        : a9707571

Award Number: 9707571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly P. Steele   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Hayward Fdn
	      25976 Carlos Bee Blvd
	      Hayward, CA  945421602    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707571  Steele   In a plant systematic project emphasizing undergraduate
              involvement at California State University-Hayward, Dr. Kelly Steele is
              studying the genealogical or phylogenetic relationships among groups of
              herbaceous legumes in the genera Medicago (alfalfa), Melilotus (sweetclovers),
              and Trigonella (fenugreek), in collaboration with scientists in Canada and
              elsewhere in the U.S. Focusing on a representative collection of c. 75 species
              of these mostly Old World plants, Dr. Steele is emphasizing DNA sequencing of
              both chloroplast and nuclear genes, to amass evidence of mutational differences
              between species. In turn, the molecular data will be used, alone and in
              conjunction with traditional morphological characters for these plants, to
              construct genealogical or phylogenetic trees for the groups. Work in several
              laboratories on related legumes provides a tribal level framework in which to
              nest the results on subtribe Trigonellinae. A phylogeny constructed from
              independent molecular evidence allows evaluation of the several competing
              notions on the origin of the coiled fruit types found in Medicago and of the
              specialized pollinator "tripping" mechanism that seems characteristic of
              certain species in this group.   Species and genus level diversity within the
              temperate and subtropical tribes of legumes is relatively well known, from
              generations of taxonomic work on morphology and anatomy. The evolutionary
              origins of various distinctive features, like fruit types and floral
              mechanisms, is complicated, however, by the likelihood of parallel or
              convergent development of similarly looking characteristics, from different
              ancestral forms. Molecular data from nucleotide sequencing of chloroplast and
              nuclear genes provide independent evidence of mutational differences between
              species. Phylogenetic trees constructed from this evidence help in
              understanding the direction and paths of change in form that accompany
              speciation and migration.
