Title       : Studies in Physical Organic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a9707677

Award Number: 9707677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth B. Wiberg kenneth.wiberg@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Dynamics Program and the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
              Directorate, Professor Kenneth B. Wiberg, of the Department of Chemistry   at
              Yale University, studies the factors that control the properties,   reactions,
              and reactivity of organic molecules.  Through a combination of   experimental
              and theoretical approaches, Professor Wiberg addresses the   degree of
              structural distortion possible in small-ring compounds and the   changes in
              energy and other properties that result from such distortion.    Carbon-bridged
              spiropentanes are expected to have a remarkably high   degree of ring
              distortion, with theory suggesting the presence of a   nearly linear bond angle
              at the central carbon.  Theoretical and   structural studies of related
              spiropentyl cations address the factors   controlling the two different types
              of rearrangements observed for these   systems.  Questions related to the
              structure and stability of small-ring   cycloalkynes and the attack by
              methylene and by permanganate on   carbon-carbon double bonds are also targeted
              for synthetic and   theoretical analysis.  Professor Wiberg also explores the
              magnitude and   the origin of the equatorial conformational preference in
              monosubstituted   cyclohexanes, focusing on careful analysis of the
              conformational   preference of the methyl group and on the role of entropy
              terms in   determining conformational preferences.  Theories regarding the
              structure and reactivity of organic molecules   continue to be tested
              experimentally, through the preparation of   molecules designed to probe the
              limits of chemical bonding, and   theoretically, through the calculational
              analysis of bonding issues in   such molecules.  Professor Kenneth B. Wiberg,
              of the Department of   Chemistry at Yale University, with the support of the
              Organic Dynamics   Program and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of
              the   Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, explores molecules known 
               or expected to display extreme structural distortions.  These studies   target
              a number of classes of molecules, particularly those in which bond   angles at
              carbon atoms forming part of a small ring are forced to deviate   markedly from
              their preferred values in the absence of the geometry   enforced by these small
              rings.  Through these studies, Professor Wiberg   gains fundamental knowledge
              regarding the factors that control the   properties, reactions, and reactivity
              of organic molecules.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                 
