Title       : Synthesis and Physico-Chemical Characterization of Molecular Optoelectronic
               Gates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9707995

Award Number: 9707995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $853500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan S. Lindsey jlindsey@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This new collaborative group award to Jonathan S. Lindsey at North   Carolina
              State University is supported by the Advanced Materials Program   in the
              Chemistry Division, the Electronic Materials Program in the   Division of
              Materials Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary   Activities in the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. The   collaboration is between
              Lindsey and David F. Bocian at the University of   California at Riverside and
              Dewey Holten at Washington University. The   expertise of the collaborators
              spans synthesis, static characterization   and dynamic photophysical studies of
              molecular electronic systems. The   focus of the research is the design,
              synthesis and physical   characterization of molecular optoelectronic gates
              based on   multi-porphyrin arrays. The gates are conceptual extensions of
              molecular   wires where the signal transmission can be turned on or off by
              placement   of a magnesium porphyrin moiety which by chemical, electrochemical,
              or   photochemical oxidation opens a channel that funnels excited-state energy 
               to the ground state. These redox-driven molecular gates parallel the  
              operation of transistor switches. The scope of the gating phenomenon,   optical
              gating methods, and and the combination of molecular gates to   achieve logic
              functions will be studied. Static and transient absorption   and fluorescence
              spectroscopy, resonance Raman spectroscopy and   electrochemistry will be used
              to characterize the systems both in   solution and as thin films. Time-resolved
              absorption and fluorescence   measurements will be made on the new arrays to
              elucidate the rates and   pathways of energy and electron transfer.  This
              research addresses the fundamental issue of whether molecular   electronics are
              a viable limit in the drive towards computer   miniaturization and whether
              information processing is possible at the   molecular scale. The molecular
              optoelectronic gates which will be   prepared will simulate the solid-state
              transistors in conventional   circuitry. If successful, molecular
              optoelectronic gates may find   applications as sensors or as components of
              other smart structures.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
