Title       : Origin and Evolution of Endemic Asteraceae From the Macaronesian Archipelagos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9707614

Award Number: 9707614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Jansen rjansen@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Javier Francisco-Ortega  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707614  Jansen   In collaboration with foreign colleagues Drs. Javier
              Francisco-Ortega and Arnoldo Santos-Guerra, Dr. Robert Jansen of the University
              of Texas is studying the phylogeny and biogeography of several genera of
              sunflower relatives, family Asteraceae, on the islands of the Macaronesian
              archipelago, the Canaries, Madeiras, and Azores. Over 800 species of plants
              have been described that are endemic to these islands (found nowhere else), and
              25% of these belong to the family Asteraceae, which shows instances of
              evolutionary radiation both among islands and elevationally on single islands.
              New evidence from DNA sequencing of chloroplast and nuclear genes, from samples
              of island species and from collections provided by colleagues from African and
              Mediterranean species suspected to be related, will help construct phylogenetic
              trees or genealogies for such genera as Argyranthemum, Cheirolophus,
              Pericallis, and Tolpis. Where modern monographic treatments exist of the
              genera, such as for Argyranthemum, the molecular evidence can be integrated
              with morphological characters described for all the species, to assess rates
              and patterns of change among species in select floral and vegetative features.
              The phylogenetic studies on Cheirolophus (tribe Cardueae), Pericallis (tribe
              Senecioneae), and Tolpis (tribe Lactuceae) will contribute to nascent efforts
              to determine the phylogenetic tree structure for these large subgroups of the
              sunflower family on a world-wide basis.    Numerous conflicting or overlapping
              theories have been proposed to explain the number and distribution of endemic
              species on the Macaronesian islands, but without a well supported phylogenetic
              framework to guide hypotheses about evolution and migration, the theorizing may
              continue unconstrained. Whether the African mainland or Mediterranean regions
              have served as sources for migrants to Macaronesia, whether back migration may
              have occurred, whether single or few migrants radiated into numerous new
              species as opposed to multiple in troductions from continental sources creating
              the diversity of the islands, whether speciation has occurred more often
              between islands or between elevation zones on individual mountainous
              islands_all these questions of biogeography can be studied within a robustly
              supported phylogenetic framework of the several groups of plants under
              consideration.
