Title       : CAA: The Neurochemical Basis of Puberty in Ferrets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9707642

Award Number: 9707642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59443              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen D. Ryan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Magee - Women's Hospital
	      300 Halket Street
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15213    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9222,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9707642  Ryan  Career Advancement Awards expand the opportunity for women
              researchers to advance their career.  Dr. Ryan will use these funds to acquire
              new anatomical and neurochemical skills that will expand her research
              capabilities that can then be used to tackle the understanding of  the neural
              mechanisms underling puberty.   Puberty is defined by the process of sexual
              maturation during which an individual becomes fertile.  Dr. Ryan is interested
              in the neural mechanisms controlling the onset of puberty.  She is using an
              animal model in which puberty can be advanced or delayed by modulating the
              ambient photoperiod.  Thus, Dr. Ryan can compare animals of the same age, some
              of which were within a known number of days from maturation, or already mature,
              and others which were still immature and would remain so for several months
              longer.  Evidence suggests that two systems, the gonadotropin releasing hormone
              (GnRH) system and the dopamine secreting neurons in hypothalamic regions, may
              be involved in onset of puberty.   With the Career Advancement Award, she will
              learn state-of-the-art neuroanatomical techniques to identify and track the
              function of these two major neuronal systems.  She will also learn the
              procedure and then set up in vivo microdialysis in her own laboratory to enable
              an analysis of the neurotransmitters during the pubertal process.  These
              techniques can then be used in her model system to provide a better
              understanding of the neural and hormonal mechanisms underlying a major
              developmental process, puberty.
