Title       : Construction and Characterization of Grain Boundary Defects in Semiconducting
               Crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9707975

Award Number: 9707975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Martin milty@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9707975  Martin  This  research  project will investigate the  microstructure 
              and   macroscopic  properties  of  specific  grain  boundary  defects  in 
              crystalline, semiconducting polymer  materials.  The  long-term  goal  of this
              work is to isolate  individual  grain  boundaries so that their microstructure
              and influence  on  macroscopic  properties can be determined unambiguously. 
              "Polymer  bicrystals"  make  it  possible  to  examine   the  mechanical and
              electrical properties of these materials as a  function of defect geometry. 
              Measurements of the mechanical  strength  and  photocurrent  transport  both 
              decrease  with  increasing  misorientation between component grains.   These 
              properties   measurements  are  corroborated  by  structural  investigations 
              using opticalmicroscopy,  scanning  electron  microscopy,  atomic  force 
              microscopy  (AFM),  transmission  electron    microscopy   (TEM),   selected  
              area   electron  diffraction   (SAED),  and  white-beam   synchrotron   X-ray 
              topography   (WBSXT).   The current  research  project  will  involve  (1) 
              investigations of  new  materials  of  current  interest  for device
              applications,  (2)  processing  schemes  for    introducing   defects   into  
              crystalline    organic  semiconductors  in  a  controlled  manner,  (3)  
              structural  characterization   by   transmission  electron   microscopy, 
              electron  diffraction, and WBSXT, and  (4)  measurements  of  macroscopic
              properties by mechanical and electrical testing.  Of  particular scientific and
              technological interest is  the  manner in which carrier transport and
              mechanical deformation  is  accommodated  across individual  grain  boundaries.
               The  manner in which slip deformation is accommodated across  the  engineered
              grain boundary interfaces as a function  of  tilt  and  twist  misorientation
              angle will be investigated.  From  these results we will learn about the manner
              in which planes  of  oriented polymer molecules laterally translate  by  what 
              are expected to be dislocatio n-mediated mechanisms of slip.  %%%  This 
              research  should provide an insight into  the  defect-  limited  behavior of
              ordered  polymer  and organic   solids.  These  efforts  will  provide
              fundamental  information about  the  relationship  between  microstructure  and
               macroscopic  properties   of   these  materials   in   the   solid-state. 
              Optoelectrically  active  polymers  are    of   considerable  interest for
              devices such  as  thin film  transistors,  flat  panel  displays,  chemical
              sensors,  and  injection  lasers.  Recent  publications  have identified the
              critical  role  of  grain  boundary  defects  in  limiting  the performance  
              of  these  flexible,  organic-based electronic  devices for  low  cost,  large 
              scale applications.  ***
