Title       : Science Priorities for NSF's Arctic National Sciences Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1998 
File        : a9707783

Award Number: 9707783
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chris Elfring celfring@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Proposal Number: OPP-9707783  Principal Investigator:  Chris Elfring   
              ABSTRACT    The National Research Council (NRC), through its Polar Research
              Board (PRB), proposes to establish a Committee on Science Priorities for NSF's
              Arctic Natural Sciences Program.  The Arctic Natural Sciences Program (ANS),
              administered by the Arctic Section of NSF's Office of Polar Programs, is a
              multidisciplinary program that provides grants to support state-of-the-art
              research in space sciences, atmospheric sciences, biology, geology, glaciology,
              and oceanography in the Arctic.  The program coordinates with related NSF
              programs and many grants involve collaborations with other agencies and
              nations.  The committee would be charged to gain an understanding of the
              program's operation and current research priorities and provide guidance on
              setting future priorities given the diverse scientific issues that fall within
              the purview of the ANS program.  The committee would suggest improvements to
              the program's management strategy; suggest ways to compare proposals in widely
              diverse fields; and suggest how to judge which proposals are best-suited for
              the ANS program versus other, related NSF programs.  The committee also would
              suggest mechanisms to facilitate interagency and international collaborations. 
              The committee would solicit wide input from the arctic research community,
              perhaps via an electronic mail or other mechanism.    The study would be
              carried out by a committee of approximately 8 experts having a range of
              experience in the arctic natural sciences, including space sciences (mesosphere
              and up), atmospheric sciences (including stratosphere), oceanography (including
              chemical and physical), glaciology (including past climates), biology
              (including ecology, bio-oceanography, and related areas), and
              geology/geophysics, as well as the ability to grasp concepts in varied
              disciplines.
