Title       : Dissertation Research: Local Identities in Transnational Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9707895

Award Number: 9707895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa B. Rofel lrofel@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
              the University of California-Santa Cruz.  The project will study the changes in
              cultural identity of people in Macau, a Portuguese colony on the south coast of
              China, in light of the imminent reversion of the colony to China on 12/20/99. 
              In light of the approaching conversion into a Chinese city the diverse
              populations have been defining their cultural identity as a unique blend of
              Portuguese and Chinese cultures.  The specific questions the project will study
              are how changing forms of transnational mobility and identity give new meanings
              to old colonial social categories, and how, when, and for whom culture itself
              has become a meaningful category.  The student will interview four groups in
              Macau: people building the Macau Museum of History (which will define Macau's
              unique heritage); students, teachers and administrators from two middle schools
              (engaged in transmitting the local culture across generations as well as
              dealing with the history of colonialism); members of neighborhood associations
              and native-place organizations (concerned about defining and maintaining local
              traditions); and residents of Macau who are returning to their hometowns in
              China.  The student will collect life histories, conduct participant
              observation, and engage in formal interviews on the subject of changing
              identity.  In addition the student will travel to Beijing to interview members
              of the Hong Kong and Macau affairs office about policy issues and to conduct
              archival research on the history of Chinese-Macau-Portugal relations.   This
              research is important because it will advance our understanding of a global
              process of transnational and local political cultural identity formation
              through this unique case of political change.  Cultural identities are involved
              in many cases of national and international crises (e.g., the former Yugoslavia
              or central Africa), where ideas of race, nation, Diaspora, city, colony and
              civilization are hotly contested and not mutually exclusive.  This case study
              will provide valuable comparative information to help understand these
              contemporary processes.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
