Title       : Ostwald Ripening in Elastically Stressed Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2001     
File        : a9707073

Award Number: 9707073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519079             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Voorhees p-voorhees@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9707073  Voorhees    Interfacial energy is the primary driving force for the 
              precipitate coarsening processing metal alloys in the  absence of elastic
              stresses.  As a result, the average  particle size increases monotonically with
              time, and large  particles grow at the expense of small particles.  In 
              contrast, in the presence of elastic stress, particles can  undergo inverse
              coarsening where small particles grow at the  expense of large particles, and
              large-scale particle  migration occurs in the solid.  Complete stabilization of
               the two-phase mixture with respect to coarsening may be  possible.  In this
              research the coarsening process is  examined in elastically stressed solids
              both experimentally  and theoretically.  The experimental effort focuses on two
               major unexplored aspects of the coarsening process in  elastically-stressed
              solids:  (1) the kinetics of the  coarsening over a wide range of average
              particle sizes, from  small average particle sizes, where the interfacial
              energy  is the dominant energy in the system, to large particle  sizes, where
              the elastic stress is the dominant energy in  the system, and (2) the
              three-dimensional morphology and  spatial arrangement of particles in the l ate
              stages of  coarsening.  The theoretical effort is directed toward  predicting
              the evolution of a statistically large system of  particles where the particle
              morphologies and locations  evolve in a manner that is consistent with the
              elastic and  diffusion fields in the system.  This effort should allow  the
              determination of statistically averaged quantities such  as the exponents and
              amplitudes of the temporal power laws  that describe the coarsening kinetics as
              well as the  development of the microstructure during coarsening.  %%%  The
              theory will be used to predict the coarsening kinetics  using parameters that
              will be measured in the experiments.  The theory will be sufficiently realistic
              that the  predictions can serve as a guide to the development of 
              coarsening-resistant coherent alloys.  * **
