Title       : CAA: Identification of Host Factors Regulating the Intra- and Intercellular
               Movement of Bipartite Geminiviruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9707580

Award Number: 9707580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sondra G. Lazarowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9707580  Lazarowitz    Viral-encoded movement proteins act to allow a plant
              virus to cross the barrier of the plant cell wall and systemically infect the
              host plant.  Understanding the function of movement proteins is essential for
              defining the stages of pathogenesis in plant virus infections and devising
              strategies to engineer disease-resistant plants.  Movement proteins also
              provide a unique approach to defining pathways of intracellular and
              intercellular transport in plants.  This laboratory's investigation of the two
              movement proteins, BL1 and BR1, encoded by the bipartite geminivirus squash
              leaf curl virus (SqLCV) have shown that the two proteins have distinct
              functions and act in a cooperative manner to move the viral single strand
              (ss)DNA genome.  BR1 is a nuclear shuttle protein that binds the viral ssDNA
              genome and moves it into and out of the nucleus.  BL1 is a cytoplasmic trap for
              BR1, providing directionality to movement by trapping BR1-genome complexes in
              the cytoplasm and directing these to across the cell wall, apparently in
              association with tubules derived from the endoplasmic reticulum.  The studies
              from this laboratory further suggest that the interaction of BL1 and BR1 may be
              regulated through posttranslational phosphorylation of both movement proteins. 
              The proposed studies, to be done during a sabbatical leave at the Scripps
              Research Institute, are designed to directly investigate the role of
              posttranslational phosphorylation in the interaction of BL1 and BR1, and to
              explore the feasibility of developing a permeabilized tobacco cell system for
              in vitro studies on nuclear export using BR1 as a model nuclear shuttling
              protein.  The phosphorylation studies will be done in the laboratory of Dr.
              Jeff Harper; the attempt to develop a permeabilized plant cell system for
              investigating nuclear export will be done with the advice and guidance of Dr.
              Larry Gerace.  The specific goals are to: (1) identify in vivo sites of
              phosphorylation in BL1 and BR1 by electrospray mass spectrometry  sequencing;
              (2) test whether BL1 and BR1 are in vitro substrates for calcium-dependent
              calmodulin-independent kinases prevalent in plants, or for other kinases; (3)
              demonstrate in vitro whether BL1 and BR1 directly bind each other and the
              effects of phosphorylation on this interaction; and (4) explore the feasibility
              of developing a permeabilized tobacco plant cell system for investigating
              nuclear export using BR1 as a model nuclear shuttle protein.      Many plant
              viruses gain entry to the plant at points on the surface of the plant, and are
              subsequently spread systemically from cell to cell through the plant by
              intercellular movement through channels in the plant cell walls.  The viruses
              contain their own "movement proteins" encoded by their viral genomes which
              facilitate the movement of viral particles or genetic material from the nucleus
              to the cytoplasm within a cell and from cell to cell within a plant.  Dr.
              Lazarowitz has been studying the movement proteins of the Squash Leaf Curl
              Virus.  The proposed studies will provide Dr. Lazarowitz with essential new
              biochemical and biophysical skills to study the regulation of protein function
              and protein:protein interactions, and will allow her to do pilot studies to
              develop a permeabilized plant cell system to investigate nuclear export in
              vitro.  These techniques are essential for defining the functions of BL1 and
              BR1.  Importantly, these new skills and systems will allow her to redirect her
              research program into two exciting new areas:  (1) biochemical studies to
              define the pathways by which plant cells direct molecules to the wall, and
              regulate the formation and functioning of channels in the cell wall; and (2)
              basic studies on the mechanism of nuclear export.  The techniques and
              intellectual perspective that she will acquire during this sabbatical leave
              will enhance both her own research capabilities and the training she can
              provide to her students and postdoctoral fellows.  ***
