Title       : Evolution of a Multigene Family: Mhc Class II Genes in Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9707548

Award Number: 9707548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott V. Edwards sedwards@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9707548  Edwards  The Mhc (major histocompatibility complex) is a group of
              genes -- a multigene family -- that help defend vertebrates, including humans,
              against parasites and infectious disease. In humans and other mammals, various
              groups of Mhc genes exist, known as families and subfamilies.  The most well
              known of these are called class I and class II.  There are 3-5 class II genes
              in most mammals; these are very distinct from one another, as indicated by the
              large number of differences one can find between sequences of their DNA.   By
              contrast, the class II genes of birds appear to be much more similar to one
              another, i.e., less diverse than those of mammals.  This similarity is puzzling
              because diversity among Mhc genes is a major way in which vertebrates are
              thought to be able to recognize the diversity of infectious agents in nature. 
              It suggests there may be less diversity among genes in birds than in mammals,
              despite presumably similar needs for protection against parasites.  This
              research will help characterize the similarities and differences among the
              class II genes in 5 divergent lineages of birds in order to determine whether
              they have remained distinct as in mammals (the divergent evolution model), or
              have become similar (homogenized) to one another (the concerted evolution
              model). These two models can be distinguished by the pattern of phylogenetic
              relationships of the different bird genes to one another. Class II genes from
              several songbird species will be isolated and the sequences of these genes will
              be aligned and compared phylogenetically. The presence of pseudogenes will
              suggest yet a third model of multigene family evolution, namely the 'birth and
              death' model. Determining which of these models describes the evolution of Mhc
              class II genes in birds will help indicate whether the mammalian Mhc is unique
              in its pattern of evolution, or whether bird Mhc is also characterized by this
              pattern.   Understanding the pattern of multigene family evolution will help
              yield insig ht into how the genomes of vertebrates evolve. Because Mhc genes
              are important for resistance to disease, understanding the mechanisms
              diversifying bird Mhc genes could also be important for conservation of
              endangered species and for increasing our ability to manipulate disease
              susceptibility in humans.
