Title       : Integration of Maximum Likelihood Paternity Analysis with Quantitative Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1997      
File        : a9707722

Award Number: 9707722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Meagher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9707722  Meagher  Paternity analysis and quantitative genetic analysis both
              have proven to be effective tools for studying the evolutionary dynamics of
              contemporary populations.  A large number of recent studies have incorporated
              these methodologies on one level or another.  One of the ongoing problems in
              applying quantitative genetic approaches, however, lies in obtaining precise
              estimates of quantitative genetic parameters, such as additive genetic
              variation and genetic correlations.  Such estimates have been obtained for a
              limited number of species, primarily short-lived organisms that can be readily
              bred under controlled conditions and with crossing designs over two or more
              generations.    A short-cut often used for long-lived organisms is to make
              measurements on field-collected progeny, typically grouped into maternal
              sibships.  Because investigators do not usually know whether individuals within
              maternal sibships are related as half-sibs (different fathers) or full-sibs
              (the same father), such maternal sibships provide estimates that are confounded
              with maternal and dominance effects to an unmeasured and unknown degree.  These
              estimates are thus only gross approximations to additive genetic variance
              values.  Statistical advances in genetic-marker based paternity analysis over
              the past decade have made it feasible to determine the underlying paternal
              sibship structure of field-collected progeny in considerable detail.  The goal
              of this project is to integrate maximum likelihood methods for paternity
              analysis with maximum likelihood estimation of quantitative genetic parameters.
              In this way, more complete information about genealogical relationships within
              field-collected progeny can be brought to bear, and evolutionary studies of
              natural populations substantively enhanced.
