Title       : Low Density Supersonic Plasma Jet Synthesis of Thin Films of Refractory and Wide
               Band-Gap Nitrides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2001     
File        : a9707923

Award Number: 9707923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247240             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Cappelli cap@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1775,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Cappelli  CTS-9707923        This is a combined experimental and
              modelling study oriented   toward an efficient process for the synthesis of
              advanced materials in the nitride family.  A supersonic plasma jet generated by
              an arc-heated flow and expanded to low densities provides a large flux of
              energetic dissociated (atomic) nitrogen into which a wide variety of reactants
              (such as gallium trichloride, aluminum trichloride, methane, or boron
              trichloride) are injected to generate a reacting flow from which products
              condence onto a substrate to form films, coatings, or epitaxial layers.  The
              ability to apply a controlled electrical bias to the substrate provides an
              added variable to influence film structure and properties.  The project
              includes modelling of reactant injection and subsequent decomposition in the
              plume; modelling of ion transport through the plasma sheath surrounding the
              substrate; development of empirical heterogeneous models of film growth;
              measurement of concentratures of critical gas-phase species during film
              deposition by optical absorption spectroscopy; measurement of concentrations
              and energies of a broader range of neutral and ionic radicals by molecular-beam
              mass spectrometry; and correlation of vapor-phase properties to film structure
              as ascertained by infrared absorption (IR) spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy,
              X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and near-edge
              X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (NEXAFS).  Optical and mechanical
              properties of the deposited films are also measured.    This study addresses
              the synthesis of a number of nitrides that form the basis of "space-age"
              ceramics.  These include cubic boron nitride (c-BN), carbon nitride (C3 N4),
              gallium nitride (GaN), aluminum nitride (AlN), and the mixed aluminum/gallium
              nitrides.  The unusual mechanical, electrical, and optical properties of these
              materials make them attractive for many applications, but their wide use is
              inhibited by the lack of an economic method of s ynthesis.
