Title       : CAA: Differential Gene Expression Related to Calcium Oxalate Formation in Grape
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9707817

Award Number: 9707817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Alice Webb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In most higher plants, certain cells become specialized to accumulate calcium
              and precipitate it as crystalline calcium oxalate.  These cells appear to
              function in bulk regulation of calcium by sequestering excess calcium, thereby
              reducing levels of free ionic calcium within the plant.  Plant cells that
              sequester calcium oxalate exhibit distinct structural and biochemical
              differences as they differentiate for this role.  Dr. Webb's research goals
              focus on understanding what stimulates plant cells to develop for this
              specialized function, and how the cell controls the crystallization process. 
              The primary objective of her current research is the application of molecular
              approaches to identify genes that are differentially expressed at early stages
              in the development of crystal-forming cells.  Molecular studies will be
              initiated with two tissues in grape, endosperm and root cortex, which have
              contrasting patterns of crystal morphology and development.  Differentially
              expressed genes will be identified using mRNA differential display to compare
              distinct populations of mRNA from each of these tissues.  Messages from
              endosperm will be compared at selected developmental stages, and those from
              roots after manipulating calcium nutrition to alter crystal development.  After
              differential expression of selected cDNAs is confirmed, they will be sequenced
              and compared to known sequences in computer databases.  Full-length cDNA clones
              will be isolated and characterized.  Clones that have potential roles in
              calcium transport, oxalate metabolism, or vacuole function will be of
              particular interest.  To identify genes specifically expressed in crystal
              idioblasts, the cellular localization of expression will also be determined for
              selected cDNAs using in situ hybridization.  These studies will form the basis
              for future research to determine how expression of particular genes and gene
              products are important in calcium oxalate crystallization and the
              differentiation of crystal-forming cells.  Correlated studies will  examine the
              structural development of crystal-forming cells in grape roots during their
              differentiation.  A variety of approaches will be explored using scanning
              confocal microscopy to observe unique features of these cells.  A primary
              objective in this work will be to examine the development of the membrane
              systems that compartmentalize calcium oxalate crystals within the vacuole.  All
              of the research to be conducted under this Career Advancement Award emphasizes
              activities and techniques that are new to Dr. Webb and will significantly
              enhance her research and advisory capabilities.
