Title       : Synaptic Competition During CNS Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  1998  
File        : a9707091

Award Number: 9707091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence F. Kromer                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Sosa-Llorens masosa@neurobio.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Med Sci
	      G P O Box 5067
	      San Juan, PR  00901    809/753-5353

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,9283,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Sosa  IBN-9707091    It is known that growing neurons and their axons can
              sense their way towards a specific target by 'reading' a variety of guidance
              cues that they encounter in their terrain along the way.  Once the terminal
              branch of a neuron reaches the area where it is going to 'settle' it needs to
              establish connections, known as synapses, with certain neurons and not others. 
              The mechanisms by which neuronal terminals ultimately sort themselves out
              within a maze of thousands of possible interconnections at a specific area are
              not well understood yet.  A phenomenon that plays a role in this sorting out is
              that of competition between neurons synapsing with a common target cell.  The
              strength of synaptic between neurons is modified when other competing synapses
              are also present.  This phenomenon has been observed in the peripheral and
              central nervous system of the cockroach will be used as a model to study
              synaptic competition between sensory neurons that form permanent connections
              with the same target interneuron.  A mutant strain in which the effects of a
              single additional neuron on a previously formed connection can be assessed will
              be used to determine if the presence of the additional neuron affects how the
              points of contact between the sensory neurons and their target are distributed
              and whether the additional competing neuron is preprogrammed to be weaker or
              becomes weaker as a result of its timing of arrival relative to other neurons. 
              The investigator will also attempt to mimic the phenomenon of synaptic
              competition between mammalian neurons grown in culture to try determine
              specifically what the involved neurons are actually competing for.  Results
              from this project will not only further our understanding of how synapses
              develop and how the complex circuitry of the brain and spinal cord is
              ultimately established, but will also be of relevance in understanding recovery
              of function following injury to the nervous system, since synaptic competition
              is also observed as neurons rege nerate.
