Title       : Workshop in Recursion Theory and Complexity Theory to be held in Kazan, Russia
               in July, 1997
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9707156

Award Number: 9707156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steffen Lempp lempp@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:  The proposal is to support travel by U. S. scientists to a one-week
              workshop in computability theory to be held in Kazan, Russia, in July 1997, to
              be organized by Profs. Marat Arslanov (Kazan State University) and Sergei
              Goncharov (Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk Branch) as well as Steffen
              Lempp (University of Wisconsin-Madison) and Robert Soare (University of
              Chicago).  The proposed workshop (to be held jointly and at the same location
              as a workshop in complexity theory, organized by Profs. Razborov and Ablayev)
              is the first meeting of its kind, designed to allow close contact between
              approximately thirty Russian and thirty scientists from the U. S. and other
              Western countries.   Computability theory, the study of unsolvable problems in
              mathematics, is a well-established branch of mathematical logic, and is
              particularly strongly represented in the United States and Russia.  For obvious
              political reasons, interaction between the two countries in this area has been
              quite limited in the past.  Research interests have also developed in somewhat
              different directions within the field;  e. g., the emphasis in Russia is on
              applications of computability theory to algebra, whereas in the United States,
              classical computability theory is more dominant.  On the other hand, close
              connections between the various directions obviously exist, as is evidenced by
              the small amount of cooperative research already taking place.  While the
              political barriers have by now mostly disappeared, severe financial
              difficulties have proven to be almost as great an obstacle to mutual
              cooperation in the field.  It thus appears that the only way to organize a
              meeting including a large number of Russians is to organize one within Russia,
              cutting travel expenses for Russian participants and counting on the
              non-Russian participants to be able to raise travel funds more easily.
