Title       : Closing the Global Water Cycle in Fully-Coupled Climate System Models:
               Terrestrial Hydrology and River Transport for the NCAR CSM Land Component
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9707953

Award Number: 9707953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129689             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Vorosmarty charles.vorosmarty@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,1303,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9617980         ATM-9707953         ATM-Supplement UCAR CA  
              Famiglietti, James  Vorosmarty, Charles Schimel, David  University of Texas
              University of       National Center for                        New Hampshire   
                 Atmospheric Research                        Closing the Global Water Cycle
              in Fully-Coupled Climate System  Models: Terrestrial Hydrology and River
              Transport for the NCAR CSM  Land Component    The global hydrological cycle
              plays a central role in the  interactive  functioning of the Earth's climate. 
              However, the  current representation of the hydrological cycle in GCMs is 
              inadequate to properly characterize its important role and  interactions within
              the climate system.  A critical shortcoming is  that the global water cycle is
              not closed so that the land and  oceans remain uncoupled, i.e. river runoff
              from the continents is  not added as an input to the oceans.  The purpose of
              this research  is to close the global hydrological cycle in the CSM under 
              development at NCAR by incorporating horizontal transport of water  across the
              continents (i.e river transport) into its land  component.  A grid-scale land
              surface parameterization will be  coupled to algorithms for subgrid-scale
              runoff generation and an  explicit representation of global river networks to
              accurately  route river flow across the continents to the oceans.  We refer to 
              this coupled land parameterization - subgrid algorithm - river  transport
              scheme as a Global Land Hydrology Model (GLHM). The board  scope of this work
              includes the development and testing of a GLHM  which comprehensively models
              the cycling of water over and through  the continental and surfaces; coupling
              this model to the CSM to  link the land and the oceans; and using the CSM to
              improve our  predictive understanding of the role of the global hydrological 
              cycle in the Earth's climate system.  Specific near-term objectives  are to:
              develop a prototype version of the GLHM from existing or  simplified model
              components; test the ability  of the prototype GLHM  to reproduce observed
              continental hydroclimatology; and to perform  initial coupled model experiments
              to determine the effect of  closing the global water cycle on CSM simulations. 
              Specific  contributions of this work to the NCAR (or any other) CSM effort 
              include: conservation of fresh water balance simulation due to  water cycle
              closure; computation of physically realistic river  hydrographs along
              continental margins for input into ocean, sea  ice, and later, biogeochemical
              transport models; the ability to  simulate subgrid soil moisture distributions
              and subgrid fractions  of inundated floodplain, both of which are intimately
              linked to the  generation of grid-scale water, energy, and biogeochemical
              fluxes;  an improved ability to validate CSM performance since streamflow is 
              the most observable and well documented of the land surface fluxes;  and an
              improved framework for understanding the global water cycle  and its complex
              interactions within the Earth's climate system.   This is the first attempt at
              a coordinated effort to build a state-  of-the-science GLHM that explicitly
              resolves the vertical and  horizontal circulation of terrestrial water for the
              specific  purpose of closing the global water cycle in CSMs.
