Title       : CAA: Technology Transfer: Bringing the Tools of Molecular Biology to an
               Ecological Genetics Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1997      
File        : a9707679

Award Number: 9707679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Kalisz kalisz@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9125,9169,9222,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Susan Kalisz   9707679 CAA             Measuring dispersal or the rate
              of movement of individuals within and among populations in nature remains a
              challenge for ecologists and population geneticists because of the difficulty
              in detecting individual movements.  This difficulty is   exaggerated for many
              plant species, in which the dispersing stages are small, such as pollen or
              seed. However, our ability to quantify dispersal or migration within and among
              plant populations is central to understanding many population and regional
              processes.  In particular, the extent to which populations or sub-populations
              are connected via migration of pollen or seed will determine 1) the extent to
              which different   populations share genes in common and 2) the extent to which
              local extinctions are balanced by recolonization from other populations within
              a region, and 3) the extent to which local adaptation will occur.  Emerging DNA
              technologies now make it   possible to use genetic markers to detect migration
              and outcrossing events with greater accuracy.  A powerful new molecular
              technique for ecological and population genetics, that of making and screening
              genomic libraries for microsatellite DNA repeats and microsatellite DNA
              polymorphism analysis will be learned by the PI.  Microsatellites   are short,
              tandemly repeated simple sequences, one to six base pairs in length, that are
              highly polymorphic for repeat number. Amplification of the microsatellite
              region by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) results in fully penetrant,
              Mendelian-inherited,   codominant markers that can be precisely identified by
              length. Since these markers are allelic, microsatellite data are directly
              applicable to population genetic models and analysis.  One of the greatest
              advantages of microsatellite DNA markers is their   extreme variability
              (typically 10-20 alleles/locus) that can be used to characterize population
              structure, determine outcrossing rates and evaluate parentage by paternity
              exclusion.  This award will facilitate al l facets of microsatellite library
              production,   cloning, screening and scoring: in essence, the transfer of this
              PCR-based technology to my program. These techniques will be learned from  Dr.
              M. Ashley who has developed microsatellite markers for several plant and animal
              systems in her laboratory.         The analysis of microsatellite markers will
              enhance current research and future development in four distinct areas:  1)
              Environmental variance typical in natural populations causes local extinctions
              to occur. Such local population extinction   should select for bet-hedging
              traits which restore populations, both demographically and genetically.  With
              respect to local extinctions, we hypothesize that plant populations which exist
              within a matrix of other population of the same species should   experience
              selection for seed dispersal.  In contrast, isolated populations should
              experience selection for seed dormancy, since isolated population cannot
              receive nor cannot export successful migrants. One goal is to quantify the
              relationship between seed   dispersal, seed dormancy and population genetic
              structure. Microsatellite markers would allow the assessment of the extent to
              which the study populations of Collinsia verna are genetically isolated
              entities (and express seed dormancy phenotypes) or exchange migrants via seed
              dispersal (and lack seed dormancy). 2)  Most models of the evolution of selfing
              consider the negative genetic effects of inbreeding depression as the critical
              factors in mating system evolution.  However, a new model demonstrates that
              environmental variance which prohibits pollinators from visiting flowers during
              some portion of the flowering season can be more important than inbreeding
              depression in driving the evolution and maintenance of self pollination
              mechanisms.  We   have demonstrated that C. verna has high levels of
              outcrossing and temporal separation of male and female phases but is capable of
              selfing.  Microsatellite markers would allow us to test this model by conductin
              g paternity analysis and within flower   outcrossing rates.
