Title       : RPG: Maternal Regulation in Danio rerio (zebrafish): Analysis of Polyadenylation
               During Oogenesis and Early Embryogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1999      
File        : a9707479

Award Number: 9707479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia L. O'Connell MOCONNEL@TCNJ.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The College of New Jersey
	      P.O. Box 7718
	      Ewing, NJ  086280718    609/771-3255

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Critical to an understanding of the maternal regulation of vertebrate
              embryogenesis is an analysis of the mechanisms used to translationally activate
              stored maternal mRNAs. Analysis of these mechanisms can expose additional
              maternal regulators, for the molecules involved in triggering the translation
              of stored maternal mRNAs by definition play central roles in regulatory
              cascades. One such mechanism was discovered in mouse and frog that involves the
              cytoplasmic polyadenylation of specific maternal mRNAs. While initially
              observed in the oocytes and early embryos of several vertebrate species, it is
              now clear that cytoplasmic polyadenylation is also required for the temporal
              activation of the bicoid, Toll, and torso mRNAs in Drosophila embryos. The
              analysis of cytoplasmic polyadenylation in Drosophila, a genetically tractable
              system, has led to the discovery of mutants in which this mechanism is
              impaired, While these studies should lead to the identification of additional
              molecules that play a role in the cytoplasmic polyadenylation pathway,
              molecules that are unique to vertebrate embryogenesis will not be identified.  
               In this proposal, the PI outlines experiments directed toward identifying
              novel maternal regulators in vertebrate embryogenesis, using the zebrafish
              system. Using a PCR-based assay that was originally designed to follow
              cytoplasmic polyadenylation in mouse and Drosophila, changes in the
              polyadenylation status of a series of known maternal mRNAs in zebrafish will be
              followed.  The results of this screen will set the stage for future research
              aimed at my long-term goal of identifying novel maternal regulatory factors in
              zebrafish.
