Title       : Numerical and Observational Studies of Tornadic Supercells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1999   
File        : a9707815

Award Number: 9707815
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael I. Biggerstaff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis Wicker  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9707815  Wicker        While progress has been made over the last decade on 
              understanding the  dynamics of tornadoes and their parent storms, much is still
               unknown concerning the  factors that cause tornado genesis and that control
              the intensity  and longevity of any   given tornado.  In this research, the
              Principal Investigator will  investigate how the  large scale environment
              conditions (e.g. wind shear and buoyancy)  control the  intensity and longevity
              of tornadoes within supercell  thunderstorms.  This work  builds on and is a
              logical follow-up to the Principal  Investigator's previous research  on the
              development of low-level rotation and tornado genesis within  supercell 
              thunderstorms.        Two separate lines of research will be pursued.  First,
              the  Principal  Investigator's current research will be extended down to the 
              tornado scale in an  effort to advance understanding of tornadogenesis. The
              previous  work has resulted in  refinements to the Rotunno and Klemp paradigm
              for origins of  low-level rotation in  supercells. The Principal Investigator s
              new theory demonstrates  the dynamical role  the inflow environment's
              near-surface horizontal vorticity has on  mesocyclogenesis  and can be used to
              predict the near-surface vertical wind shear  profiles which are  optimal for
              the generation of strong low-level mesocyclones within  supercells.   Extension
              of this work includes examining whether tornado-scale  circulations are 
              directly related to the mesocyclone circulation, as well as a study  to
              understanding  the role of shear and buoyancy in determining the spatial scales
               and magnitude of  the low-level circulation and convergence needed for the
              generation  of tornadoes.        Second, an attempt will be made to explicitly
              model a  particular supercell and  tornado observed during the Verification of
              Origins of Rotation in  Tornadoes  Experiment.  This part of the study will
              provide a much needed  evaluation of the  current state of cloud simulation
              realism and hopefully identif y  specific aspects of  convective scale modeling
              which need to be improved.        Potential benefits from this research are
              many.  Aside from  increasing basic  understanding of storm and tornado
              dynamics, the operational  community will  benefit from this research. 
              Understanding which particular  environmental profiles of  wind shear,
              temperature and moisture that are most conducive for  tornadoes will  enable
              operational forecasters to pinpoint and focus on small  regions where the 
              conditions are favorble for the formation of intense tornadic  storms.  By more
              fully  understanding the dynamics associated with these supercells and  their
              tornadoes,  improved severe weather forecasts and Doppler radar observations 
              can then be used  more effectively to forecast and detect tornado formation and
              warn  the public.  ***
