Title       : CAREER: Enhancement of Minority Research Opportunities Through the Full
               Integration of Research and Teaching Experiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a9707644

Award Number: 9707644
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Jackson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9707644  Jackson    Prostaglandins are a family of cyclic fatty acids which are
              potent mediators of key physiological processes in a large variety of
              organisms. Prostaglandins are continuously synthesized in cell membranes by the
              sequential action of the key regulatory enzymes phospholipase A2 (PLA2) and/or
              phospholipase C (PLAC), and cyclooxygenase (COX).  PLA2 /PLAC mediate the
              release of arachidonic acid from the sn-2 position of membrane phospholipids. 
              COX incorporates two molecules of oxygen into arachidonic acid concomitant with
              the cyclization of the carbon chain to produce prostaglandin.  Two genes are
              known to encode COX, a constitutive COX1 gene and an inducible, early-response
              COX2 gene.  This research will determine the molecular mechanisms that regulate
              prostaglandin synthesis at the level of the COX1 gene promoter and COX1 mRNA. 
              The education portion of this project includes using this research program to
              further develop the Biotechnology Program for non-traditional and minority
              students at Massachusetts Bay Community College, to develop a related Marine
              Biotechnology Program involving Massachusetts Bay Community College, the New
              England Aquarium in Boston, and The University of the Amazon in Brazil; and to
              develop a science enrichment program for primary school students and teachers
              in the Boston Public School system.  %%%  Prostaglandins are a family of cyclic
              fatty acids which are potent mediators of key physiological processes in a
              large variety of  species. This research will determine the molecular
              mechanisms that regulate prostaglandin synthesis at the level of the COX1 gene.
               The education portion of this project includes using this research program to
              further develop the Biotechnology Program for non-traditional and minority
              students at Massachusetts Bay Community College; to develop a related Marine
              Biotechnology Program involving Massachusetts Bay Community College, the New
              England Aquarium in Boston, and The University of the Amazon in Brazil; and to
              develop a science  enrichment program for primary school students and teachers
              in the Boston Public School system.  ***
