Title       : Research and Training in Vision and Computational Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1997    
File        : a9707006

Award Number: 9707006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amir H. Assadi assadi@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Assadi  9707006       Visual perception of surfaces is crucial for 3D object 
              recognition.  All surfaces in natural scenes are endowed with  texture.  In
              this project, the investigator develops new  algorithms to estimate shape
              (geometric characteristics of  surfaces) from texture in natural and synthetic
              scenes.  The new  geometric models use piecewise Riemannian foliations, in the 
              sense of differential topology, with additional structure.  Given  a
              3D-textured surface, not necessarily piecewise smooth, one  constructs a
              foliation whose leaves form a one-parameter family  of 2D-textured and
              piecewise smooth mathematical surfaces  approximating the given object. 
              Together with an objective  function defined on their leaves, such 2D-textured
              foliations are  fundamental geometric objects that model 3D-textured surfaces
              in  the world.  One can use algorithms to recover shape from texture  for the
              piecewise smooth leaves, e.g. curvature and slant.  Several scene-based methods
              are explored to construct textured  foliations, ranging from analytic (e.g.
              Hamilton-Jacobi  equations) and topological techniques (e.g. integrable 
              distributions) to statistical estimation methods.  The  psychophysical
              experiments to test the theory and compare  different algorithms are explored
              with colleagues who are  neuroscience experimentalists.  In particular, the
              objective  function can be numerically approximated based on psychophysical 
              data.  The new models are applied to perception of symmetry.  The  problem of
              modeling computational strategies employed by the  visual cortex to estimate
              shape from texture, and their  comparison with the new computational
              algorithms, is pursues.  The  investigator outlines a concrete training program
              and research  collaboration with his senior colleagues in vision and 
              neuroscience at UC Berkeley in order to achieve the cognitive and 
              computational objectives of the project.       How do we see?  This simple
              question does not have a simple  answer.  Vision is a complex series of eve nts
              that begins when  light enters the eyes and ends with perception.  People are
              able  to discriminate between objects of different size, contrast and  color
              with precision.  They can estimate curvature and orientation  of surfaces with
              varying roughness and multitudes of texture, as  well as describe within short
              time intervals properties of  surfaces such as symmetry and similarity to other
              familiar  objects.  The human visual system easily outperforms any man-made 
              machine.  Decades of research in vision demonstrate the wisdom of  the
              following approach: Key insights generally come from models  that are
              well-suited for exploring a specific research question.  Geometric models
              coupled with computational techniques have  formed a cornerstone of modern
              theories of biological as well as  robot vision, and of their diverse
              applications.  In this project,  the principal investigator and his colleagues
              establish a new  link between advanced geometric theories in pure mathematics 
              (theory of foliations from differential topology) and visual  perception and
              estimation of shape of surfaces in natural and  synthetic environments.  Among
              applications of the theory, one  could mention: robot motion planning and
              navigation of manless  vehicles in rough terrain or unreachable environments;
              visual  shape estimation of images of materials obtained by atomic force 
              microscopy in scientific research and design of advanced  materials; long-term
              computerized inspection of surfaces subject  to ballistic deposition and
              erosion in environmental studies and  ecology; and computational inspection of
              large databases of  images from infrared radio astronomy in order to locate
              specific  features.  Just as the neurons in human visual system perform  their
              tasks in parallel, the above-mentioned theory lends itself  to parallel
              processing implementation.
