Title       : Fabrication and Characterization of Multilayer Nanostructures of Manganites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9707687

Award Number: 9707687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qi Li qli@phys.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9161,9221,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9707687 Li  This Research Planning Grant(RPG) addresses synthesis and processing
              issues in the fabrication of trilayer tunnel junctions and multilayer
              nanostructures of manganites. Based on results of  magnetoresistance effects, a
              large spin-polarized tunneling effect is expected in manganites because of the
              large degree of spin polarization in these materials.  The approach is to use
              artificially fabricated trilayer junctions and multilayer structures as
              tailored systems with controlled junction parameters to systematically study
              the phenomena. The objective during the planning period is to study the
              feasibility of fabricating and characterizing small-area multilayer tunnel
              junctions using the National Nanofabrication Facilities at Penn State.
              Principal research areas to be pursued are: 1) epitaxial growth of artificial
              trilayer junction structures consisting of two manganite layers separated by a
              thin insulating barrier layer with sharp interfaces and low leakage. Different
              insulator layers will be tested and the structural and interfacial properties
              of the junction will be characterized; 2) lithographically pattern the junction
              into small with the goal of achieving single magnetic domain in both manganite
              layers with the magnetic moment in each layers antiparallel; 3) study
              spin-dependent magneto-transport and magnetic properties of the junctions with
              different junction sizes, manganite layer thicknesses, and barrier layer
              materials and thicknesses. It is anticipated that the feasibility of the
              project will be ascertained, and a systematic study on the effect of
              spin-polarized tunneling in manganites, their relation with sample structures
              and parameters, and a comparison with theoretical models will follow. %%% The
              project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
              having technological relevance to electronics. These studies are important for
              greater understanding of spin-polarized transport in general, and the anomalous
              magnetoresistance effects in manganite thin  films and polycrystalline samples
              in particular. At the same time, the current research also addresses issues
              directly related to the technologies and therefore has direct impact on the
              potential application of the colossal magnetoresistance materials. ***
