Title       : Simultaneous In Situ Measurements within Polar Stratospheric Clouds of Particle
               Size, Number, Composition, Scattering Ratio, & of Gas Phase Concentrations of
               Nitric Acid & Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a9707520

Award Number: 9707520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179835             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Deshler deshler@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Important details concerning polar stratospheric ozone depletion are still
              required for a more complete quantitative understanding.  This is particularly
              true in the Arctic stratosphere where the loss of ozone is not as severe as in
              the Antarctic. The microphysics of the nucleation, growth, composition,
              sedimentation of particles in polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) is one of the
              critical areas for understanding Arctic ozone loss.  PSC particles provide
              sites for the heterogeneous chemistry required to activate chlorine, which then
              destroys ozone.  The pivotal role played by PSC particles is most evident in
              the Arctic when ozone loss is essentially modulated by temperature, a surrogate
              for PSCs, from year to year.  The frequency, duration, and timing of PSC
              occurrence determines to a large extent the amount of ozone loss.  Removing
              some of the present uncertainties concerning PSC formation temperatures,
              particle composition, and particle phase will permit more careful modeling of
              the amount of chlorine processed by PSCs.    This project is to collaborate on
              joint measurements of PSC characteristics during the Third European
              Stratospheric Experiment on Ozone.   The instruments will be flown onto one
              balloon gondola which will simultaneously measure, in situ, aerosol
              concentration, size, composition, depolarization, backscattering, and gas phase
              concentrations of nitric acid and water.    The investigation will focus on
              methods to infer particle index of refraction, which is a function of
              composition.  These joint measurements will be the first direct measurements of
              the complete thermodynamic environment in which PSC particles exist, coincident
              with a characterization of aerosol size, concentration, composition, phase, and
              optical properties.  These measurements should reveal the extent to which the
              measured PSCs are in thermodynamic equilibrium with their environment, which
              hydrates of HNO3 are formed, and the abundance of condensed HCI, an important
              species for chlorine activation.
