Title       : Phytoliths in the Flora of Ecuador: Methodology for Paleoenvironmental
               Reconstruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9707029

Award Number: 9707029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90571              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah M. Pearsall ANTHDMP@MIZZOUl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Deborah Pearsall and her students
              will construct diagnostic phytolith profiles for a variety of present day
              Equadorian vegetation communities. `Phytoliths` are microscopic silica forms
              which are produced by plants and which are eventually incorporated into the
              soil. Although a single species produces more than one phytolith form and few
              forms are unique to any single species, through analysis of phytolith
              assemblages preserved in the ground, it is often possible to identify the
              plants which were present. Phytolith analysis therefore constitutes an
              important tool for environmental reconstruction. For many years archaeologists
              have worked in Equador and attempted to understand how complex societies arose
              in this region. The country varies ecologically from the better watered
              Northern to drier Southern coast. From West to East vegetation zones change
              from arid coastline across the Andes to tropical Amazonian rainforest.
              Paleoecologists know that these zones shifted significantly in response to past
              climate changes and archaeologists wish to understand cultural change in
              relation to these natural phenomena. Dr. Pearsall's research will provide data
              to assist in this process. She and her students will establish two transects
              across Equador, one running North-South, the other East-West. Through analysis
              of already collected specimens as well as additional fieldwork they will define
              phytolith assemblages which correlate with specific environments and note the
              most important indicator types. On this basis it will then be possible to
              extract phytolith assemblages from old soils and reconstruct paleoenvironments.
               This work is important for several reasons. It will help to establish an
              environmental context to understand cultural change. It will also shed new
              light on long term human impact on the environment. Ecologists are uncertain
              about how humans who functioned prehistorically at technologically simple
              levels affected their surroundings. To what extent were rainforest boundaries
              and plant communities influenced by small scale slash and burn agriculture? 
              The data collected during this research will shed new light on this question.
              It will also establish a data base which will be widely used by archaeologists
              and natural scientists.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
