Title       : CAA: Molecular Endocrinology of Metamorphosis in Flatfish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9707716

Award Number: 9707716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62749              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Specker jspecker@gsosun1.gso.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator (PI) is a mid-career professor of oceanography
              specializing in comparative endocrinology of fishes. The PI's training in
              comparative endocrinology and position at the Graduate School of Oceanography,
              University of Rhode Island, enable the PI's laboratory to address two societal
              issues: (1) the urbanization of the coastal environment and the consequent
              potential impact of endocrine-disrupting chemicals on aquatic organisms, and
              (2) the collapse of marine fisheries and the unmet demand for seafood products.
              The PI's laboratory works on integrative organismal endocrinology and on
              comparative protein biochemistry, focusing now on the problems of vitellogenins
              in mouthbrooding fish, controlling the timing of metamorphosis in flatfish, and
              gastrointestinal differentiation in fish. The overall goal of the career
              advancement award is to acquire working knowledge in the area of molecular
              endocrinology during a research-oriented sabbatical leave at the University of
              Massachusetts. The proposed research aims to describe the spatial and temporal
              appearance of thyroid hormone receptors and retinoic acid receptors in flounder
              during metamorphosis. The PI will acquire familiarity with the techniques of
              RT-PCR-based differential display, generating molecular probes for receptors,
              in situ hybridization and dual-label in situ hybridization, and quantitative
              image analysis. Characterization of the molecular endocrinology of flounder
              metamorphosis provides a powerful foundation for examining responses to changes
              in the physical and chemical environment, including endocrine-disrupting
              chemicals. This working knowledge would strengthen the PI's service to agencies
              and journals in evaluating proposals and manuscripts and in outlining research
              initiatives; it would strengthen the teaching of endocrinology and physiology
              by permitting firsthand coverage of molecular endocrinology; and it would
              strengthen the role of the fish endocrinology laboratory in the new Coastal
              Institute where marine mo lecular oceanography is an organizing theme.
