Title       : Scattering and Predissociation Dynamics of Van der Waals Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9707670

Award Number: 9707670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henning H. Meyer hmeyer@hal.physast.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Henning Meyer of the University of Georgia is supported by the   Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program and the Office of   Multidisciplinary Activities to
              investigate the structure and dynamics of   van der Waals complexes using high
              resolution near infrared spectroscopy   in combination with counterpropagating
              pulsed molecular beam scattering.    The van der Waals complexes to be studied
              contain an infrared chromophore   and a monomer amenable to state-specific
              multiphoton ionization.  Thus   vibrational excitation of the monomer can
              result in predissociation of   the complex, and by detecting the fragments,
              Meyer will measure   fundamental and overtone cluster bands with rotational
              resolution.  From   these measurements, he will gain information on the
              fragment velocity and   angular momentum anisotropies as well as the state
              correlation, the   dissociation energy of the complex, and state-specific cross
              sections for   the monomers.  Ultimately, from these experiments he will derive
              the   multidimensional potential energy surface.  The PI will carry out a  
              parallel theoretical effort:  ab-initio electronic structure calculations   and
              quantum mechanical solutions to the bound state and scattering   problems.   
              The interest in molecular clusters has been motivated largely by the   prospect
              of developing a more detailed understanding of bulk matter   through the access
              to direct quantum specific information on finite sized   cluster systems. 
              Dimers are of particular importance as the first step   towards describing bulk
              material at a molecular level.  Their structure   and dynamics can be described
              in terms of a multidimensional potential   energy surface which is crucial to a
              variety of very active research   areas like the molecular modeling of solvent
              effects and biomolecules.    The concept of a potential energy surface is also
              the basis for the   theoretical description of bimolecular reactions and
              vibrational energy   transfer, and therefore it plays a key role in the
              modeling of such   diverse gas phase processes as combustion, atmospheric
              warming and   pollution due to the release of man-made substances.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
