Title       : Genetic Basis of Gender Expression in Silene vulgaris, a Gynodioecious plant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9707372

Award Number: 9707372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. McCauley david.e.mccauley@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9707372  McCauley    This project will investigate the genetic
              determinants of sex expression in natural populations of Silene vulgaris, a
              gynodioecious plant. In plants gynodioecy, or the presence of female and
              hermaphroditic individuals in the same population, is fairly common. Sex
              determination in gynodioecious plants is often a consequence of the interaction
              of genes in the cytoplasm that eliminate male function, and genes in the
              nucleus that restore it. The study of S. vulgaris will consist of two parts.
              First, a complex series of "tester" crosses will be conducted in order to
              characterize genetic diversity at the cytoplasmic and nuclear gene loci.
              Second, cytoplasmic molecular markers will be developed so that numerous
              individuals can be classified according to the male sterility types identified
              by the crosses. This will enable a rapid characterization of the genetic
              composition of populations. One observation that is often made of gynodioecious
              species is that the relative numbers of females and hermaphrodites (the sex
              ratio) can vary dramatically from place to place. One goal of the crosses and
              molecular studies is to understand the genetic basis for population to
              population variation in the sex ratio.   This will be one of just a few
              investigations of the genetics of gynodioecy in natural plant populations. The
              use of male sterility factors to manipulate the gender of economically
              important crop plants is an important tool in plant breeding, yet the
              phenomenon is not well understood in nature. In addition to potential benefits
              to plant breeders, this study will also be of value to the field of basic
              population genetics, in that it will contribute to an understanding of how
              genetic diversity is maintained within species.
