Title       : RPG: Characterization of Angiotensin II as a Potential Volume Transmitter in the
               Central Extended Amygdala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2000   
File        : a9707672

Award Number: 9707672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17741              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea M. Zardetto-Smith amzarsmi@creighton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Creighton University
	      2500 California Plaza
	      Omaha, NE  68178    402/280-2360

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zardetto-Smith  9707672    Synaptic transmission is the key to understanding the
              basic operation of the nervous system at a cellular level.  Without
              transmission, there is no direct communication between neurons.  The classical
              view of transmission is that of a chemical signal, referred to as a
              transmitter, released from one neuron which then diffuses to other neurons or
              target cells where it binds to a receptor and triggers a signal which excites,
              inhibits, or modulates cellular activity.  More recently, volume transmission
              which uses extracellular fluid pathways has been recognized an alternative form
              of interneuronal communication.   Volume transmission includes not only the
              diffusion of humoral factors through the extracellular fluid to their specific
              receptors on neurons or glial cells but also the diffusion of electrotonic
              signals along those pathways.   Neuropeptides, which are stored within large
              dense-cored vesicles in nerve terminals located near extracellular space,  may
              be key to understanding volume transmission.  Dr. Zardetto-Smith will use this
              Research Planning Grant to examine the role that the neuropeptide, angiotensin
              II, plays in volume transmission.  Angiotensin II is primarily known for
              mediation of the intake of water in response to depletion of the extracellular
              fluid content but it will also induce seeking out and ingestion of salty
              fluids.   Dr. Zardetto-Smith has designed a series of experiments to examine
              whether angiotensin II functions in a volume transmitter mode, possibly through
              interactions with specific GABAnergic neurons, under conditions which challenge
              body fluid homeostatis.  These findings will help us better understand the
              paradox resulting from the dissociation between the location of transmitters
              and their receptors in mediating interneuronal communication.  It will also
              provide new information on the neural regulation of sodium appetite which is
              very important given the significance of sodium in intracellular mechanisms
              that are essential for our survi val.
