Title       : Late Quaternary Ice Sheet Extent, Chronology, and Paleoceanography, East
               Greenland Margin/Denmark Strait: Implictions for the Arctic and North Alantic
               Oceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1999   
File        : a9707161

Award Number: 9707161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223707             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Jennings jenninga@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Andrews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Funding is requested to support research on sediment cores obtained from
              eastern Greenland during a joint USA/Norwegian research cruise.  The objectives
              of the proposal are to: 1) Document ice sheet/slope/deep-sea sediment transfers
              and interactions for the East Greenland/Denmark Strait margin over the last
              30ka; 2) Test different hypotheses for the extent of the East Greenland ice
              sheet's margin during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) and the timing of retreat;
              and 3) Develop and interpret high-resolution marine records (decadal to
              centuries time-scales) of changes in the character of the surface water (East
              Greenland Current) and bottom water (Arctic Intermediate Water) over at least
              the last 14ka, and how these data reflect paleoceanogrphic changes in the
              Arctic and North Atlantic Oceans.    The core on the shelf and slope are firmly
              placed in a seismic stratigraphic framework both from previous surveys and
              during core collection in 1996.  The choice of the core sites was designed to
              1) test two contrasting models for the extent of glacial ice on the
              south-central east Greenland margin during and since the LGM and to 2)
              investigate the paleoceanography and ice-sheet/ocean interactions across the
              Denmark Strait "gateway" between the Arctic and the North Atlantic over the
              interval of record (the last 30 ka). The extent of the East Greenland ice
              margin flanking Denmark Strait during the last glaciation is virtually unknown,
              yet this extent and the timing of deglaciation are important parameters for
              understanding the past changes in ocean circulation through the Denmark Strait,
              and the role of this ice margin in Heinrich events, meltwater spikes, and other
              abrupt climate changes during the glacial period.    The research thrust for
              the Holocene is to document paleoceanographic and glacial conditions in the
              fjords and on the shelf, and to compare these reconstructions with other
              paleoclimate data such as the ( 18( record from Renland ice core, and the
              "Little Ice Age" events under study from the t errestrial neoglacial record. 
              The results of these studies will help us to understand how, why, and how
              quickly the environment has changed in this region during the Holocene.
