Title       : CAA: Flagellar Beat Regulation in Chlamydomonas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1998    
File        : a9707268

Award Number: 9707268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50249              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beth F. Mitchell mitchell@maple.lemoyne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Le Moyne College
	      Le Moyne Heights
	      Syracuse, NY  132081322    315/446-2882

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9222,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9707268  Mitchell    This is a Career Advancement Award for Women Scientists and
              Engineers.  Eukaryotic flagella are complex organelles whose regulation is
              still only minimally understood.  Flagellar bending is based on the sliding of
              doublet microtubules driven by multiple dynein ATPase isozymes.  The radial
              spokes and central pair microtubules are axonemal structures which have been
              implicated in the regulation of flagellar beat.  This project is directed at
              extending ongoing studies on the regulation of dynein arm activity by axonemal
              protein kinases and phosphatases that are in turn controlled by the radial
              spoke - central pair complex.  The biflagellate alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
              is an excellent model system for studies on flagellar function, in part because
              it is well-suited for genetic analysis.  Extragenic suppressor mutations have
              been isolated which bypass the paralysis normally associated with the absence
              of the radial spokes or central pair microtubules.  Some of these suppressor
              mutations, which code for altered forms of outer arm dynein heavy chains, also
              result in a defect in a signal transduction pathway leading to flagellar
              quiescence.  The goal of this research is to begin analysis of the role of
              these outer arm dyneins in the regulation of flagellar beat and quiescence.  It
              is expected that this signal transduction pathway involves protein
              kinase/phosphatase activity, and the proposed experiments are designed to
              explore this possibility.  This award involves a one-year sabbatical leave
              during which experiments will be conducted in the laboratory of Dr. Winfield
              Sale at Emory University School of Medicine.  This collaborative effort will
              utilize previously isolated suppressor mutants in combination with techniques
              currently in use in Dr. Sale's lab, including videomicroscopic analysis of
              microtubule sliding rates and phosphoprotein characterization.  Increased
              understanding of regulatory cascades important in Chlamydomonas flagellar
              motility will also contribute to better u nderstanding of motility regulation
              in cilia and flagella of other organisms, and perhaps in cytoplasmic dynein
              motility systems as well.  A sabbatical leave will provide the PI with exposure
              to a dynamic research environment, including several individuals focusing on
              different aspects of flagellar regulation in Chlamydomonas.  In addition, the
              opportunity to attend research seminars on a regular basis, as well as to
              attend professional meetings will enhance the career advancement aspect of this
              award.    Flagella are whip-like appendages that propel motile eukaryotic cells
              as diverse as unicellular algae and mammalian spermatozoa.  The ability of
              these cells to swim smoothly and in appropriate response to environmental cues
              is critical to their survival and function.  The experiments to be performed
              during Dr. Mitchell's sabbatical will further our understanding of  the
              mechanism whereby flagella beat with a regular motion that results in smooth
              swimming.  ***
