Title       : RPG: Tactical Defensibility: Landmarks and Territorial Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9707464

Award Number: 9707464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17610              (Estimated)
Investigator: Perri K. Eason pkeaso01@ulkyvm.louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707464  Eason  Many animal species are territorial, with individuals defending 
              areas  against conspecifics. Territory owners incur costs from defending  the
              territory, but also benefits from the territory's resources;  benefits  must
              outweigh costs for defense to be feasible.  Previous work has  ignored  a
              characteristic of territories that may be critical in  determining the costs 
              of their owners:  tactical defensibility, or the relative  difficulty of 
              defending a particular site.  One factor that may be the primary  determinant 
              of defensibility is the presence or absence of landmarks in the  habitat. 
              Anecdotal reports from a wide variety of taxa (insects, fish,  reptiles, birds,
               and mammals) have suggested that animals use naturally occurring  and man-made
               features as territorial boundaries.  This common phenomenon has  received very
               little attention from scientists, and this study will address this  lapse. 
              The system to be studied is the territorial behavior of the cicada  killer wasp
              (Sphecius speciosus).  Males of this species defend  mating  territories on
              flat, featureless ground.  This species responds  strongly  to landmarks:  male
              wasps will move their territories so that the  boundaries coincide with
              landmarks, if landmarks such as dowels  are provided.  This study will
              determine the degree to which the size and shape  of  territories can be
              manipulated by introducing landmarks.  For  experiments,  grids will be
              constructed of dowels, and the size and shape of the  units  in the grid will
              be varied. Behavioral data will also be  collected.  The data obtained will be
              used to examine the effects of tactical  defensibility on defensive costs and
              male mating success in cicada  killers.  The results will provide information
              about the effects of habitat  heterogeneity on territory size and thus on the
              density of males.  Such data  are of value to theoretical ecologists and in
              addition will be of  practical  use to conservation biologists:  an
              understanding of how habitat  heteroge neity affects territorial species may
              enable wildlife  biologists  to create habitats that are more suitable to
              threatened or  economically  important species.
