Title       : Evolutionary Dynamics of Mitochondrial DNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9707676

Award Number: 9707676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Rand david_rand@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    9707676  Rand  The goal of the research program is to understand the
              evolutionary forces acting on variation in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA).  MtDNA is
              the most widely used genetic marker in population and evolutionary biology and
              it is generally assumed that the variation in mtDNA sequence is neutral, i.e.,
              is not altered by natural selection. However, a number of recent reports have
              shown that mtDNA evolution departs from various neutral models.  While
              non-neutral mtDNA evolution can compromise specific cases of evolutionary
              study, departures from neutral evolution offer opportunities to examine the
              variety of general evolutionary forces that can act on mtDNA itself, and on
              nuclear-cytoplasmic interactions.    The main question the investigator is
              studying is: Does natural selection operate differently on interactions between
              nuclear sex chromosomes and maternally inherited cytoplasmic genes (such as
              mitochondrial DNA) than on interactions between autosomes and mitochondrial DNA
              (where an autosome is a biparentally inherited non-sex chromosome). Theoretical
              models of cytonuclear population genetics show that selection on cytoplasmic
              chromosomes and autosomes cannot preserve genetic variation. A new model shows
              that selection on combinations of mtDNAs and sex chromosomes can preserve
              variation.    This model will be tested with large samples of fruit flies
              (Drosophila melanogaster) from natural populations in distinct habitats. 
              Multiple-marker DNA analysis will be performed on individual fruit flies using
              markers spread across the length of the sex (i.e., X-chromosome) and autosomes
              (i.e., the 2nd and 3rd chromosomes). Additional DNA sequence data will be
              collected to test other models of natural selection on mildly deleterious
              mutations in mtDNA.  These studies will provide basic data bearing on how
              chromosomal inheritance and effective population size affects evolutionary
              change, and may lead to a greater understanding of the general principles of
              chromosomal coevolution.
