Title       : CAA: Development of Landscape Analysis and GIS Expertise to Predict Vegetation
               Dynamics at Ecotones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1997    
File        : a9707100

Award Number: 9707100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47380              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra P. Peters   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,9222,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Coffin   CAA 9707100    The goal of this project is for the PI to
              obtain new skills in   geographic information systems (GIS) and landscape
              pattern analysis   while on a sabbatical leave at the University of New Mexico.
              The PI   will use these new skills, in combination with her established  
              expertise in simulation modeling, to analyze and predict plant species  
              dominance at ecotones, or boundaries between ecosystem types. The   specific
              objectives to be accomplished are: (1) acquiring GIS   expertise and
              familiarity with spatial data layers available for   grass-woody plant ecotones
              in New Mexico; (2) gaining a better   understanding of properties of ecotones
              and the importance of   spatially-explicit processes to ecotone dynamics; and
              (3) increasing   the PI's knowledge of pattern analysis and edge detection
              techniques   in landscapes. The PI will take a class in GIS, and will
              collaborate   with numerous investigators working at the NSF-supported
              Sevilleta   Long Term Ecological Research site. Acquiring this new expertise is
              an   integral first step for the PI to achieve her long-term goal of  
              developing a spatially-explicit modeling tool to understand and   predict
              responses of vegetation at ecotones.         This project has broad scientific
              importance for two reasons. First,   ecotones are among the most dynamic and
              important areas for landscapes   and regions, the spatial scales where global
              changes in climate and   regional changes in landuse are expected to have the
              largest impact  on plant communities and ecosystems. Currently we are lacking a
               good understanding of how environmental factors, such as climate and  
              landuse, interact with ecological processes to produce patterns in  
              vegetation. A spatially-explicit, mechanistic tool is needed to predict  
              changes in vegetation patterns as the environment changes. This project   will
              allow the PI to develop such a tool. Second, this project will   provide the PI
              with expertise in a combination of quantitative   approaches tha t is not
              commonly found in ecologists. Furthermore, women   are under-represented in
              each of these areas. This combination of   different approaches will provide a
              unique perspective on ecological   problems, a perspective that the PI can
              transmit to future ecologists by   teaching undergraduate and graduate level
              courses as well as by   mentoring graduate students.
