Title       : Dissertation Research: Conservation and Participation in Papua New Guinea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9707719

Award Number: 9707719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3112               (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Morren morren@ocean.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cathrine P. West  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
              Rutgers University, studying how participation by tribal people in conservation
              projects in Papua New Guinea affects people's identity.  Using a controlled
              measure of participants and non-participants in the conservation project (the
              Crater Mountain Wildlife Management Area), the study will examine local ideas
              and understandings of what it means to be `modern`; local identity politics;
              and specific environmental actions and events.  The hypothesis to be tested is
              that participation in certain practices (learning the regional Pidgin language,
              desiring an airstrip-there are no roads in the area, participating in a
              `revival` movement, and consideration of mining ventures) is tied to an image
              of `modernity` which has become part of local cultural identity.  Methods
              include survey questionnaires to about 500 individuals in each of three
              villages impacted by the project, an open-ended questionnaire interview with
              about 300 persons from the set of villages, and general ethnographic
              participant observation.  By documenting and analyzing the relationship between
              identity and participation in the conservation project in Papua New Guinea, the
              research will contribute to theories of conservation practice and to the
              contemporary ethnography of Melanesia.   The project will advance our
              understanding of how development projects appear to local people who are most
              impacted by them.  This knowledge will help conservation planners and
              politicians design projects that protect the environment while at the same time
              garner the understanding and support of local populations.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
