Title       : The Evolution of Alleles Conferring Symbiotic Specialization in Legumes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1997    
File        : a9707697

Award Number: 9707697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew A. Parker mparker@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9707697  Parker          The symbiosis between legume plants and bacteria
              that form nodules on their roots (rhizobia) is globally important in providing
              a key nutrient (nitrogen) for both natural ecosystems and agriculture. 
              However, the ecology and evolution of legume-rhizobial interactions remain very
              poorly understood.  In particular, legumes are commonly found to be genetically
              variable in their capacity to interact with different bacterial genotypes. The
              plant genes affecting this mutualism typically cause differences in symbiotic
              specialization: some plants can only interact successfully with a limited
              number of rhizobial strains, while other plants achieve successful symbiosis
              with a wide range of bacterial partners.  Because rhizobia benefit plants by
              providing an important nutrient, plants with restricted symbiotic abilities
              should be at a disadvantage.  Nevertheless, genes that cause symbiotic
              specialization are widely prevalent in legume populations, suggesting that
              there are other evolutionary processes that compensate for any natural
              selection against them.  The nature of such processes is currently unknown, so
              the primary objective of this research is to experimentally test a series of
              hypotheses about why symbiotic specialization has evolved to be common in
              natural populations of legumes.               The main significance of this
              research is that it will reveal the fitness benefits and costs for legume
              plants associated with being specialized or promiscuous toward bacterial
              symbionts.  Genes that affect rhizobial specificity are also of interest in
              efforts to improve the productivity of agriculturally-significant legumes (such
              as soybeans, peas, beans, alfalfa, etc.).  Thus, the results of this project
              should also provide an important comparative perspective for an improved
              understanding of legume-rhizobial interactions in agroecosystems as well.
