Title       : Mapping of Genetic Factors Causing Genotype-Environment Interaction for Fitness
               in Drosophila melanogaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9707470

Award Number: 9707470
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1997   
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Fry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9707470  Fry   Natural populations of animals and plants often harbor
              heritable or genetically-based variation for traits closely related to
              reproductive fitness, such as juvenile survival or egg production.  The
              existence of this variation presents a puzzle, because natural selection is
              expected to eliminate variants with low fitness.  According to the
              environmental heterogeneity hypothesis, genetic variation for fitness traits is
              maintained  because different genotypes have highest fitness at different times
              or in different places.  Although much indirect evidence supports this
              hypothesis, fully evaluating the hypothesis has proven difficult, because to do
              so requires knowledge of how different alleles (variants of individual genes)
              affect fitness in different environments, information that is seldom available.
               In particular, for environmental heterogeneity to maintain  variation,
              "trade-offs" must be present, such that alleles that increase fitness in some
              environments decrease fitness in others.  In the proposed work, the chromosomal
              locations of genes affecting fitness on different diets, food with and without
              ethanol, will be determined in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, in order
              to determine whether trade-offs are present.  Ethanol is a natural component of
              breeding sites of D. melanogaster, and variation in ethanol levels has been
              proposed to maintain genetic variation in populations of this species.  The
              proposed work makes use of large laboratory populations that are adapted to
              food either containing or lacking ethanol; on each type of food, the two
              populations maintained on that food type have substantially higher fitness than
              the populations maintained on the other food type.  Chromosomal regions
              responsible for these fitness differences will be mapped, in order to determine
              whether regions causing higher fitness on one food type give rise to lower
              fitness on the other.  If this work produces evidence for trade-offs, an
              important assumption of the environmental heterogene ity hypothesis will be
              supported.   Whether environmental heterogeneity maintains genetic variation
              for fitness traits has implications for a number of important biological
              issues, including how new species are formed, and what determines the degree of
              ecological specialization of populations.  In addition, a full understanding of
              the factors maintaining genetic variation for fitness traits is important for
              analyzing the potential for pest species to adapt to new crop varieties or
              pesticides, and for designing strategies for maintaining the long-term
              viability of populations of rare, endangered species.  The proposed work will
              therefore make contributions on both basic and applied fronts.
