Title       : Inheritance and Evolution of Ribosomal DNA Variants in Salmonid Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9707468

Award Number: 9707468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kent M. Reed   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth B. Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9707468  Reed   The multi-copy ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes and their
              associated spacer sequences have been widely applied as molecular tools for
              both systematic and populational studies.  However, mechanisms involved in the
              evolution of the rRNA genes and the significance of variation in these remain
              as important genetic and evolutionary questions.  Ribosomal DNA sequences
              evolve through both mutation of individual sequences and homogenization
              (concerted evolution) of tandem gene arrays.  However, origin of new rDNA loci
              (new chromosomal sites of tandem arrays) may drastically alter the evolutionary
              dynamics of these multi-copy genes.  Salmonid fishes provide an interesting
              vertebrate model system for investigating rDNA evolution.     The ribosomal RNA
              genes of salmonid fishes appear to have amplified during radiation of this
              group.  Accompanying this amplification is an increase in the number of rDNA
              loci in a number of species including three of six members of the genus
              Salvelinus.  Mechanisms proposed for the origin of these include chromosomal
              rearrangements, amplification, reinsertion errors and involvement of mobile
              genetic elements in either recombination or transposition.     The proposed
              research is intended to characterize the level of intra-individual variation in
              the rDNA cistron of one species (lake trout, Salvelinus namaycush) by closely
              examining the molecular structure of the non-transcribed intergenic spacer
              region (IGS).  Molecular analysis of the IGS will focus on screening for
              sequences responsible for the length variation seen in the rDNA cistron of this
              species.  Cistron-specific probes will be designed to test if length variants
              are interspersed within individual arrays or occur as locus-specific variants.
