Title       : Sigma Xi / A*DEC Town Meeting on Reform in Undergraduate Education in Science,
               Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9707194

Award Number: 9707194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33164              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Malone Tfmalone@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet K. Poley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ann H. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sigma XI Sci Res Soc
	      
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  27709    919/549-4691

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Sigma Xi, the Scientific Research Society, in partnership with the A*DEC
              Distance Learning Consortium, proposed to organize and conduct a "Town Meeting"
              videoconference of individuals and institutions to promote further development
              of the comprehensive and self-sustaining reform in science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology recommended in a recent report to the NSF
              Directorate in Education and Human Resources.         The major objectives of
              the project are:       1) to bring the central thrust of the NSF report to the
              attention of a broad segment of research and comprehensive universities,
              community colleges, governmental and industrial laboratories, and the varied
              constituencies of all these institutions;       2) to generate an informed
              discussion of the report's analysis and recommendations by knowledgeable
              individuals at these institutions, legislators, and members of governing
              boards;       3) to illustrate by a few selected case studies opportunities for
              educational reform in these promising directions.         The format of the
              Town Meeting will be adapted from Town Meeting videoconferences sponsored by
              the Sigma Xi/A*DEC partnership in 1995 and 1996.  The program will originate in
              the television studio on the campus of North Carolina State University in late
              March or early April 1997 and will be uplinked to 2 redundant satellites for
              downlink to >100 sites across North America.  Interaction between the program
              participants at the Raleigh location and the downlink participants will be
              facilitated through 800-telecommunications links (phone and fax) and by e-mail.
               It is projected that the program and discussion will involve more than 2000
              faculty, students, administrators, and members of the general public.        
              Following the 1.5 hour discussion program, participants will be asked to
              evaluate the format of the program and discussion using an evaluation form that
              will be provided at each site and may be accessed on the Sigma Xi Web site, as
              well.  A follow-up summary and an alysis of the evaluations will be conducted
              and made available to interested parties.  A 30-minute edited videotape will be
              made available for distribution and later use by individuals and groups to
              promote continued discussion of the report.
