Title       : Dissertation Research: Translocal Indentity In Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9707774

Award Number: 9707774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9759               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvia J. Yanagisako syanag@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
              Stanford University studying individuals and organizations in Indonesia who are
              defined as having minority social status.  Indonesia is attempting to develop a
              national, capitalist, middle-class identity, while at the same time the
              individuals to be studied are influenced by a global movement concerned with
              issues of civil rights and disease.  The western model of behavior stresses
              individual choice and responsibility, while the traditional Indonesian model
              stresses group values derived from families or religious communities.  The
              project will assess how individuals of minority sexual orientation combine
              their local experiences with global concepts and issues in light of Indonesia's
              emerging national movement for legitimization and acceptance.  The student will
              study in three cities, using ethnographic techniques and intensive interviews
              as well as observations.  The sites will be a large, central Muslim industrial
              city with strong national and global connections, a Hindu city in a tourism and
              migration center, and a provincial city distant from the centers.  Through
              volunteer work as a HIV educator in local HIV/AIDS centers in each place the
              student will study the history, structure and activities of minority sexual
              activist groups as well as their understanding of the disease.  Focus groups of
              activist as well as non-activist persons will be conducted in each site to
              probe local conceptions of identity, civil society and disease.  The Indonesian
              minority sexual behavior movement is emerging at the same time that a new
              national culture and middle-class identity are developing, in the context of
              global media forces and international aid activities.  This project will show
              how Indonesians use these political and economic categories together with more
              traditionally cultural categories like gender, kinship and the family, to
              interpret their own identities and the notion of community.  This study will
              advance our understanding of how marginal groups relate to dominant cultural
              categories emanating from both their traditional society and from international
              sources.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
