Title       : Landscape-Level Paleoecological Reconstructions for Kaua'i
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  2000   
File        : a9707260

Award Number: 9707260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238650             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Burney burney@fordham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4650

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              BURNEY  9707260    This project seeks to understand the dynamics of prehuman
              ecosystems on the island of Kaua'i in the Hawaiian Islands, and to identify the
              processes whereby environmental changes of the human period have led to the
              collapse of the native fauna and lowland flora.  The overall methodology for
              creating a detailed picture of past environments and their changes will be
              through multidisciplinary study of paleoecological, paleontological, and
              archaeological sites.  Cores collected from the late Quaternary sediments of
              the island will provide evidence for past vegetation, water chemistry, fire
              occurrence, and environmental catastrophes.  Some of these sites also contain
              bones of indigenous birds and molluscs; these sites will be excavated in order
              to reconstruct past faunal assemblages.  Pollen and charcoal evidence from the
              human period will provide an another record of changing human land-use
              patterns, which can be compared to paleontological evidence of the introduction
              of exotic animals and archaeological assessments of past human population
              densities and distributions.    Measuring prehuman extinction rates will enrich
              discussions of climate vs. human activity in global extinction patterns. 
              Obtaining high-resolution paleoclimate records will also permit the generation
              and testing of hypotheses regarding past changes in hurricane frequency, fire
              occurrence, and abrupt climate shifts like those to be expected from marine
              phenomena such as El Nino.  A practical goal of this research will be to
              develop a comprehensive picture of prehuman environments of the island, as a
              guide to restoration ecology efforts underway in collaboration with the
              National Tropical Botanical Garden, which is adjacent to the primary sites. 
              Landscape reconstructions from paleoecological data are likely to provide the
              best reference ecosystems available as models for ecological restoration
              efforts.
