Title       : Novel Techniques for the Solution and Solid Phase Syntheses of Peptides and
               Peptide Segments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1999      
File        : a9707651

Award Number: 9707651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Carpino cjhorton@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic Synthesis Program and the Office of  
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  
              Directorate, Professor Louis A. Carpino, of the Department of Chemistry   at
              the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, develops novel techniques   for the
              solution and solid phase synthesis of peptides and peptide   segments.  Methods
              for the synthesis of longer peptides and small   proteins, whether by stepwise
              solution or solid phase techniques or by   segment condensation methods, are
              not wholly satisfactory, suffering from   problems in the coupling steps and
              the unavailability or instability of   suitably protected histidine and
              arginine residues.  Professor Carpino   explores new derivatives of these amino
              acids, permitting their   incorporation and deprotection in automated coupling
              schemes.    Solubilizing systems such as peptide bond protection and
              poly(ethylene   glycol) residues are examined for their ability to provide good
                solubility of growing peptides in comparatively non-polar solvents and   for
              their applicability for the coupling of peptide segments by various  
              techniques.  Optimized techniques are then applied to the synthesis of   longer
              peptides.  With continued growth in the demand for polypeptides for a variety
              of   applications, including the study of fundamental biological and  
              biochemical phenomena and the development of new medical diagnostics and  
              therapeutic agents, new techniques for the rapid, efficient, universally  
              general, and, ideally, automated synthesis of polypeptides are required.   
              Professor Louis A. Carpino, of the Department of Chemistry at the   University
              of Massachusetts, Amherst, with the support of the Organic   Synthesis Program
              and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the   Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences Directorate, develops such techniques.    His studies focus
              both on the design of suitable building blocks to   allow the automated
              sequential construction of peptides and on the   development of new techniques
              for the construction of peptides.  The   latter techniques center on the highly
              effective use of solid `supports`   as platforms for peptide synthesis and
              extend the basic premises of such   solid-phase peptide synthesis to
              homogeneous solutions in organic   solvents through the use of soluble
              polymeric materials as the   construction scaffold.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
