Title       : RPG: The Evolution of Mixed Sex Allocation Patterns: A Comparative, Phylogenetic
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9707609

Award Number: 9707609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colette M. St. Mary stmary@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 1228,9169,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Colette M. St. Mary  9707609       ABSTRACT         Sex allocation theory has
              provided a powerful conceptual framework from   which to understand allocation
              patterns in a wide range of organisms,   included those that have separate
              sexes, as well as those that are   hermaphroditic.  However, there are some
              organisms for which current theory   is clearly inadequate.  Individuals of two
              temperate species of fish   (gobies) in the genus Lythrypnus (L. dalli and L.
              zebra) simultaneously   devote energy to both male and female functions,
              although they reproduce via   only one sex at a time.  Further, gonadal
              allocation varies with body size   (i.e., ontogenetically).  This overall
              pattern of sex allocation cannot be   explained by reference to existing
              theory.  The PI's recent theoretical work in   this area suggests that costs of
              changing sex plays an important role in the   evolution of these mixed
              strategies.  To examine this hypothesis the PI  will   conduct a detailed
              examination of the pattern of sex allocation throughout   the genus Lythrypnus.
               This will be done in an explicitly historical   context, integrating studies
              focused on phylogenetic reconstruction and   field and lab experiments designed
              to quantify the costs of reallocation and   associated patterns of allocation
              and behavior.  The genus Lythrypnus   includes 20 species, which range over
              both temperate and tropical seas,   including the eastern Pacific, the Atlantic
              and the Caribbean.  Five species   have been recently examined histologically. 
              All are simultaneous   hermaphrodites; however, they differ significantly in
              sexual pattern.  Within the context of this proposal the PI will initate
              collection of the   additional data needed to understand the evolution of
              complex allocation   patterns in hermaphroditic organisms.  The overall program
              goals include 1)   development of a phylogeny for Lythrypnus based on molecular
              data; 2)   documentation of variation in sexual patterns in Lythrypnus (i.e.,  
              ontogenetic and among-individ ual variation in sex allocation); and 3)  
              application of field and laboratory experiments to quantify the degree of  
              sexual flexibility, the costs and benefits of each sexual function, and the  
              costs of reallocation.  Ultimately, the PI will map sexual patterns and
              potential   selective factors onto the phylogeny to provide an integrated test
              of the   hypothesis generated from the PI's dynamic model.    This work and
              studies of this sort provide a basic understanding of sex allocation patterns
              in hermaphroditic species.  Many fishes, invertebrates and plants are
              hermaphroditic and our management, harvesting and control of such species is
              predicated on an understanding of their sexual and mating systems.
