Title       : CAA: Developmental Genetic Analysis of an Eyeless Strain of Mice. A Study Toward
               Understanding Eye Morphogenesis and Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9707451

Award Number: 9707451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Priscilla K. Tucker ptuck@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9125,9169,9222,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Abstract       Priscilla Tucker  CAA    9707451     The proposed research is
              designed to identify genes responsible  for the early stages of eye development
              in mammals.  The project has two   aims.  First, a genetic analysis of an
              eyeless mutant mouse strain will be   carried out to identify one or more genes
              responsible for the eyeless   condition.  This involves conducting a genetic
              mapping study in which   eyeless mice are crossed with normal mice. 
              Differences in DNA content   between normal and eyeless descendants of the
              cross are localized to   specific chromosomes and candidate genes, those
              thought to be responsible   for the eyeless condition, are identified.  Second,
               a comparative study   of gene expression will be conducted in both eyeless and
              normal mice.   Patterns of gene expression for  nine genes known to be involved
              in the   early development of the eye will be compared and any differences in  
              expression of these genes between  eyeless and normal mice will be noted.   
              The project has important implications for furthering an  understanding of how
              the mammalian eye develops as it will provide new   information on what genes
              are responsible for eye development and  when and   where they are expressed
              during eye development.  In addition,   identification of one or more genes
              responsible for the eyeless condition   in these mice may shed light on the
              genetic basis of instances of   eyelessness in nature.  More generally, the
              project has important   implications for understanding how eyes evolved in
              animals.  In nature,   different species of animals exhibit a great diversity
              of eye types and,   for years, researchers thought that eyes evolved
              independently multiple   times.  Yet, recently, several genes involved in eye
              development are found   in such diverse organisms as fruit flys and humans. 
              This observation   suggests that animal eyes have a common developmental
              origin.  The search   for new genes involved in eye development in animals will
              further our   understanding of how  the same genes can be utilized differently
              in   different organisms to produce the great diversity of eye types found in  
              nature.
