Title       : Mixed Mating in Natural Populations of the Chestnut Blight Fungus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9707675

Award Number: 9707675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Milgroom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9707675  Milgroom  The overall goal of this proposal is to examine the
              mating system and genetic structure of natural populations of the fungus that
              causes chestnut blight, Cryphonectria parasitica.  This is the only fungus so
              far shown to both self-fertilize and outcross in nature; that is, it has a
              mixed mating system.  While selfing occurs readily in nature, it is rare in the
              lab, suggesting that environment has a role in determining the frequency with
              which selfing occurs.  The first objective for this proposal, therefore, is to
              determine the role played by environment in influencing  how often selfing
              occurs, and also the extent to which the ability to self-fertilize is
              genetically determined.  This will be accomplished by testing the potential of
              individuals to self and/or outcross in natural populations, under different
              environmental conditions, especially with regard to the ecology of chestnut
              trees (e.g., tree age, habit, and density, companion species), which are hosts
              for this fungal pathogen. The evolution of selfing depends on the intensity of
              inbreeding, which is mating among closely related individuals.  Therefore, the
              second objective is to determine the degree to which natural populations of C.
              parasitica are inbred.  The effects of selfing and inbreeding on population
              structure are determined in part by the potential for inbreeding depression,
              which is a reduction in fitness of inbred individuals relative to complete
              outbreeding.  Therefore, the third objective is to determine the effects of
              inbreeding on fitness by studying laboratory crosses between individuals of
              varying degrees of relatedness.    Mating systems, the means by which organisms
              reproduce and pass their genes on to the next generation, have profound effects
              on diversity and evolution. The fungal kingdom comprises a richly diverse group
              of organisms, representing a broad range of life histories and reproductive
              strategies. Yet our knowledge of the natural breeding systems of fungi is
              surprisingly sparse and  incomplete, considering the rich tradition of
              research, dating back to Darwin, on plant breeding systems.  Virtually nothing
              is known about the temporal or spatial dynamics of fungal mating systems in
              nature.  The work outlined above will constitute a first step in addressing
              this disparity, and in so doing launch a new direction in research on fungi.
