Title       : LTREB: Ecological and Evolutionary Determinants of Habitat Selection and Risk of
               Nest Predation among Coexisting Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9707598

Award Number: 9707598
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248745             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Martin tmartin@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0510302   Energetics & Thermodynamc               
Program Ref : 1182,1306,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707598  Martin  Habitat selection among coexisting species is generally thought
              to reflect choices that minimize ecological costs and maximize fitness.
              Ecological processes among coexisting species are often emphasized as a
              potential explanation for differences in microhabitat choices. Yet, processes
              and the mechanisms underlying processes are rarely directly tested. Predation
              can favor microhabitat differences among coexisting species and is a process
              that can be tested directly. However, habitat selection also may be constrained
              by physiological tolerances as a function of the evolutionary history of a
              species and different evolutionary histories or physiological tolerances may
              provide an alternative explanation for differences in resource use among
              species. Such alternative actions of biotic versus abiotic influences are
              particularly highlighted along microclimate gradients because species commonly
              segregate along microclimate gradients. This study will address the question,
              "Does the distribution of species along an environmental gradient reflect
              physiological constraints or responses to ecological costs such as nest
              predation or vegetation preferences?" Continued long term study of this system
              and nest site shifts is important because such shifts provide an unprecedented
              opportunity to examine the potential role of biotic versus abiotic influences
              on habitat selection and species coexistence based on dynamic changes in
              potential environmental influences. Continuation of this long-term work will
              advance our understanding of mechanisms underlying nest predation as a process
              influencing habitat selection, species coexistence, and parental activity
              patterns. These data will provide important information for long-term
              conservation of species; habitat requirements for successful reproduction are
              critical for conservation and data being collected under this project is
              currently being used by the US Forest Service to affect land management
              decisions on the forests being studied.
