Title       : Taxonomic Revision of Selected Sonoran Lichen Families
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1997    
File        : a9707714

Award Number: 9707714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Nash tom.nash@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707714  Nash   Lichens are symbiotic associations of a fungus and an alga, and
              they are usually identified and classified on the basis of the fungal organism
              in the partnership. They occur widely and at times abundantly on soil, rocks,
              and as epiphytes. The classification of the several thousands of species of
              lichens is complicated by their poor representation in museum collections and
              their small size, resulting in an emphasis on a few supposed "key" characters
              for discrimination. Unfortunately, it is now widely accepted that many of these
              key features have evolved multiple times, in different groups or lineages of
              lichens; thus, lichen classification requires more specimens and closer
              attention to the acquisition of new morphological and molecular characters. For
              the large lichen "flora" of the North American Sonoran desert and adjacent
              parts of California with a mediterranean type climate, Prof. Thomas Nash has
              assembled an international team of 50 or so specialists, students to senior
              researchers, to complete a taxonomic inventory of the suspected 1700 species of
              lichens. Four large and taxonomically troublesome genera, Arthonia, Buellia,
              Lecania, and Solenopsora, are the main targets for field work, museum study,
              and taxonomic revision; a fifth genus, Verrucaria, will receive preliminary
              study. This will be accomplished in conjunction with young European workers who
              have specialized on the mediterranean relatives of these groups, and who can
              test species limits and diagnoses against the variation to be found in the
              North American groups.   The biodiversity and classification of lichens remain
              poorly known in most parts of the world, and the research tradition for their
              study has emphasized narrow national or regional studies by one or two
              specialists. Prof. Nash's international consortium of colleagues, focusing on a
              large desert region of North America, with taxonomic relatives in mediterranean
              climates of the world, promotes two modern approaches that promise to
              revolutionize the study  of lichens. First, collaborative work by specialists
              drawn from an international pool of talent; second, a global perspective in
              comparisons of morphological and anatomical characters to assess the
              reliability of taxonomic features useful for identification and upper-rank
              classification.
