Title       : Analysis of Multiscale Atmospheric Turbulence Structure Within the Surface Layer
               of Lake-induced Convention
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1999  
File        : a9707730

Award Number: 9707730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302819             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre D. Mourad pierre@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9707730  Mourad   The Lake-Induced Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) is a
              multiple-investigator project whose ultimate goal is the understanding of how
              lake-effect conditions caused by cold air outbreaks over the Great Lakes,
              produce enhanced and debilitating snowfall downstream of the Great Lakes as
              well as influencing weather patterns in the northeast US.    One approach to
              addressing this research problem is the documentation and explanation of the
              effects of enhanced surface fluxes of heat and moisture from Lake Michigan on
              multiscale turbulence.  Multiscale turbulence is generally thought to be made
              up of three classes.  The first is primarily two-dimensional roll vortices (or
              "large eddies") that scale with the boundary-layer depth and have axes aligned
              with the mean boundary-layer wind.  The second class is sub-roll turbulence
              that also spans the boundary layer but is three dimensional and is typically
              convectively-driven.  The third class of atmospheric turbulence, called "gust
              microfronts" or "ramps", is largely restricted to the surface layer and is
              driven by a combination of shear and convection.  These three classes of
              turbulent structure evolve and interact in response to the enhanced fluxes from
              Lake Michigan into the overlying atmosphere.  This study has four main goals.
              (1) The first is to examine the spatial evolution and distribution of gust
              microfronts utilizing in situ aircraft data.   (2) Using the results of (1) and
              simultaneous synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images, the second goal is to test
              the hypothesis that SAR images can capture the spatially distributed stress
              patterns on the surface of the water created by multiscale atmospheric
              turbulence structure.  (3) The third goal is to correlate geometric features in
              SAR images with those seen in satellite images of clouds and with basic
              parameters that describe boundary-layer structure.  (4) The fourth goal is to
              work with several co-investigators under the umbrella of Lake-ICE to understand
              the interactions between large ed dies, km-scale thermals and ramps in lake
              induced convective boundary layers.    Successful completion of this research
              will provide an improved knowledge of boundary layer fluxes over the Great
              Lakes and the ability to detect and classify various types of boundary layer
              turbulence using remote, spaced-based sensors.
