Title       : Free Radical and Photochemical Reactions of Organophosphorus Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9707038

Award Number: 9707038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley G. Bentrude   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Organic Dynamics Program supports Professor Wesley G. Bentrude, of   the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Utah, for his studies of   free
              radical and photochemical reactions of organophosphorus systems.    Professor
              Bentrude is exploring the use of three-coordinate phosphorus   molecules as
              traps for biradical intermediates and the selective   diversion and
              functionalization of free radical intermediates through new   uses of
              phosphoranyl radical chemistry.  Fundamental aspects of the   influence of
              electronic structure on the efficiencies of   triplet-sensitized intramolecular
              photorearrangements of allyl phosphite   triesters, cyclization and
              fragmentation reactions of radical cations of   three-coordinate phosphorus
              molecules, and the radical pair vs. concerted   nature of the photo-Arbuzov
              rearrangement are also under investigation.  With the support of the Organic
              Dynamics Program, Professor Wesley G.   Bentrude, of the Department of
              Chemistry at the University of Utah,   studies the chemistry of
              phosphorus-containing molecules.  Such compounds   are found in a number of
              important settings, with practical applications   as antioxidants, fuel
              additives, and antitumor and antiviral agents, and   are also key intermediates
              in a number of biochemical transformations.    Through the discovery of new
              reactions of phosphorus-containing molecules   and elucidation of the pathways
              by which these reactions occur, Professor   Bentrude contributes to our
              fundamental understanding of the chemistry of   these important compounds.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
