Title       : U.S.-Czech Research on Developmental Genetics of Amphioxus: Insights into the
               Origin and Evolution of the Vertebrate Body Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9707861

Award Number: 9707861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39806              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas D. Holland nholland@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Z. Holland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
Program Ref : 0000,5930,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              INT 9707861  Holland      This U.S.-Czech research project between Linda Holland
              and Nicholas Holland of the University of California, Scripps Institute, and
              Zbynek Kozmik of the Czech Institute of Molecular Genetics will examine
              developmental genetic data to indicate homologies between body regions of
              distantly related animals.  Specifically, this project focuses on
              cephalochordate amphioxus as a plausible, more simple model for the proximate
              invertebrate ancestor of vertebrates.  The collaborative work features the
              developmental expression and function of the Pax gene family in amphioxus which
              is involved in morphogenesis of the vertebrate pharynx, nerve cord, eyes, axial
              musculature, and kidneys.    The researchers intend to isolate cDNA and genomic
              DNA clones of amphioxus homologs of the Pax family and use them as templates
              for the synthesis of antisense riboprobes to determine by in situ hybridization
              where and when these homologs are expressed in developing amphioxus.  From the
              observed localization patterns inferences can be made about homologous genes. 
              The combined expertise in embryology and expression patterns (U.S.) and cloning
              and gene analysis (Czech) are expected to yield new insights into the evolution
              of the vertebrate body plan and the mechanisms involved in shaping a chordate
              embryo.  The information will contribute to our basic understanding of how
              genes interact to create an organism.    This project in developmental biology
              fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling
              leading experts in the United States and Central Europe to combine
              complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong mutual interest and
              competence.   ??
