Title       : RPG: Phylogeny and Biogeography of Oedionychina (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9707544

Award Number: 9707544
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17234              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine N. Duckett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      P.O. Box 21926
	      San Juan, PR  009311926    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              (9707544)  Duckett   RPG    The flea beetle sub-tribe, Oedionychina (Coleoptera:
              Chrysomelidae: Alticinae) is a large evolutionarily natural group of 24 genera
              distributed primarily is South America, Africa and India (the ancient continent
              of Gonwana minus Australia).  The evolutionary relationships among these genera
              are not understood despite the presence of economically important species in
              the sub-tribe.  Oedionychina is also   the only clearly defined suprageneric
              group of flea beetles that is distributed in more than one continent. 
              Therefore, the biogeography of this group will be of value in elucidating the
              origins of the flea beetles   and  the great radiation of flea beetle in the
              new world tropics.  An evolutionary analysis of the Oedionychina using modern
              cladistic methods will be performed with the aim of investigating the role of
              dispersal and continental drift in the current distribution of the genera. Of
              special interest are the relationships among the New World and Old World genera
              and the congruence of their evolutionary histories to the age and known
              evolutionary histories of the areas where they are distributed.This study  
              will test two existing hypotheses of the evolution of the these beetles one
              which maintains that they evolved in Gonwana and some groups diversified in
              Africa and South America after the continents separated; the other maintains
              that this group evolved in South America and later dispersed over water to
              Africa and India.  These results are important to the theory of the formation
              of biotas.  The lack of systematic understanding of phylogenetic relationships
              is in part because of reliance on traditional characters of the insect
              exoskeleton.  These characters will be combined with analysis of morphological
              and developmental characters from juvenile stages as well as female genitalia
              and the specialized sensory structures of the mouth. As a result of this study
              the kinds of characters used for evolutionary studies of the flea beetles will
              be expanded.  Existin g data on cytogenetics will also be integrated into the
              analysis to provide a more powerful data set.  Additionally, the natural
              history of the beetles, which is totally unknown in 99% of the species will be
              documented and samples for later analysis of DNA will be collected.    During
              this planning grant the PI will conduct a collecting and rearing trip to
              southern Brazil where 12 of the 24 genera are found is proposed. Work done on
              this trip will test and perfect rearing and collecting techniques of juvenile
              stages, provide taxa for initial analsysis using Scanning Electron Microscopy
              (mouth sense organs) and  explore the utility of character systems which have
              never been used in the Chrysomelidae for evolutionary analysis.   The adults
              and juveniles collected will be prepared and analyzed morphologically; if these
              character systems provide good phylogenetic resolution, research using these
              systems will be planned in northern South America and Africa to complete the
              taxonomic sampling necessary for an understanding of the evolution of the
              Oedionychina and to test hypotheses of the evolution of the Gonwandian fauna
