Title       : Optimal Reaction Norms and Genetic Constraints in the Evolution of Plant Size in
               Ipomoea purpurea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1999     
File        : a9707223

Award Number: 9707223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Rausher mrausher@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9707223  Rausher   The goal of this project is to attempt to understand the
              degree to which a model organism, the morning glory Ipomorea purpurea, is
              optimally adapted to various environments it encounters.  Specifically, this
              project seeks to characterize empirically the optimal value for several traits
              in different environments and then determine whether natural populations have
              evolved to exhibit those values in the respective environments.  The project
              also seeks to characterize any constraints that may prevent populations from
              evolving to those optimal values.   Characteristics of  the range of natural
              environments normally encountered by I. purpurea will initially be surveyed. 
              Using this information, two field experiments will be conducted in which I.
              purpurea is grown either a gradient of soil nutrient levels or a gradient of
              competitive intensity.  The pattern of natural selection acting on traits
              related to plant growth and size will be measured to determine how far the
              means of these traits are from their optima in each environment.  A set of
              breeding and selection experiments will provide a characterization of any
              genetic constraints acting to prevent evolution toward these optima, and the
              importance of these constraints will be evaluated by computer simulation.  
              Evolution by natural selection is a compromise between what is favored (how
              selection acts) and what is possible (determined by the genetics of organisms).
              While biologists have made great strides understanding evolution in model
              organisms (e.g. fruit flies) living in simple, controlled environments, much
              less is known about the evolutionary responses of plant and animal populations
              to complex natural environments.  The broad aim of this project is to begin to
              provide an understanding of  such a response in an organism that typically
              encounters a complex environment.
