Title       : INKA Economic Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9707962

Award Number: 9707962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14431              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terence N. D'Altroy tnd1@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Veronica I. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Terence D'Altroy and Veronica
              Williams will oversee neutron activation analysis of ceramics excavated from a
              series of Inka sites in two regions of Argentina. The Inka empire arose in the
              highlands of Bolivia and extended its control over a wide area which stretched
              from northern Peru to portions of Argentina. Given the lack of writing and a
              simple system of roads which ran over extremely rough mountainous terrain, the
              development of an such an empire is a remarkable accomplishment. The feat is
              even more impressive given the very culturally and linguistically distinct
              groups which were incorporated, often against their will into the empire.
              Archaeologists wish to understand the mechanisms which the Inka employed to
              achieve such integration and this project seeks to examine this question at the
              southern extreme of the area which the Inka controlled. In collaboration with
              reactor scientists at the University of Missouri, the investigators will
              conduct neutron activation analysis of ceramics from a series of sites. This
              will allow them to determine the trace element concentrations which serve as
              `fingerprints` to indicate which types of ceramics are made from the same kind
              of clay. This often allows matching of ceramics with individual clay sources.
              With this information it will be possible to determine which ceramics were
              produced locally and which were made elsewhere and imported long distances. In
              particular the investigators wish to compare the origins of elite finely made
              Inka wares which have ritual significance with those used for cooking and other
              mundane subsistence tasks. The points of ceramic origin provide insight into
              the amount of direct control the Inka exercised. The investigators speculate
              that if fine wares are produced locally, Inka rule was indirect and
              considerable authority was ceded to local pre-Inka political structures.
              Importation of ritual Inka ware suggests more direct control with a tribute
              system.  This research is important for several reasons. It will provide new
              insight into how complex organizations such as empires arise. It will also
              increase our understanding of one of the most highly developed prehistoric
              civilizations in the New World.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
