Title       : Tunable Interaction Potential in Charge-Stabilized Colloidal Suspensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9707476

Award Number: 9707476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy E. Larsen larsena@stolaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9707476  Larsen    The proposed research would develop a technique for 
              continuously adjusting the interaction between charged  colloidal spheres.  The
              application of a rotating electric  field will induce a dipole moment in the
              dielectric spheres,  resulting in a net attractive interaction.  This
              attractive  interaction would be continuously tunable by varying the  voltage
              used to create the electric field. The quantitative  functional form of the
              induced interaction will be measured  using blinking optical tweezers.  This
              tunable interaction  will then provide unique opportunities for studying phase 
              transitions in the model system of colloidal spheres.  Notably, the technique
              could be used to help discern the  fundamental nature of two dimensional phase
              transitions.  Some experiments have indicated a continuous transition;  others
              demonstrate an abrupt transition reminiscent of three  dimensional transitions.
               Recent studies (Marcus and Rice,  PRE 55 p.637, 1997) have suggested that the
              range and nature  of the interaction potential would allow for direct tests of 
              the influence of the interaction on the type of phase  transition which occurs.
               %%%  The proposed research would develop a method for  continuously adjusting
              the interaction between tiny charged  spheres.  This interaction can be
              continually tuned by  exploiting the electrical properties of the spheres,
              namely  through the application of an electric field.  Such spheres  are a
              popular model system for studying melting and freezing  transitions such as ice
              melting to water.  The freezing  transition occurs abruptly at a specific
              temperature for  bulk samples of water for example, however, the nature of  the
              transition for a very thin film has not yet been  resolved.  Some experiments
              indicate that the transition for  the thin film is abrupt as in the bulk
              sample; others have  demonstrated that the transition is gradual, like jello 
              solidifying-it continually gets stiffer and stiffer.  Recent  studies have
              suggested that the thin fi lm transition depends  very sensitively on the form
              of the interaction between the  spheres.  By developing a technique to
              continuously tune the  interaction between the spheres, the influence of this 
              interaction on the thin film transition could be directly  tested.  ***
