Title       : Abundance, Biomass, Vertical Distribution, and Selected Process Studies of
               Arctic Ocean Zooplankton: A Collaborative Proposal for Ancillary Use of the
               SHEBA Platform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9707182

Award Number: 9707182
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230643             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Campbell campbell@gso.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,4444,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  This collaborative research project represents one of the first
              comprehensive biological process studies to be carried in the Arctic Ocean over
              a full annual cycle.  Investigators from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution,
              University of Rhode Island, and Brookhaven National Laboratory, the Canadian
              Dept. of Fisheries and Oceans, and from other U.S. institutions will use a
              Canadian icebreaker as home base for a 14-month period to study the seasonal
              cycle of biological production and respiration, and the seasonal cycle in
              biomass of algae, bacteria, protists, and zooplankton, in the central Arctic.  
               This project involves a year-long study of the distribution and abundance of
              total zooplankton and standing stock, vertical migration patterns, and aspects
              of secondary production and vital rates of four target copepod species,
              including egg production, egg viability, growth, and changes in carbon standing
              stock, in the upper 500 m of the Arctic Ocean.  Additionally, the carbon and
              energy flow at the over-wintering site will be described.    The sampling plan
              includes both continuous (acoustic) and weekly (net tows) monitoring of
              zooplankton biomass and abundance augmented by periodic, intensive, process
              oriented work:  1) Acoustic backscatter intensity data will be made available
              periodically to calibrate the backscatter intensity: zooplankton biomass
              relationship using total zooplankton biomass measured from net hauls.   2)
              Zooplankton biomass, abundance, and taxonomic composition will be measured at
              ~10 day intervals throughout the period of the project. Vertically discrete
              samples will be collected at regular but less frequent intervals (monthly)
              using opening/closing mechanisms on the ring nets.    3) Process Studies will
              involve egg production rate and viability experiments, growth rate experiments,
              and taxa and life stage specific determination of respiration rates for the
              dominant copepod species.  Individuals of the dominant taxa will collected for
              length, dry weight, carbon and nitrogen  content and the determination of the
              RNA/DNA ratio, an indicator of the vital rates of the copepods.     The results
              will be compared to those from previous studies and will enhance understanding
              of the Arctic Ocean ecosystem, the life cycles of copepods in the Arctic Ocean,
              variability in the Arctic ecosystem, and the potential importance of
              zooplankton, especially copepods, to the Arctic Ocean carbon cycle. The
              seasonal study of production/ respiration processes will provide valuable
              information regarding: 1) the present structure and function of central Arctic
              ecosystems, which can serve as a baseline for evaluating the impact of future
              global change processes in this sensitive region; and 2) the nature and timing
              of production and respiration processes in a high latitude system and in
              particular how the heterotrophic community survives during the dark winter
              months.
