Title       : Dissertation Research: Development of Early Neolithic; Use-wear Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9707154

Award Number: 9707154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ofer Bar-Yosef obaryos@fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Ofer Bar-Yosef, Mr. Sho Yamada will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to understand one of the
              most basic transitions in human prehistory: the Neolithic revolution  which
              marks the change from a hunting and gathering to a farming and herding way of
              life. It was this shift which established the subsistence base from which
              civilizations in many parts of the world arose. This project approaches the
              issue through examination of the developmental of early agricultural society in
              the southern Levant (Israel and Jordan), the region where plant domestication
              first took place. Mr. Yamada will use lithic use-wear analysis, the microscopic
              study of edge wear on stone tools. Different activities - cutting wood,
              scraping skins, harvesting grasses - leave different microscopic traces on
              stone tool edges and through their examination it is possible to infer the
              tasks for which particular kinds of stone tools were used. Once specific tasks
              and their frequencies are known it is then possible to reconstruct subsistence
              technology, gain insight into social organization and see how these changed
              over time. A series of major tool types from 19 sites will be examined. The
              sites derive from both woodland and steppe zones and thus will allow Mr. Yamada
              to determine the effect of environment on this cultural transformation.      
              In use wear studies, it is necessary to examine local raw materials and
              experimentally determine the wear which results from a variety of activities.
              To accomplish this goal, Mr. Yamada will have an Israeli flintworker duplicate
              archaeologically known tool types from appropriate raw materials. These will
              then be used for a variety of purposes in a carefully controlled context. This
              experimental program includes harvesting wild grains and other plants under
              varying conditions with a number of sickle blade types, sheep shearing and
              butchering, soil digging and a various of domestic tasks. Mr. Yamada will
              conduct quantitative analysis of wear change through the use of computer image
              processing. The results will then be applied to a range of archaeological
              materials.       This research is important for several reasons. It will
              provide insight into the development of agricultural and pastoral societies in
              the Near East. It will also help to refine use wear analysis an archaeological
              tool. Finally it will assist in training a promising young scientist.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
