Title       : "Scalable Audio Compression for Multimedia Applications"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9707764

Award Number: 9707764
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen Gersho gersho@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vladimir Cuperman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Scalable signal compression algorithms are required by the evolving
              communication  network, which is composed of a variety of channels with widely
              differing static  and dynamic capacities, and by the recent trend toward
              incremental capacity and  bandwidth reservation channels.  Current multimedia
              compression algorithms  implicitly assume simple point to point transmission as
              well as fixed bandwidth  allocation, and result in under-utilization of the
              network resources.  The  development of truly scalable coders with rate
              controlled by the local source  statistics, network traffic load, and channel
              condition will directly impact the  next generation of audio internetworking
              for multicasting, videotelephone,  videoteleconferencing, and various
              applications for information retrieval from  multimedia databases.    This
              research focuses on new audio compression techniques for voice and music 
              signals, that allow efficient scaling of bit rate and audio bandwidth within
              the  framework of multimedia compression.  The primary thrust centers on audio
              signal  modeling with a sinusoidal signal representation, which is bandwidth
              and rate  scalable and achieves good performance in a variety of coding
              environments from  low-rate coding of narrow-band speech (2 kb/s) to
              high-quality coding of audio  signals (16-64 kb/s).  Methods under
              investigation include sophisticated phonetic  and music classification to allow
              content-adaptive audio decomposition and  modeling, generalized product code
              vector quantization, and in particular, multi-  stage vector quantization, to
              implement scalable quantization techniques.  Inter-  stream optimization for
              joint compression of audio and video signals is studied  with emphasis on
              potential applicability to packet transmission and in particular  to TCP/IP
              Internet protocols.  An important sub-problem is the inter-stream rate 
              allocation optimization taking into account each stream's level of activity,
              user  requirements, and sensitivity to quantization and channel errors.  Sourc
              e-channel  coding and error concealment issues are studied in order to maintain
              quality of  service requirements under packet losses for both wired and
              wireless channels.
