Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computations in Fluids and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9707494

Award Number: 9707494
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Shelley shelley@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9707494  Michael Shelley    These projects concern dynamics and pattern
              formation in complex  fluids, and singularity formation and topological
              transitions in  Newtonian fluids.  The first project considers the
              hydrodynamics of  slender elastic filaments, such as arise in liquid crystal
              flows, the  dynamics of phospho-lipid bilayer tubes, and in the dynamics of 
              biological polymers.  Building tractable computational models, that  account
              for hydrodynamic interactions of the filament with itself,  relies on
              discriminating exploitation of slenderness.  This still  gives a
              computationally intensive problem with high-order time-step  constraints from
              elasticity, interaction integrals with singular  kernels, and integral
              equations to be solved at every time-step.  The  second project continues
              towards an understanding of topological  transitions of fluid/fluid interfaces
              between immiscible liquids.  The  fundamental questions are: How does surface
              tension provoke or mediate  transitions?  What characterizes the singularity? 
              What physics needs  to be added to follow the transition?  And what is left of
              the  singularity in its aftermath?  Building upon previous work on such 
              singularities in the Kelvin-Helmholtz instability between immiscible  fluids,
              it is proposed to study, computationally and analytically,  singularities and
              transitions in jets that separate immiscible fluids,  both by using sharp
              interface models, and fluid models that have  viscosity and allow some
              miscibility.  The third project studies the  effect of shear-thinning, a
              property shared with many non-Newtonian  fluids and liquid crystal flows, on
              the development of the  Saffman-Taylor instability.  Some of the modelling work
              has already  been done, yielding a natural non-Newtonian version of Darcy's
              law,  relating the fluid velocity to the solution of a nonlinear elliptic 
              problem.  It is proposed to now simulate the full nonlinear dynamics  of such a
              bubble expanding into a shear-thinning liquid.  This is a  very challenging
              comp utational problem as it involves the solution of  nonlinear elliptic
              problems on an evolving domain.    Much of the fundamental dynamics of fluids
              and materials --  singularity and pattern formation are two central examples --
              will be  understood by a progression from mathematical modelling, to developing
               computational methods and relevant mathematical understanding, and  thence to
              large-scale simulation and data analysis through  high-performance computing. 
              The three projects to be pursued here all  lie at the intersection of fluid
              dynamics and materials science, and  all illustrate the above statement.  In
              the first project, it is  proposed to understand and simulate the dynamics of
              filamentary  structures, as arise in phase transitions of liquid crystalline 
              fluids, the dynamics of phospho-lipid bilayer tubes, and in the  dynamics of
              biological polymers.  In first example, such filaments are  of potential
              technological importance in the manufacture of  high-strength filaments.  The
              second project continues towards a  theoretical understanding of what drives
              the break-up into droplets of  a jet of fluid into a second, different fluid
              (say, oil and water).  While easy and common to observe, such behavior is
              strongly associated  with surface tension, an effect that is still
              ill-understood, and yet  lies at the heart of much basic fluid phenomena.  This
              will be studied  by a combination of modelling, analysis, and large-scale
              computation.  The final project concerns the dynamics of shear-thinning liquids
               flowing in thin gaps.  Such flows are important to display device  design, and
              to injection molding.  Of particular interest is the  instability and pattern
              formation associated with a gas/liquid  interface which is driven but mediated
              by surface tension.  This is an  extremely challenging computational problem,
              requiring the development  of new simulational methods.
