Title       : Response of a Cycling, Diverse Cell Population to Toxic Stress: Dose-Rate
               Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9707991

Award Number: 9707991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Hahnfeldt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Engl Deaconess Hosp
	      185 Pilgrim Rd
	      Boston, MA  022155324    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hahnfeldt  9707991       When a cell population is subjected to toxic or
              transforming  doses of chemical or radiation agents, the net population effect 
              depends not only on the total dose but also on the time course of  dose
              delivery, i.e. one has dose-rate effects.  Dose-rate effects  are not only very
              important in themselves but give insight into  the underlying biochemical
              mechanisms and kinetics of damage  formation.  For ionizing radiation, DNA
              repair usually leads to  direct dose-rate effects, i.e. less damage if a given
              dose is  prolonged.  But, for dynamic cell populations, inverse dose-rate 
              effects, with more damage for prolonged irradiation, also occur.  The inverse
              dose-rate effects are due to the first part of a  prolonged dose delivery
              preferentially killing the more sensitive  cells in a diverse cell population,
              and biological processes then  driving the preferentially spared, more
              resistant cells into more  sensitive states, where the remainder of the dose
              can act upon  them more effectively.  Such resensitization is often due to 
              redistribution of the cell population attendant on movement  through the cell
              cycle.  The investigator studies dose-rate  effects for induced damage to a
              heterogeneous, dynamic  population, by combining standard models for cell
              population  dynamics with standard models for cell damage.  Various  population
              dynamics models are be used, having the common feature  that there is a
              well-defined asymptotic growth rate and an  asymptotically stable population
              structure.  Recent  resensitization theorems on the killing of cycling cells
              are  extended to theorems on cell populations having additional  diversity. 
              Biologically important examples under investigation  include: (a) populations
              consisting of more than one  age-structured subpopulation, (b)
              maturity-structured populations  (with cell cycle synchrony loss ascribed to
              variable age  progression over time), and (c) populations subjected to 
              environmental stochasticity.  Quantitative models, developed in  p reliminary
              studies, of the inverse dose-rate effect for in vitro  transformation, an
              indicator of cellular mutagenesis are  generalized.       Adverse effects of
              radiation (or chemicals) in the  environment often occur at low dose rates over
              long periods of  time.  For practical reasons, laboratory studies of the 
              parameters that govern the adverse effects normally use much  shorter time
              periods and much higher dose rates.  To bridge this  gap, modeling of dose-rate
              effects is needed.  One dose-rate  effect is observable for populations, e.g.
              of cells, that possess  any sort of susceptibility variation over time to toxic
              insults.  Under these conditions, prolonging the delivery of a fixed total 
              dose  e.g., by halving the intensity (or concentration) and  doubling the
              exposure time  will not have neutral effect but will  instead change the
              efficacy of that fixed total exposure.  This  is because more of the population
              members, as they undergo their  sensitivity variations naturally over time,
              will now have the  opportunity to display their more susceptible states in time
              to  be affected by the exposure.  This pattern is different from that 
              anticipated in most laboratory studies.  Over a wide range of  conditions, the
              difference can in fact make a given dose more  damaging when delivered over a
              prolonged period rather than  rapidly, but for some other conditions, the
              opposite result can  be expected.  Mathematical theorems are developed to
              elucidate  these dependencies.  Important implications of this investigation 
              include the prediction of cellular mutagenesis and transformation  frequencies
              due to ambient, long-duration stress conditions.
