Title       : Systematics, Ontogeny, Osteology and Historical Biogeography of Fossil and
               Living Gars (Actinopterygii, Lepsosteiformes)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9707705

Award Number: 9707705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance Grande grande@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Bemis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-9707705  Grande     The gars (Lepisosteidae) are members of a very
              long-lived assemblage that is thought by most ichthyologists to be the most
              primitive living group of Neopterygii (a group that contains about half of all
              species of vertebrate animals).  The seven, living species of gars are today
              restricted to the eastern-America region, from southeastern Canada to Cuba. 
              Extinct species of gars, some over 100 millions years old, document that gars
              were once widespread, occurring on both American continents, Europe, Africa,
              Madagascar, and India.  Drs. L. Grande (of the Field Museum in Chicago) and W.
              Bemis (of the University of Massachusetts) will carry out the first
              comprehensive study of comparative anatomy, biogeography, and ecology
              (including paleoecology) among all living and numerous extinct species of gars.
               Their study will be anchored in thorough, detailed examination of skeletal
              variation but they also will examine living material to following developmental
              stages of critical morphological characters.  Several fossil species will be
              described and species-level taxonomic problems will be resolved.  A resolved
              genealogy (phylogeny) of lepisosteid species and of primitive neopterygian
              groups is expected to yield critical information regarding major questions
              surrounding the Earth's history, biodiversity, and patterns of biological
              extinction.  The work also will provide extremely relevant data towards
              resolution of one of the major questions in ichthyology: the origin of teleost
              fishes.
