Title       : The Use of 4-Dimensional Lidar Data to Evaluate Large Eddy Simulations: A Lake
               ICE Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9707165

Award Number: 9707165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431866             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin W. Eloranta eloranta@lidar.ssec.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9707165  Eloranta        Much of the energy that drives atmospheric circulations
              is obtained through  exchanges of heat, moisture, and momentum with the
              surface.  Lake-effect weather  events, where cold air masses are rapidly
              modified over the Great Lakes, are  excellent natural laboratories for studying
              these exchanges. The Lake-Induced  Convection Experiment (Lake-ICE) is a
              multiple-Principal Investigator project which  seeks to use this natural
              laboratory to determine how boundary layer growth  processes are controlled by
              mesoscale boundary layer convective structures and how  the modified boundary
              layer effects the production of precipitation and the larger  scale
              meteorological conditions.         In this research effort, the Principal
              Investigator will study the four  dimensional characteristics of the evolution
              of the boundary layer near the upwind  shore of Lake Michigan. To accomplish
              this, the Principal Investigator will deploy  and operate a  Volume Imaging
              Lidar (VIL) on the west shore of Lake Michigan  during the Lake-ICE project. 
              The lidar will observe the growing convective  boundary layer over the lake as
              cold air passes over the warm water.  These  observations will complement
              airborne and ground-based radar measurements  planned for mid-Lake area and the
              eastern shore and will be coordinated with other  research meteorological
              measurements.  During a typical data session, the VIL will  repetitively scan a
              three-dimensional volume extending to 21 km downwind.  These  images of aerosol
              backscatter will record the growth of convection as the air moves  downwind.   
                    Specifically, the lidar data will be analyzed to provide: 1) the depth of
              the  boundary layer as a function of distance downwind, 2) the wind speed and
              direction  as a function of downwind distance and altitude, 3) the dimensions
              and aspect  rations of the convective plumes, 4) the spatial organization of
              the convective cells  in the convective field, 5) the decorrelation time for
              convective structures, 6) the  d ownwind distance and altitude of first cloud
              formation.        The primary application of the lidar data will be to evaluate
              numerical  models of the boundary layer over the lake.  In addition, the
              Principal Investigators  will evaluate the ability of a large eddy simulation
              to derive an explicit description  of the convective field.          Successful
              completion of this research will increase fundamental  understanding of the
              evolution of the lake boundary layer which is crucial to  understanding and
              forecasting the very disruptive lake-effect snow events.  ***
