Title       : Enhancement of Measurement Techniques and Preliminary Study of Magnetic and
               Electrical Properties of Novel Conducting Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9707585

Award Number: 9707585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49000              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Grayson Alexander alexangr@lanmail.shu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Seton Hall University
	      400 South Orange Avenue
	      South Orange, NJ  070792646    973/275-2974

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9222,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9707585  Alexander    In this CAA project complex susceptibility and resistivity
               measurements will be used to investigate electric and  magnetic properties of
              composites of quasi one- and two-  dimensional molecular metal crystals in
              conventional  polymers.  The effect of molecular dimensionality of the 
              conducting particles on the percolation threshold and  conductivity of the
              composites will be instigated.  Data  will also be related to bulk crystal
              shape and dimensions,  molecular metal composition and metal concentration in
              the  composites.  We will investigate the properties of the  composites when
              the conducting phase becomes magnetic and  look for evidence of proximity
              effect and tuneling when the  conductor becomes superconducting.  Dielectric
              relaxation measurements will be used to  investigate interfacial chemical and
              electromagnetic  interactions between the conducting and insulating phases of 
              the composites.  These materials have potential as coatings  or extruded
              plastics for electromagnetic shielding or  electrostatic dissipation
              applications.  %%%  Composite materials made by combining conventional polymers
               with carbon or metal powders or fibers are currently used  for industrial
              applications, because of  their good  electrical conductivity and mechanical
              properties.  In this  CAA project, we plan to form, for the first time,
              composites  of conventional polymers with "molecular metals".  These are 
              metallorganic or purely organic substances that conduct  electricity.  Some are
              practically one-dimensional chains of  molecules weakly linked together. 
              Others are almost two-  dimensional "sheets" of molecules that are weakly
              linked  together.  This work will yield results of both fundamental  and
              practical importance.  We will gain understanding of the  effect of molecular
              dimensions on the electrical  conductivity of a composites and study the effect
              of  dispersing one- or two- dimensional superconducting or  magnetic crystals
              in an insulating, non-magnetic matrix.  These composi te magterials may exhibit
              good conductivity  and/or useful magnetic properties, making them important as 
              materials for electrostatic dissipation or electromagnetic  shielding.  In
              addition to journal publications, a patent  application is anticipated. 
              Detailed study of these  composites will take several years and will provide
              the base  for a long-term vigorous research program.  ***
