Title       : A Morphological and Molecular Investigation of Castaneoid Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9707945

Award Number: 9707945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Manos pmanos@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9707945  Manos   The ecologically and economically important family Fagaceae of
              oaks, beeches, and chestnuts is most familiar to temperate-zone botanists from
              a relative handful of species. But the family has many tropical species, and is
              especially diverse in southeast Asia, where Dr. Paul Manos of Duke University
              will be conducting field work to sample the two largest genera, Castanopsis and
              Lithocarpus. These two genera comprise nearly half of the species diversity in
              the family and represent an even greater range of morphological diversity in
              the characteristic cupule (the burr or acorn) than found in the temperate-zone
              members of the family. One goal of the research is to infer genealogical or
              phylogenetic relationships among the many tropical species, by integrating
              traditional morphological knowledge of these plants with new molecular data
              from DNA sequencing of nuclear ribosomal genes, which provide a direct measure
              of mutational differences between samples. This phylogenetic framework in turn
              will allow analysis of the history of development of various cupule
              morphologies in the lineages of tropical and subtropical Fagaceae, especially
              among cupule types that are indistinguishable at maturity but suspected of
              convergent evolution from different juvenile stages.   The range and history of
              species diversification in the "tropical chestnuts" or castaneoids are poorly
              known. Field work, study of existing herbarium collections, and new DNA
              sequence data will be brought together to improve our understanding of the
              basic taxonomy and phylogeny of these plants. Tropical diversity often contains
              key elements to understand the evolutionary history of plants in the temperate
              zone, and this is likely to be the case with the diverse, insect-pollinated
              Castanopsis and Lithocarpus of southeast Asia. The studies will prove useful in
              interpreting morphological evolution, and will place the major groups of
              castaneoids into a geographical as well as phylogenetic framework.
