Title       : Ontogeny, Phylogeny, and Heterochrony in Old World Monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9707361

Award Number: 9707361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Leigh s-leigh@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Patterns of primate growth and development (ontogeny) appear to be highly
              unusual relative to other mammals.  Unfortunately, the principles that govern
              these patterns remain poorly understood.  Therefore, this research project
              conducts an integrated study of growth and development in a group of
              closely-related African and Asian monkey species (baboons, mandrills,
              mangabeys, and macaques).  The project is designed to broaden, refine, and
              clarify our perspective on human ontogeny.  This research will help reveal
              connections between brain development and evolution that appear to have played
              a pivotal role over the course of  human evolution.  In addition, detailed
              comparisons between human and nonhuman primate ontogeny will be accomplished. 
              Consequently, it will be possible to establish whether or not humans are unique
              in exhibiting an adolescent skeletal growth spurt, resolving a long standing
              debate in theories of human evolution.  In order to attain these goals, the
              research conducts comparative analyses of ontogeny in fossil materials, living
              captive specimens, and wild-shot specimens.  A substantial portion of the study
              focuses on growth and development of the skull and skeletal system.  In
              addition, the project undertakes innovative analyses of growth hormones using
              data from captive colonies of baboons and mangabeys.  Hormonal analyses enable
              assessments of evolutionary changes in growth control.  Several other areas of
              research also will be explored.  For example, the study evaluates the relevance
              of developmental data to taxonomic questions, and conducts quantitative genetic
              analyses of growth and development.  Finally, the study has direct biomedical
              applications because baboons and mangabeys are important animal models of human
              diseases.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
