Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Studies of the Coevolution of Inbreeding Depression
               and Mating System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9707684

Award Number: 9707684
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcy K. Uyenoyama marcy@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9707684  Uyenoyama    Mating between closely related individuals often
              results in inbreeding depression, or the production of offspring of lower
              quality.  This project addresses the evolution of mating systems in response to
              inbreeding depression and its evolution in turn in response to the mating
              system.    Theoretical analyses suggest that the penalty of inbreeding
              depression evolves to different magnitudes among familial lineages that
              practice different levels of inbreeding.  Among the possible consequences of
              such interactions is the evolution of mixed mating systems, which entail both
              inbreeding and outbreeding.  Natural populations of Datura stramonium, which
              practices a mixed mating system, provide a model system for the direct
              exploration of these issues.   Previous work has demonstrated that a
              morphological character (stigma-anther distance) is both heritable and a
              determinant of the level of inbreeding in individuals.  The magnitude of  
              inbreeding depression will be estimated in individual families.  This system
              permits a test of whether inbreeding depression at the family level is
              associated with mating system.  In addition, numerical simulation studies will
              be conducted to explore various aspects of associations between inbreeding
              depression and familial lineage, including their genetic bases and consequences
              for the evolution of mating systems.   All living organisms are subject to the
              deleterious effects of mutations.  Processes that influence the generation,
              purging, and maintenance of mutational load directly affect the length   and
              quality of life.  Theoretical and empirical studies have established mating
              system as a major determinant as well as a consequence of inbreeding depression
              in natural populations.
