Title       : Community-Level Selection: Laboratory Experiments and Computer Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1997      
File        : a9707650

Award Number: 9707650
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221354             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Sloan Wilson dwilson@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Wilson, D. S.  DEB-9707650    Biological communities have often been described
              as functionally organized units, similar to single organisms in the harmony and
              coordination of their parts.  The evolution of adaptations at any level of the
              biological hierarchy, however, requires a corresponding process of natural
              selection at that level.  This grant proposal explores the process of
              community-level selection with laboratory experiments and computer simulations.
               In the laboratory, a population of isolated soil communities will be
              established and scored with respect to a phenotypic character (plant growth). 
              The highest and lowest scoring communities will be used as the "parents" to
              colonize a new set of "offspring" communities.  This experimental design is
              identical to standard artificial selection experiments except that the selected
              units are communities rather than individuals.  If the experiment is
              successful, it will produce soil communities that are functionally designed to
              increase (or decrease) plant growth.  The computer simulations will allow the
              same process to be explored in which the interactions among the species can be
              specified in detail.     Artificial selection at the individual level has been
              employed for centuries to develop strains of plants and animals that are useful
              to man.  The same procedure can potentially be used to evolve multi-species
              communities that interact as a coordinated team to solve important practical
              problems, such as promoting plant growth, excluding a target species from a
              community, or degrading a toxic compound.  Artificially selected communities
              may provide better solutions than artificially selected individuals for the
              same reason that coordinated teams of people can outperform single individuals.
               The advantages of "teamwork" are obvious; the problem is how to develop the
              teams.  The proposed research may provide a simple method that so far has been
              overlooked.
