Title       : The Role of Senescence in Life History Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2002  
File        : a9707473

Award Number: 9707473
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400001             (Estimated)
Investigator: David N. Reznick gupy@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9707473  Reznick   Most current research on the aging process evaluates the
              influence of environmental factors on the rate of aging or characterizes
              individual genes that influence lifespan in two model organisms, the nematode
              Caenorhabditis elegans and the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster.  We propose
              evaluating aging instead from an evolutionary perspective.  Senescence is
              thought to have evolved because the strength of selection declines with an
              individual's age;  natural selection will have the greatest influence on
              individuals that are early in their reproductive lifespans because they have
              only begun to contribute offspring to the next generation.  The influence of
              selection declines to zero when individuals are no longer reproducing or caring
              for offspring.   Two genetic mechanisms, mutation accumulation and antagonistic
              pleiotropy, can account for the evolution of senescence due to this
              age-specific decline in the strength of selection.  Both mechanisms predict
              that high extrinsic mortality rates will select for earlier senescence.   
              "Extrinsic mortality" refers to death to external causes, such as predation. 
              We will test this prediction by evaluating the lifespan and lifetime
              reproductive performance of guppies derived from high and low predation
              environments.   In our earlier work, we established that natural populations of
              guppies from Trinidad experience high versus low mortality rates, correlated
              with the species of predators present.  Guppies from high predation
              environments mature at an earlier age, smaller size, and devote more of their
              resources to reproduction than their counterparts from low predation
              environments.  These differences were shown to have a genetic basis.  They were
              further evaluated by modifying mortality rates in natural populations,
              resulting in the evolution of these same life history patterns over time
              intervals as short as four years.  These combined studies argue that predators
              and mortality rates have selected for changes in the early life history,  or
              that the differences that we observed among populations in early life history
              represent an adaptation to prevailing mortality  rates.  These results provide
              the rationale for predicting that predation has also influences the evolution
              of the aging process.!   Evaluating aging in these fish potentially provides a
              new model system for studying the aging process, a new way of identifying genes
              associated with aging, and a means for answering a question that is not
              accessible in all lab-based systems considered thus far, which is "why do we
              see such dramatic differences in lifespan among species in nature?".
