Title       : Molecular Systematics of a Rapidly Evolving Species Flock: The Mbuna (Cichlidae)
               of Lake Malawi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9707532

Award Number: 9707532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irving L. Kornfield irvk@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5928,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9707532  Kornfield   Irv Kornfield of the University of Maine will employ
              hypervariable microsatellite markers to study the systematics and phylogeny of
              the mbuna , a large group of cichlid fishes of Lake Malawi, East Africa, that
              have obligate ties to shallow, rocky habitats..  Mbuna represent a highly
              speciose assemblage known for rapid and extensive diversification over a short
              periods of time.  Mbuna thus represent an ideal model system in which to
              examine processes (e.g., habitat fragmentation, trophic and spatial niche
              shifts, interspecific agonistic interaction, and sexual selection) that are
              associated with speciation and adaptive radiation.  Kornfield will use
              microsatellite markers to construct a hypothesis of relationships among major
              lineages within the extremely large and complex mbuna genus Pseudotopheus.  The
              molecular phylogeny will then be compared to one based primarily on
              morphological and behavioral traits.  Kornfield also will examine characters
              found in the morphology and distribution of scales.  This aspect of the project
              will be in collaboration with E. Leppitsch of the Austrian Science Foundation. 
              A second part of the project will be to evaluate the hypothesis that allopatric
              populations of mbuna that display reproductive coloration exhibit the disjunct
              patterns of distribution as a consequence of vicariance.  An alternate
              hypothesis, that the similarities in reproductive coloration stem from
              parallelism or convergence, also will be evaluated.  Resolution of phylogenetic
              relationships within the mbuna will provide fundamental insights into the
              phenomena of sexual selection and behaviorally-mediated reproductive isolation.
               The project involves significant collaboration with a scientist from Malawi,
              and is co-funded by the U.S.-Africa Program in the Division of International
              Programs at the NSF.
