Title       : A Posteriori Error Estimation and Up-Scaling for Mixed Finite Element Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9707015

Award Number: 9707015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jong-Shi Pang                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd J. Arbogast arbogast@brahma.ticam.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9707015  Todd Arbogast    A POSTERIORI ERROR ESTIMATION AND  UP-SCALING FOR
              MIXED FINITE ELEMENT METHODS      This project concerns the approximation of
              second order elliptic and parabolic  partial differential equations by mixed
              finite element methods on logically  rectangular grids.  The first objective is
              to develop a local a posteriori  error estimator or indicator, so that spatial
              errors can be localized.  We  propose to estimate the error by exploiting the
              equivalence between mixed and  non-conforming methods for rectangular elements.
               The second objective is to  develop up-scaling or homogenization techniques
              for highly variable  coefficients and point-like sources, i.e., for resolving
              fine length scales in  the model system that are below the size of a practical
              computational mesh.  The error associated with using these up-scaling
              techniques must be  quantifiable.  We propose to base our techniques on the
              discrete equations, and  use the coarse scale Raviart-Thomas projection
              operator which preserves the  flux across any element face.  The third
              objective is to demonstrate the  applicability of the techniques in a practical
              setting; we consider the  simulation of subsurface flow.  The first two
              objectives are complementary.  Error estimation would allow us to refine the
              mesh where the solution is ill  behaved, as near sharp fronts, local
              heterogeneity, or sources (i.e., wells),  so that computational effort can be
              concentrated to resolve the major length  scales in both the data and the
              solution.  Up-scaling would allow us to further  resolve some scales below the
              mesh size.      Our understanding of fluid flow underground is important to a
              range of  activities, including the clean-up of ground-water contamination and
              oil and  gas production.  Ground-water supplies are increasingly threatened by 
              contaminants introduced into the environment by improper disposal or accidental
               release.  U.S. petroleum production has declined markedly in recent years. 
              These problems can be ameliorated by  complex engineering processes that
              require  careful design and monitoring, which in turn depend on our ability to
              simulate  on a computer the movement of fluids underground.  Our computer
              simulations  must be sufficiently detailed that we can further predict
              physical, chemical,  and biological processes and the consequences of human
              intervention.  Such  simulation requires that we approximate accurately the
              differential equations  governing the movement and interaction of the fluids. 
              It is difficult to do  this for a number of reasons, but the most basic is a
              lack of resolution: we  can only use data and compute fluid velocities at a
              small number of grid points  in space.  To date there has been no effective way
              to estimate the error in the  approximation to the fluid velocity.  If we knew
              that our errors were large, we  could take corrective action by increasing the
              grid resolution, up to the  limits of the computer resources available.  Beyond
              that limit, it is necessary  to approximate certain very small-scale quantities
              below the grid scale (such  as local variations in rock properties) by
              replacing them by some appropriately  defined average quantities.  We address
              these concerns in this proposal, and  demonstrate the applicability of our
              techniques in practical settings to gain  their acceptance by engineers.
