Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1996      
File        : a9458164

Award Number: 9458164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180299             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Eric Gouaux   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,9183,9297,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9458164  Gouaux  The work in this project involves using x-ray crystallography
              to  elucidate the three-dimensional structures of membrane proteins, with a 
              focus on oligomeric complexes which form channels or pores. The current 
              concentration of these studies is on a class of bacterial toxins that  exist in
              two distinct states: water-soluble monomers and membrane-bound  oligomers.
              Members of this class of molecules include  -hemolysin from  Staphylococcus
              aureus, aerolysin from Aermonas hydrophila and cytotoxin  from Pseudomonas
              aeruginosa. Mechanisms for assembly of this specific  class of transmembrane
              pores will be developed and from this, models will  be developed for the
              assembly of oligomeric membrane proteins in general.  To accomplish these aims
              strategies have been developed for; 1 )  crystallization of membrane proteins
              which involve sparse matrix and  systematic approaches; 2) proven the ability
              of n-alkyl dimethylphosphine  oxide detergents for use in membrane protein
              crystallizations; and '3)  have identified novel amphiphiles which promote the
              growth of large  single crystals. More than 15 different crystal forms of the 
              detergent-solubilized  -hemolysin oligomer have been formed (three of  which
              diffract beyond 3.0 angstroms) and have 3 distinct forms of the  water-soluble
              monomeric species. Determination of the oligomer ace form  is underway. During
              the time of this award plans are to crystallize and  determine the structures
              of assembly intermediates of  -hemolysin using  different mutants that are
              "frozen" at different stages and to pursue  crystallographic studies on related
              toxins and on important oligomeric  membrane proteins.  %%%  The transduction
              of energy, the active and passive transport of ions  and molecules, the
              transmission of biochemical signals into and out of  cells and organelles, and
              the action of potent bacterial toxins are  some of the critical biological
              processes mediated by membrane  proteins. Models of the three-dimensional
              structure and the function of   membrane proteins are much less developed when
              compared to models that  describe the properties of water-soluble proteins. The
              work in this  project involves using x-ray crystallography to elucidate the
              three-  dimensional structure of membrane proteins.  -Hemolysin, one of the 
              important virulence factors from Staphylococcus aureus, kills blood cells  by
              forming a hole in the cell membrane. This project is focused on  understanding
              how the toxin assembles itself on the surface of the  cells - that is, how it
              actually creates the fatal pore in the cell  membrane. In addition, studies are
              planned on crystallography of  related toxins, ion channels and receptors.
              These fundamental studies  will lay the foundation for genetic engineering of
              membrane proteins  for use as novel biomaterials and as chemotherapeutic
              agents.  ***
