Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9458185

Award Number: 9458185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna Marie Pyle amp11@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9458185  Pyle  This research program is designed to elucidate the tertiary
              folding  patterns and chemical mechanism of the group II intron, a 
              structurally complex catalytic RNA involved in eukaryotic gene  expression.
              Group II introns are often required for the processing  of pre-RNAs in the
              mitochondria of plants and yeast. The tertiary  architecture, or folding of the
              group II intron is of great  interest because it cannot be solved using
              conventional  base-pairing rules and preliminary work suggests it is different 
              from any RNA studied previously. The specific objectives being  studied are: 1)
              to determine the location an identity of tertiary  interactions stabilizing
              group II intron folding. In particular,  characterize interactions between
              Domain (D1), which binds the  5'-exon, and Domain 5 (D5), a small catalytically
              essential RNA  that binds D1 in-trans. 2) Provide a complete kinetic framework
              for  the folding pathway and chemical mechanism of the wild-type group  II
              intron, enabling a precise interpretation of mutational   results. 3) Solve the
              three-dimensional structure of the group II  intron through a combination of
              biochemical, X-ray crystallographic  and molecular modeling studies. 4) Utilize
              Group II intron  substructures derived from catalytic D5 and nucleophilic D6 as
               covalent probes to scan for group II introns in humans. 5) By  swapping small
              nuclear RNA components Or the spliceosome with  domains of the Group II intron,
              search for evidence that group II  introns and spliceosomal RNAs are related in
              structure or function.  %%%  This research program is investigating the folding
              patterns and  chemical mechanisms of the Group II intron, which is a 
              structurally complex catalytic RNA involved in gene expression in  plants and
              yeast. The folding of the group II intron is of great  interest because it
              cannot be solved using conventional  base-pairing rules for nucleic acids and
              preliminary work  suggests it is different from any RNA studied previously.
              These  studies may serve a s an interesting and biologically relevant  model
              for novel forms of RNA tertiary organization that are  stabilized through
              nucleic acid base-backbone contacts, metal ion  bridges, and other unusual
              inter actions. Catalytic RNAs  (ribozymes) such as the group II intron provide
              a particularly  effective means of characterizing RNA tertiary interactions 
              because ribozymes report on changes in their structure through  changes in
              their catalytic activity. These studies will provide  kinetic evidence for
              group II intron folding as well as solve the  three-dimensional structure of
              the group II intron. Studies will  also be done to scan for human group II
              introns to see if they  occur in animal cells which is not known to date.  ***
