Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9458100

Award Number: 9458100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Bredt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9458100  Bredt    Nitric oxide (NO) is a noxious free radical gas which, 
              remarkably, functions as an endogenous biological messenger  molecule. 
              Initially identified in mammalian macrophages and  endothelial cells, NO
              appears to have prominent influences  in diverse tissues throughout the animal
              kingdom.  NO  represents a major divergence from previously characterized 
              cellular signals.  While other transmitters reversibly  interact with high
              affinity receptors in a "lock-and-key"  manner, NO achieves signaling
              specificity not by its three  dimensional shape but rather by its radical
              chemical  reactivity.  Under ambient conditions NO is a lipophilic  gas; these
              properties allow it to rapidly diffuse into cells  without being restrained by
              cellular barriers.  The  discovery of NO as a messenger has prompted a search
              for  other small reactive biological mediators and already  several have been
              found in organisms ranging from bacteria  to primates.    This laboratory is
              using molecular and genetic approaches to  define the roles of NO in the
              functioning and development of  the nervous system.  Owing to its reactive
              free-radical  structure, experimentally adding NO to a biological system  may
              cause non-specific effects which are physiologically  unimportant.  Also, NO is
              technically difficult to deliver  in a manner which resembles endogenous
              synthesis.  To avoid  these problems these studies will make use of transgenic
              NOS  "knockout" mice generated by targeted disruption of the  endogenous gene. 
              These animals are viable and furtile and  should serve as an excellent model to
              study the neuronal  functions for NO.  The PI will also develop a "dominant 
              negative" genetic approach to delete NOS from specific cell  types and during
              selected stages of development.  These and  other future studies of NO may help
              serve as a model for  understanding signaling by other members of this new
              class  of biological messengers.
