Title       : NYI: Quantitative Inverse Electrocardiography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9458064

Award Number: 9458064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher R. Johnson crj@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9179,9216,9297,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The goal of this project is to  bring together   expertise in  geometrical
              modeling, numerical analysis, large scale   computing,  and scientific 
              visualization applied to problems in medicine---computational   interactively
              investigate  bioelectric fields and provide the   ability to design 
              bioelectric devices.  Every year, 500,000 people die suddenly    due to 
              abnormalities in their heart's electrical system (cardiac    arrhythmias)
              and/or  coronary artery disease.  Traditional  electrograms (ECGs)   show
              damage that  already has occurred in the  heart; consequently physicians  
              currently treat many  life-  threatening disorders of the heart's rhythm after
              they   occur.  This  project seeks to equip physicians with a noninvasive and  
               accurate means of  determining the changes within the heart's  electrical
              system   that signal the  onset of disease much earlier  and allow them to
              treat the   disease prior to  significant damage  to the heart.    To
              accommodate efficient   design and  optimization, a  computational steering
              package is developed   which   allows the user to design bioelectric devices
              and measure   their  effectiveness in  an interactive graphical environment. 
              Using  interactive   graphical input  devices, engineers are able to  design
              devices, place them   directly into the  computer model, and  automatically
              change parameters and   boundary conditions as  well  as the mesh
              discretization level needed for an accurate   finite  element  solution. 
              Instead of the typical simulation mode --    manually setting input 
              parameters, computing results, storing  data off to disk,   visualizing the 
              results via a separate  visualization package, then starting   again at the 
              beginning --  software is developed to ``close the loop'' and   allow the 
              visualization to help guide (steer) the design and   computation  phases of the
               simulation.  Not only are specific results on  bioelectric   field problems 
              significant, but this general approach  is applicable to many   other
              engineering  and scientific problems,  and the computational   infrastructure
              developed  is broadly useful to many other researchers.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
