Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2000 
File        : a9458201

Award Number: 9458201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy M. Handel handel@paradise1.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9458201  Handel  A holy grail in structural biology is the ability to predict
              three  dimensional structure from protein sequence, and conversely, to identify
               sequences that will adopt a predefined 3-dimensional fold. This requires  a
              thorough understanding of the hierarchy of energetic forces that  dictate
              protein structure. De novo protein design has been a useful  approach for
              investigating these forces and understanding the  sequence-structure
              relationship in proteins. To this end, computational  techniques are being
              developed in order to facilitate protein design. In  order to simplify this
              problem initial studies involve repacking of the  protein core rather on
              redesign of the total protein. This allows  investigators to limit sequence
              space to hydrophobic amino acids, and  energy terms to Van der Waals and
              solvation energies. Despite this  simplification, choosing the identity of core
              residues in a protein is a  complex combinatorial problem; the difficulty lies
              in the requirement  that the residues simultaneously satisfy conditions of high
              density  packing and favorable interaction energies with the protein backbone
              and  other side chains. The complexity of protein folding is dealt with in two 
              ways in this project. First the range of possible side chain orientations  is
              restricted by calculating rotamer libraries for the target structure  being
              repacked. Secondly, genetic algorithms are used to search through  the reduced
              but nonetheless enormous set of possible residue-rotamer  combinations. These
              algorithms are efficient optimization routines which  "evolve" highly fit sets
              of information depending on the selection  criterion. The information sets are
              combinations of side chains in  designated orientations (a structure) and the
              criterion is based on the  lowest Van der Waals and/or solvation energy.
              Experimental study of  predicted cores is of fundamental importance to
              increasing the  understanding of the rules of protein folding and to improve 
              computational strategies. Thus, repacke d proteins are subsequently  produced
              by recombinant methodologies, and their structures characterized  in great
              detail by biophysical techniques including heteronuclear  multidimensional NMR.
               %%%  A holy grail in structural biology is the ability to predict three 
              dimensional structure from protein sequence, and conversely, to  identify
              sequences that will adopt a predefined 3-dimensional fold.  This requires a
              thorough understanding of the hierarchy of energetic  forces that dictate
              protein structure. De novo protein design has been  a useful approach for
              investigating these forces and understanding the  sequence-structure
              relationship in proteins. To this end, computational  techniques are being
              developed in order to facilitate protein design.  In order to simplify this
              problem initial studies involve repacking of  the protein core rather on
              redesign of the total protein. This allows  investigators to limit sequence
              space to hydrophobic amino acids, and  energy terms to Van der Waals and
              solvation energies. Despite this  simplification, choosing the identity of core
              residues in a protein is  a complex combinatorial problem; the difficulty lies
              in the requirement  that the residues simultaneously satisfy conditions of high
              density  packing and favorable interaction energies with the protein backbone 
              and other side chains. These studies will also use NMR methods to look  at the
              dynamic structures of a developmentally important transcription  factor from
              the helix-loop-helix family of proteins, as well as on  proteins involved in
              lymphocyte chemotaxis and activation. These  proteins will be investigated by
              using a combination of biophysical and  molecular biological techniques.
