Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9458207

Award Number: 9458207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James U. Bowie bowie@uclaue.mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9458207  Bowie  Membrane proteins are responsible for the selective transport of
               molecules in and out of the cell, for coupling of energy from  nutrient
              metabolism or light to the synthesis of ATP, and for  transducing external
              signals from molecules such as  neurotransmitters and hormones across the
              membrane. Mutations in  membrane proteins are responsible for diseases ranging
              from cystic  fibrosis to cancer. In spite of their crucial importance to 
              biochemical processes, knowledge of membrane protein structure is  still at a
              rudimentary level. In order to understand how the amino  acid sequence of a
              membrane protein determines its  three-dimensional  structure, it is essential
              to know which residues in the sequence  are the key determinants of that
              structure. The work undertaken in  this study is designed to identify the
              structure determining  residues in the sequence of a particular membrane
              protein,  diacylglycerolkinase from Escherichia coli. The problem will be 
              addressed by determining what sequence changes can be made in the  protein
              without affecting activity, what sequence changes destroy  the ability of the
              protein to fold and function, and what sequence  changes alter the stability of
              the protein. Residues important to  the structure of the protein should be less
              tolerant to change than  residues that are not playing crucial roles. The
              information  obtained will improve the understanding of the forces that 
              stabilize membrane protein structure and improve the ability to  predict
              membrane protein structure.  %%%  Proteins are enormous molecules that are
              almost entirely  responsible for the smooth operation of cellular machinery.
              Many  thousands of different protein molecules are required to create an 
              organism as complex as the human body and some of our most feared  diseases
              ranging from cystic fibrosis to cancer are caused by  damaged protein
              molecules. Consequently, much effort has been  directed toward learning how
              particular protein molecules work. A  crucial step in developing  an
              understanding of any individual  protein is to determine its structure: the
              three dimensional  arrangement of atoms in the protein molecule. Using current 
              experimental approaches, however, it usually takes many years to  determine the
              structure of any protein. As a result, there is  little hope of obtaining a
              detailed understanding of the thousands  of proteins in the cell unless we can
              more rapidly learn their  structures. This work is directed toward
              understanding the  molecular rules that determine how a particular class of
              protein  structures is determined. This work will be used to develop more 
              rapid, theoretical approaches to structure determination.  ***
