Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1999       
File        : a9458178

Award Number: 9458178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Baker dabaker@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9458178  Baker  Little is known about how amino acid sequences specify the
              native  states of proteins.  The proposed research is a combined molecular 
              biological and biophysical approach to this problem.  Because the  complexity
              the folding problem increases with chain length, the  research is focused ont
              he shortest sequences known to fold into  unique, stable structures without
              disulfide bonds.  The goal is to  identify the determinants of folding for two
              small  -  proteins  which have similar secondary structural elements but
              different  folding topologies.  Both in vivo and in vitro selection methods 
              will be used to identify 1) large sets of divergent sequences which  adopt each
              folding topology 2) amino acid sequence changes which  convert one topology
              into another. The 3-D structures adopted by  particularly interesting sequences
              will be studied in detail using  NMR and X-ray crystallography.  Analysis of
              the resulting sequence-  structure database and comparison with the sequences
              and structures  of natural  -  proteins will seek to identify the sequence
              patterns  which specify each of the two topologies.  A detailed understanding 
              of how amino acid sequence specifies tertiary structure for these  particularly
              simple proteins should contribute to the understanding  of the folding of more
              complex proteins.  %%%  Due to advances in technology and the initation of
              large scale DNA  sequencing projects, DNA sequence information is being
              generated at  an ever increasing rate.  However, understanding the role of the 
              newly sequenced genes is difficult from the DNA sequences alone;  what one
              needs to know are the structures and functions of the  proteins that the genes
              encode.  The research project is directed  at understanding the rules which
              connect amino acid sequences with  protein structures for two particularly
              simple proteins.  To the  extent that the rules generalize, this knowledge
              should contribute  to the understanding of the folding of larger and more
              complex  proteins, and thus to th e interpretation of data generated in  genome
              sequencing projects.  ***
