Title       : U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research: Characterization of Scorpion Venom Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1994      
File        : a9103846

Award Number: 9103846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul L. Fletcher fletcher@toxin.med.ecu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maryann D. Fletcher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 5922      MEXICO
Fld Applictn: 0511303   Toxicology                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1117,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a research collaboration                               
              between Professor Fletcher of East Carolina University                         
              and Professor Lourival D. Possani of the Universidad                           
              Nacional Autonoma de Mexico in Mexico City.  The                               
              investigators intend to specifically identify the                              
              receptor proteins in mammalian pancreas that are                               
              targeted by scorpion venom toxic proteins to activate                          
              exocrine secretory discharge.  Identification will                             
              measure venom protein binding and localize the                                 
              receptors at the cellular level.  The work is expected                         
              to lead to the isolation and characterization of these                         
              receptors.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The U.S. laboratory will supply the Mexican laboratory                         
              with biotinylated and radiolabled scorpion venom                               
              proteins while the Mexican laboratory will provide                             
              synthetic peptide analogs of the venom proteins.  Both                         
              laboratories will use scorpion venom supplied by the                           
              Buntanton Institute in Brazil.  Interest in exploring                          
              these venoms and their effect on the pancreas is high                          
              because they share no features in common with proteins                         
              and peptides previously described that are also known                          
              to act on the exocrine pancreas.  These studies seem                           
              to include that certain excitatory behavior, usually                           
              associated with nerve and muscle cells, may also occur                         
              in epithelial tissue and thus may increase our                                 
              understanding of receptor-mediated secretory activity                          
              of these tissues.
