Title       : Interaction between Low-Frequency Waves and High Frequency Eddies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1993       
File        : a9103647

Award Number: 9103647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Huug M. van den Dool   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ming Cai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The time-averaged (climatological) extra-tropical                         
              atmospheric flow shows a definite spatial arrangement of areas of              
              locally maximum variance ("storm tracks") located east of                      
              equatorward extending meanders (pressure trough) in the                        
              climatological jet-stream.  Van den Dool and Cai propose to study              
              the temporal variations of the flow which underlie this climatic               
              feature.  They posit a complementary inter-relationship between                
              slowly-varying ("low frequency") planetary-scale waves and                     
              rapidly changing ("high-frequency") synoptic scale eddies.  This               
              would suggest that there exist traveling storm track regions                   
              downstream of traveling low-frequency waves, which are obscured                
              in the time average.  In fact, they report on a pilot study which              
              demonstrates the existence of such regions in the mid-                         
              troposphere.  They used a novel analysis technique, which records              
              high-frequency activity in a frame which follows an identifiable               
              feature of the low-frequency flow as it travels about the mid-                 
              latitudes.  Having demonstrated the existence of traveling storm               
              tracks, they now propose extended analyses to elucidate the                    
              three-dimensional structures of both the low-frequency and high-               
              frequency features as seen in this moving ("phase-transformed")                
              frame, and the symbiotic relationship between them.  The results               
              of the proposed study will form the basis of future attempts to                
              extend detailed day-to-day weather forecasts out to ranges that                
              exceed a week.
