Title       : Late Cenozoic Extensional Deformation of Bulgaria and the Role of Lower Crustal
               Flow in Continental Deformation (Crustal Structures and Tectonics): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9103478

Award Number: 9103478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : October 28,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48241              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leigh H. Royden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1553,
Abstract    :
                This research consists of two parts: (1) a study of the young                
              extensional history of Bulgaria; and (2) application of fluid                  
              dynamic theory to the problem of lower crustal flow during                     
              continental deformation.  The Bulgarian component of the                       
              program consists of:  compilation of existing data on the                      
              structure, age, stratigraphy, etc. of features related to young                
              extension in Bulgaria; regional correlation of extensional                     
              events with coeval events along the Hellenic trench system; and                
              quantitative analysis gravity and topography data across young                 
              extensional features.  The goal of this portion of the study                   
              is to better understand the relationship of subduction and its                 
              driving forces to regional deformation in the upper                            
              lithosphere.  The problem of lower crustal flow during                         
              lithospheric deformation will be addressed by application of                   
              a variation of simple channel (or sheet) flow to simple two and                
              three dimensional models of the deforming lithosphere with the                 
              ultimate goal of better understanding the coupling of crustal                  
              and mantle motions during continental deformation.                             
                The project combines an attempt to understand the basic                      
              tertiary evolutions of Bulgaria with an attempt to get a better                
              theoretical handle on flow in the lower crust.  It also                        
              furthers VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for                   
              women to advance their careers in science or engineering                       
              through research, and to encourage other women to pursue                       
              careers in these areas through the investigators' enhanced                     
              visibility as role models on the host campuses.  In this                       
              project, the proposed activities which contribute to the second                
              objective include:  presentation of a series of guest lectures,                
              establishment of a weekly seminar/support group for female                     
              graduate students (and post-doctoral fellows), and counseling                  
              of female students in a department where there are currently                   
              no female faculty.
