Title       : Spectral Analyses of Old Stellar Populations (Stars and Stellar Evolution): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9103302

Award Number: 9103302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Peterson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1215,
Abstract    :
                This proposal is to calculate and apply theoretical stellar                  
              spectra to stars in globular clusters in the Local Group, in                   
              order to quantify the metallicity calibration and to                           
              investigate the occurrence of variations in the relative                       
              abundances of light elements and in the mean stellar age.  The                 
              work will be based on models and spectra generated from the                    
              newly expanded line list of Kurucz, which have reproduced both                 
              flux distributions and individual line strengths of the Sun and                
              the cool giant Arcturus in the solar neighborhood.  The first                  
              stage of the proposed work will be to calculate models and                     
              spectra for individual cool giants in the Galactic globular                    
              clusters M4, M71, and 47 Tucanae; the open cluster M67; and the                
              Galactic bulge.  The goal is to determine the overall                          
              metallicity and the abundance ratio of the light elements                      
              oxygen, magnesium, silicon, calcium, sodium, and aluminum with                 
              respect to iron, to show to what extent explosive                              
              nucleosynthesis dominated the element production in various                    
              environments and epochs.  Following this, theoretical spectra                  
              will be completed for hotter stars of various metallicities                    
              near that of the Sun, both with and without light element                      
              enhancements.  Combinations of these spectra appropriate to                    
              clusters of different ages will then be compared to the                        
              observed integrated-light spectra of globular clusters in                      
              Andromeda to simultaneously estimate the iron and light-element                
              abundances and the mean stellar age.                                           
                The proposed research represents "state of the art" work in                  
              stellar atmospheres and elemental abundances, which could make                 
              substantial advances in our understanding of the composition                   
              and evolution of the Galaxy, namely structure of stars and                     
              history of the evolution of the elements.  The project furthers                
              VPW program objectives to provide opportunities for women to                   
              advance their careers in science or engineering through                        
              research, and to encourage other women to pursue careers in                    
              these areas through the investigators' enhanced visibility as                  
              role models on the host campuses.  In this effort, the proposed                
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:                   
              giving guest lectures on the real-life analyses of stellar                     
              abundances in a graduate course on stellar atmospheres and                     
              presenting a seminar on how telescope applications should be                   
              written.
