Title       : Polypeptide Structure of Nuclear Pore Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1991  
File        : a9103496

Award Number: 9103496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miguel Berrios miguel@pharm.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
                 The long term objective of the project is to study the                      
              polypeptide structure of the nuclear pore complexes in Drosophila              
              melanogaster.  Work will focus on a myosin-like ATPase recently                
              localized to Drosophila nuclear pore complexes and thought to                  
              participate in nucleocytoplasmic transport.  The specific goal of              
              this proposal is to biochemically identify the nuclear myosin-like             
              protein.  Work will concentrate on the purification of this protein            
              from Drosophila Kc tissue culture cells and/or early embryos using             
              affinity chromatography strategies.  Once the nuclear myosin-like              
              ATPase protein has been affinity purified, amino acid sequence                 
              information will be used to generate monospecific antibodies and               
              oligonucleotides to clone and sequence the gene encoding the                   
              Drosophila nuclear myosin-like ATPase and to confirm its nuclear               
              pore complex localization.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Nuclear pores are the sites at which movement of proteins, nucleic             
              acids, and nucleoprotein complexes take place between the cytoplasm            
              and the nucleus.  This is an important area of current research in             
              cellular biology, since communication between the nucleus and the              
              cytoplasm is critical to the eukaryotic cell.  Very little is known            
              about the transport process or the macromolecules which are                    
              involved.  It is generally accepted that there is an ATPase                    
              associated with nuclear pores.  Affinity photolabeling of a                    
              candidate nuclear pore ATPase led to the identification of the                 
              putative myosin-like pore protein, which will be studied further               
              with the support of this award.
