Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1991      
File        : a9103980

Award Number: 9103980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7375               (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Doolittle dolitl@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean P. Lambert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Much attention has been given to human activities in                      
              tropical regions during the past half century.  Tropical dry                   
              forests occupy a roughly equivalent proportion of the earth's                  
              surface as do tropical rain forests, and like the tropical rain                
              forests, they are decreasing dramatically in area.  Shifting                   
              cultivation, the principal subsistence agricultural activity in                
              tropical forests, has been less well studied in tropical dry                   
              forests than it has been in the tropical rain forests.  This                   
              doctoral dissertation project will investigate the shifting                    
              cultivation system as it operates in diverse environmental                     
              settings within the tropical dry forests of Guerrero, Mexico.                  
              Specific attention will be given to cultigen diversity, fallow                 
              characteristics, environmental impacts, and the sustainability of              
              the production strategies.  Field research will include                        
              observation of cultivation activities and biophysical conditions               
              and processes.  Quantitative assessment of changes in the                      
              cultivation system in recent decades also will be used provide a               
              basis for testing hypotheses about the form, timing, and location              
              of shifting cultivation.                                                       
                                                                                             
                   This project will generate valuable information about                     
              tropical dry forest ecosystems that have been affected by the                  
              practice of agriculture.  The information will contribute to                   
              fundamental understanding of the relationships between                         
              environmental, cultural, and economic conditions.  The project                 
              will provide information relevant to addressing some of the major              
              problems associated with agriculture encountered by developing                 
              countries.  It also will provide an excellent opportunity for a                
              promising young scholar to continue to develop independent                     
              research skills.
