Title       : Combinatorial Generation, Gray Codes, and Structure Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9103431

Award Number: 9103431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dana S. Richards                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82283              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla D. Savage savage@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Many practical problems require for their solution the sampling of a           
              random object from a combinatorial class or, worse, an exhaustive              
              search through all objects in the class.  In order for such a search           
              to be possible, even for problems of moderate size, combinatorial              
              generation methods must be extremely efficient.                                
                   As an example, the Gray code approach to combinatorial generation         
              is to generate the objects as a list in which successive elements              
              differ only in a small way, as in the binary reflected Gray code.              
              Each combinatorial Gray code problem has an alternate formulation as a         
              Hamilton path or cycle problem in an associated graph, which may be            
              vertex transitive or even a Cayley graph.                                      
                   Asymptotic improvement in the efficiency of combinatorial                 
              generation requires not only good data structures and algorithm design         
              techniques, but, more often, some new insight into the structure of            
              the combinatorial class involved.  These structure questions put us            
              into the realm of well-known open problems on Hamilton cycles, graph           
              isomorphism, Cayley graphs, and symmetric chain decompositions in              
              lattices.  Progress on the enumeration problems is made by studying            
              the structure problems hand in hand.                                           
                   The research proposed herein is to continue work on combinatorial         
              generation and Gray codes and also to address directly some of the             
              outstanding problems in related areas.  These include the Hamilton             
              cycle problem on vertex transitive graphs and Cayley graphs, new               
              problems on de Bruijn - like sequences, and the existence of symmetric         
              chain decompositions and complete matchings in certain partially               
              ordered sets involving permutations and integer partitions.
