Title       : Study of Relationships of Particle Morphology and Process Parameters to the
               Physical Properties of Products in Powder Metallurgy, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9103107

Award Number: 9103107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1991  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1860000            (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Ramakrishnan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DATA NOT AVAILABLE
	      
	      ,       /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5919,5951,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  Under this project, Drs. John Beddow of the                      
              University of Iowa, and P. Ramakrishnan of the Indian                          
              Institute of Technology, Bombay (IITB) will continue their                     
              cooperation in the study of powder metallurgy.  The key                        
              objective of this research is to seek to relate the                            
              characteristics of powder particles that are used to form                      
              powder metallurgy and ceramic products to the structure and                    
              properties of the sintered materials so produced under a                       
              variety of processing conditions.  Investigations will                         
              include new theories of particle characterization and                          
              morphological analysis of particle size and shape on the                       
              one hand and study of new theories of morphological texture                    
              analysis and new and well-established methods of sintered                      
              material property measurement on the other.  Empirical,                        
              phenomological and theoretical correlations between powder                     
              and sintered material will be developed and explored.  Most                    
              of the experimental work will be done at IITB, with the                        
              analysis and theoretical formulation done at IITB and the                      
              U. of Iowa.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Scope:  The two scientists have been cooperating for a                         
              number of years with a number of joint publications in                         
              various refereed journals and presentations in U.S. and                        
              European conferences.  The area of research can lead to                        
              optimization of the methods used in recycling ferrous                          
              scrape, thus leading to important savings in material and                      
              energy usage.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Funding:  The project is being supported under two grants:                     
              INT 9103107 to the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay;                     
              INT 9106225 to the University of Iowa
