Title       : Role of Thrombin and Tissue Factor in Estrogen Stimulated Uterine Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9103484

Award Number: 9103484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine P. Henrikson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert W. Dickerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  The general question addressed in this project is:  how do sex            
              steroid hormones cause maturation of reproduction organs?  A model             
              system for the study of this question is the immature female rat.              
              When such a rat is given an injection of estradiol (E2), a very                
              rapid development of the uterus ensues.  One of the first                      
              detectable biochemical changes is an increase in two proteins -                
              tissue factor (TF) and thrombin.  Because they are among the first             
              things to change, it seems possible or even likely that they may               
              be involved in the further development of the uterus - that E2                 
              activates them, and they in turn activate other developmental                  
              processes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                   Both proteins are associated with cell division in other                  
              biological systems.  When the smooth muscle cells lining blood                 
              vessels are stimulated to grow, increases in TF occur.  Thrombin               
              is a stimulator of cell division in fibroblast and may be important            
              in the process of wound healing.  Since both proteins are present              
              in the uterus as it begins to grow they may be involved with                   
              uterine development under the control of E2 .  Our investigations              
              are directed at proving this hypothesis.                                       
                                                                                             
                   Our studies are complicated by the fact that thrombin is                  
              generated in biological systems from a precursor - prothrombin -               
              by the enzymes of the coagulation cascade which begins with TF.                
              A question we must answer is whether TF acts as a growth factor per            
              se or as the initiator of thrombin generation through the                      
              coagulation cascade.  The aims of this project are:  1) to show                
              that thrombin causes cell division in the uterus after E2                      
              stimulation and 2) to find out whether TF acts directly on the                 
              uterus or indirectly by the generation of thrombin.                            
                                                                                             
                   This research will increase our understanding of a normal                 
              biological process - the maturation of one of the organs of                    
              reproduction.//
