Title       : Dissertation Research: Archaeology of Middle Kingdom Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1991     
File        : a9103166

Award Number: 9103166
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11584              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elmer S. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Elmer Miller, Judy Lustig, a graduate               
              student at Temple University will conduct doctoral dissertation                
              research.  She will focus on the First Intermediate and Middle                 
              Kingdom periods of ancient Egypt and examine the relationships                 
              among gender ideology and roles, kinship structure and beliefs                 
              and practices about ancestors.  Because the database is so rich,               
              it will enable her to ask specific kinds of questions which                    
              cannot be addressed in most archaeological situations.  Primary                
              sources include scenes, texts and statuary found in elite tombs                
              as well as a variety of literary and religious texts concerning                
              divine and human relationships and the values Egyptians attached               
              to these.  Cemetery, village and house plans will be utilized as               
              additional sources of social information.                                      
                                                                                             
              This research is of anthropological significance for several                   
              reasons.  It will shed light from a new perspective on the social              
              processes which led to the growth of Egyptian civilization.                    
              Secondly, it is methodologically innovative.  While an                         
              anthropological/archaeological approach stresses the search for                
              the general rules which underlay human behavior and which are                  
              best revealed by their development over long periods of time,                  
              Egyptiologists tend to review their subject matter from a tighter              
              more historical perspective.  Therefore, anthropological                       
              archaeology and Egyptology constitute, unfortunately, two                      
              distinct disciplines with very little overlap and anthropologists              
              rarely examine Egyptian data.  Ms Lustig's research cuts across                
              this divide since it will examine this Egyptian material with an               
              anthropologist's eye and use this database to ask anthropological              
              questions.  Hopefully, it will mark a path which others will                   
              follow.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This project will also assist in the training of an extremely                  
              promising young scientist.
