Title       : International Travel Support for Research in Resilient Parallel Computation:
               University of Paris, France: Oct- Dec 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1992 
File        : a9103953

Award Number: 9103953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210716             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zvi M. Kedem zvi.kedem@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis E. Shasha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The investigators propose to develop theoretical foundations for               
              automatic and efficient methods to translate programs written for              
              ideal abstract shared-memory parallel machines to programs for more            
              realistic (but still abstract) parallel machines.  "Realistic" in this         
              context means that components of the machines may suffer failures or           
              that different components may execute at different speeds.                     
                                                                                             
              The first step in the translation is to divide the parallel program            
              written for the ideal abstract machine into fragments whose different          
              portions do not interfere with one another.  Each such program                 
              fragment will be transformed to a program on the more realistic                
              machine, which executes the fragment fast but only "tentatively"; that         
              is, the result is correct only with high probability.  Then the                
              realistic machine checks whether the tentative computation was                 
              correct.  If so, the fragment has completed its execution, otherwise           
              its effects will be undone and it will be re-executed.  Algorithmic            
              ideas are drawn from the literature on randomization and transaction           
              processing.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The significance of the proposed work is that many algorithms have             
              been developed for ideal shared-memory parallel machines, since they           
              are easy to program and understand.  The success of the research will          
              contribute to the theoretical foundation of the automatic translation          
              of such algorithms to programs executing efficiently on more realistic         
              machines.
