Title       : Stability And Performance Of Human-Machine Interaction In Telerobotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9103955

Award Number: 9103955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Homayoon Kazerooni Kazeroon@newton.me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6845,
Abstract    :
              This research introduces a new control architecture for master-                
              slave telerobotic systems.  Common architectures used in                       
              telerobotics are the "position error architecture" and the                     
              "forward flow architecture."  The proposed architecture extends                
              these two architectures.  It utilizes the exchange of power and                
              information signals between a master robot, which controls a                   
              slave robot, and the human arm that is in physical contact with                
              the master.  The human wears the master robot, so power transfer               
              is unavoidable and information signals from the human help to                  
              control the machine.  Local force feedback at the master can                   
              increase the apparent sensitivity of the master to human  input                
              commands.  In the present case, force information is communicated              
              in both directions.  Balance is maintained between the stability               
              requirements of the master and the requirements for human                      
              control.  Master motion is partially due to the transfer of human              
              power and partially due to the command generated by the                        
              controller computer.  The design of the controller is based on                 
              dynamic models of the human arm and the environment.  The human                
              arm dynamic behavior is modeled as a functional relationship                   
              between a set of input and outputs.  The internal structures and               
              operations of the model components are implicitly accounted for.               
              An estimator creates the human arm dynamic model using a learning              
              model.  It accepts information using human electromyograph (EMG)               
              signals, arm orientations and contact forces.  Dynamic behavior                
              of the database of experimentally verified human arm (EMG)                     
              impedances for regions of arm orientation is used to arrive at a               
              time-varying, human sensitivity function.  A learning model                    
              accounts for non-calibrated regions.  The learning model uses a                
              measure of the EMG signals (time or frequency domain) as a index               
              to derive human impedance as a function of a cognitive command.                
              Changes in system performance and system stability will be                     
              investigated experimentally as a function of changes in the human              
              and the environmental load dynamics.  The results will be                      
              compared to similar results obtained when telepresence governs                 
              the system performance.  The architecture allows convenient                    
              mapping of variables into telerobotic design specifications.                   
              This research advances a knowledge-based methodology and will                  
              lead to an understanding of the role of human dynamics and                     
              constraints in the control of telerobotic systems and in other                 
              types of human-computer interactions.
