Title       : Research on Learning in Industrial Settings: Persistence, Turnover, and Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1990  
File        : a9103061

Award Number: 9103061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64936              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis N. Epple epple@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Argote  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The presence of a learning curve has been documented in                   
              many industries.  Yet little is known about why learning                       
              occurs, whether it persists, and how to transfer it.  This                     
              award empirically investigates the persistence of learning                     
              within organizations and the transfer of learning across                       
              organizations.  The role of turnover in learning and its                       
              persistence are also examined.  The analyses are based on                      
              records data collected from one firm in the aerospace                          
              industry producing an advanced jet and from three plants of                    
              the same firm in the automotive industry producing a light                     
              truck.  The principal investigator will estimate production                    
              functions with variables included to assess the importance of                  
              persistence, transfer and labor turnover in affecting the                      
              efficiency of the production process.  In addition to testing                  
              whether learning persists, whether it transfers, and whether                   
              turnover is related to the rate of learning, the research                      
              aims to develop a theoretical model of learning in                             
              organizations that integrates and explains the empirical                       
              findings.  The research will advance scientific knowledge                      
              about why learning occurs in organizations and whether it                      
              persists and transfers.  This information will enable                          
              organizations to improve their productivity and hence,                         
              compete more effectively.  The information will also lead to                   
              improved forecasting.
