Title       : Computational Studies of Molecular Motions in Zeolites (Theoretical
               Computational Physical Chemistry): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1991  
File        : a9103932

Award Number: 9103932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95725              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy Bug   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1956,
Abstract    :
                The planned research will pursue structural and dynamical                    
              properties of small molecules adsorbed within a class of porous                
              solids know as zeolites.  These solids are microporous, polar,                 
              and have profound technological importance.  The prototypical                  
              small molecules for the study are those of hydrogen; the                       
              zeolite host is NaA.  The techniques will be modern methods for                
              computer simulation of classical and quantum fluids.  As far                   
              as is known, this will be the first study of molecular                         
              diatomics in a zeolitic environment.  The structural and                       
              thermal properties of the confined fluid will be probed, as                    
              will diffusional and rotational relaxation times, the shifts                   
              in electronic and vibrational states that arise from proximity                 
              to the charges and multipoles which comprise the interstitial                  
              walls.                                                                         
                There is considerable interest in developing theoretical                     
              models to explore the reactivity and dynamics of small                         
              molecules in zeolites. This project furthers VPW program                       
              objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their                 
              careers in science or engineering through research, and to                     
              encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through                 
              the investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the                   
              host campuses.  In this project, the proposed activities which                 
              contribute to the second objective include:  teaching a                        
              chemistry course, chairing a workshop for                                      
              undergraduate/graduate women in greater Boston home                            
              institutions, advising and mentoring students in the host                      
              department, having an undergraduate physics student work as a                  
              research assistant.
