Title       : PRF: The Coevolution of Fungus-growing Ants and their Fungi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1991      
File        : a9103782

Award Number: 9103782
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: James K. Wetterer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1121,
Abstract    :
                   Attine ants (tribe Attini) are unique among ants in growing                
                                                                                            
              a symbiotic fungus for food.  The ecology of many species of                   
              attines has been studied extensively due to their economic and                 
              ecological importance.  Fundamental evolutionary questions,                    
              however, have remained unanswered due to poor understanding  of                
              the phylogenetic relationships of the ants and of their fungi.  A              
                                                                                             
              study to establish the phylogeny of attines and of their fungi                 
              using molecular genetics in order to: 1) infer the origins of                  
              this obligate ant/fungi and the habits of the most closely                     
              related non-attine ants and fungi, and 2) determine whether the                
              attine fungi have speciated in parallel with the ants will be                  
              conducted.  In such a case, the cladograms of the attine ants and              
                                                                                             
              their fungi should be exactly congruent.  This pattern would                   
              suggest that the different lines of attine ants have coevolved                 
              with their fungi in close mutual dependency.  Alternatively,                   
              disparities between the two cladograms may suggest that some                   
              attine lines have acquired new unrelated species of fungus to                  
              cultivate.  The nature of the disparities should provide insight               
                                                                                             
              into the coevolutionary interactions between the ants and their                
              fungi.
