Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1991    
File        : a9103501

Award Number: 9103501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : January 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8755               (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa R. Gilbert  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Much of the research and public policy attention on urban poverty         
              is directed at the "urban underclass."  In addition to unemployed,             
              minority, inner-city females heading their own families, the urban             
              underclass also includes many women who work for wages.  These women are       
              employed in dead-end, female-dominated occupations and are no more             
              financially secure than they would be if they received welfare payments.       
              This doctoral dissertation project will explore the strategies that low-       
              income women have developed to ensure the health, safety, and shelter of       
              themselves and their families without relying on welfare.  Specifically,       
              the research will focus on the place-specific nature of the personal           
              contacts that link African-American, Puerto Rican, and Vietnamese women        
              to jobs, child care, and housing.  Intensive personal interviews and a         
              survey questionnaire will be used to investigate the ways that personal        
              networks enable and constrain women in their quests to provide for             
              themselves and their families.  Analysis of the spatial dimensions of          
              women's social networks will illuminate the relationship between the           
              nature of these networks and the job, housing, and child-care                  
              opportunities available to these women.                                        
                                                                                             
                   By focusing explicitly on the spatial dimensions and the place-           
              based nature of personal contacts, this project will provide valuable          
              information about the degree to which women are constrained                    
              locationally, and it will assess the impacts of these spatial                  
              constraints on their economic survival.  This project also will provide        
              an excellent opportunity for a promising young scholar to continue to          
              develop independent research skills.
