Title       : Numerical Boundary Conditions for Wave Propagation and FluidDynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1991 
File        : a9103197

Award Number: 9103197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38780              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Higdon higdon@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   The principal investigator will study various questions                   
              involving open boundary conditions for problems in wave                        
              propagation and fluid dynamics. The topics of investigation                    
              include absorbing boundary conditions for dispersive waves, open               
              boundary conditions for the shallow water equations in a rotating              
              reference frame, and absorbing boundary conditions for the                     
              velocity-stress formulation of the elastic wave equation.  This                
              work is motivated by the fact that many physical problems are                  
              defined on spatial domains that either are unbounded or are so                 
              large that it is not feasible to compute numerical solutions over              
              the entire region.  In such situations, it is necessary to                     
              truncate the domain.  One then encounters the problem of                       
              finding boundary conditions to impose at the artificial                        
              computational boundary.                                                        
                   The development of such boundary conditions is the subject                
              of this research.  This work is expected to have applications to               
              computer modeling of several kinds of physical phenomena,                      
              including large scale motions of the atmosphere and oceans,                    
              seismic waves within the earth, and waves on the surface of                    
              water.  For example, suppose that an oceanographer wants to model              
              the circulation in an ocean.  One possibility is to compute the                
              relevant physical quantities on an array of grid points                        
              distributed over the entire ocean.  If the circulation is needed               
              for the entire ocean, this is what must be done.  On the other                 
              hand, if the circulation is needed only on a relatively small                  
              portion, such as the continental shelf, then the above procedure               
              is far too costly.  Instead, one would prefer to compute the                   
              circulation only on the region of real interest. In such a                     
              computation, the region is bounded partly or entirely by a                     
              boundary that is "open" instead of physical.  Telling the                      
              solution what to do at such a boundary is rather tricky, and an                
              incorrect choice of boundary conditions can seriously corrupt the              
              solution that is computed. The goal of the present research is to              
              develop effective open boundary conditions for the physical                    
              situations mentioned above.  Open boundary conditions for seismic              
              waves would be useful to geophysicists who use seismic methods to              
              search for geologic structures that could contain petroleum, and               
              open boundary conditions for water waves would be useful to                    
              engineers who study the effects of wave actions on coastal and                 
              offshore structures.
