Title       : Phylogenetic Analysis of Blepharoneura (Diptera:Tephritidae)A Test of New
               Methods and Hypotheses About the Evolution of Host Choice (Systematic
               Biology/Teacher Enhancement): VPW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1992    
File        : a9103322

Award Number: 9103322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158122             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha A. Condon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7300,9225,
Abstract    :
                Through a phylogenetic analysis of a monophyletic species                    
              group of Blepharoneura (Diptera:  Tephritidae), sets of                        
              hypotheses are tested that address two major aspects: 1)                       
              evolution of host choice in phytophagous insects; 2) evolution                 
              of science and education.  This effort tests a new method for                  
              discovering morphological characters, utilizing public                         
              involvement, and stems from observations that untrained                        
              observers recognize patterns overlooked by specialists.                        
              Curious children are ideal untrained observers.  The                           
              investigator will work with teachers, visit classrooms, explain                
              the research, and ask students for help (How can we tell these                 
              flies apart?).  The process generates new characters for the                   
              investigator, and involves students and teachers in the process                
              of working on a real problem in science.  Methods and                          
              collaboration include:  field work in Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru,                
              and Venezuela with volunteers from UMBC; isozyme                               
              electrophoresis; cytology; morphological character discovery                   
              with children and teachers in the elementary Science                           
              Integration Project, UMBC; and phylogenetic analysis.                          
                The study is significant because it will generate and                        
              integrate interactions between:  systematics and ecology, and                  
              science, education, and the public; and, provide a powerful                    
              model for these interactions.  The project furthers VPW program                
              objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their                 
              careers in science or engineering through research, and to                     
              encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through                 
              the investigators' enhanced visibility as role models on the                   
              host campuses.  In this project, the proposed activities which                 
              contribute to the second objective include:  working with and                  
              training elementary and middle school teachers and students,                   
              and involving them with research through the Elementary Science                
              Integration Project (UMBC); training teachers and volunteers                   
              for field work using the National Aquarium resources;                          
              participating in two seminar series at UMBC; and serving as a                  
              lecturer for the University President's Commission on the                      
              Status of Women.
