Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stable and Chaotic Behavior of Deterministic Models of
               Interacting Populations with/withoutGenetic Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1992      
File        : a9103829

Award Number: 9103829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63329              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Selgrade selgrade@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene Namkoong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigators study the dynamical behavior of systems of              
              difference and differential equations that describe interacting                
              populations with and without genetic variation.  Special                       
              consideration will be given to the onset of chaos and of strange               
              attractors, e.g., a period-doubling cascade to a strange                       
              attractor that is forced by changing a single intraspecific                    
              parameter.  The proposers will attempt to reverse the onset of                 
              chaos by the periodic harvesting or seeding of a population.                   
              These studies will include numerical experiments and analytical                
              arguments employing techniques such as stability theory,                       
              invariant set theory, bifurcation and perturbation theory.                     
                   The development of an ecosystem, whether natural or managed,              
              is affected by complex interactions among environmental and                    
              genetic components.  The proposed research will study                          
              mathematical models that attempt to capture some of the essential              
              features of these interactions.  The objectives of the research                
              include understanding:  (i) how environmental and genetic                      
              parameters influence species coexistence and extinction; (ii)                  
              the onset of chaotic fluctuations in the densities of ecosystem                
              populations; and (iii) how harvesting and seeding strategies                   
              affect ecosystem stability.                                                    
                   Such knowledge may help in maintaining biodiversity in                    
              natural ecosystems, in the management of natural resources such                
              as forests and lakes, and in the development of disease-resistant              
              crops.
