Title       : PRF: Spatial Genetic Structure and Genetic Demography of Delphinium nelsonii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1991      
File        : a9103781

Award Number: 9103781
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   Most plant populations will be structured genetically in                  
              space as a result of restricted gene flow and spatially                        
              heterogeneous selection.  However, the fine scale causes and                   
              consequences of within population genetic structure remain                     
              obscure.  The proposed research is aimed at determining the                    
              pattern of fine scale spatial genetic structure in populations of              
                                                                                             
              the montane herb Delphinium nelsonii and understanding how the                 
              pattern is produced.  Two populations will be sampled                          
              hierarchically to quantify genetic structure at wide range of                  
              spatial scales. In each population, individuals from several                   
              stages in the life cycle will be genotyped using isozyme                       
              electrophoresis.  Adult population structure will be                           
              characterized using three methods and compared to patterns                     
              estimated from empirical measures of pollen and seed dispersal                 
              distances.  Deviations in genetic diversity and population                     
              structure among different life history stages will be used to                  
              identify the timing and possible mechanisms of population                      
              subdivision.  Two techniques will be used to estimate the effects              
                                                                                             
              of heterozygosity and inbreeding on offspring survival.                        
              Controlled crosses between individuals of different combinations               
                                                                                             
              of spatial proximity and genetic similarity will be made.  Three               
                                                                                             
              measures of fitness, seed set, seed mass, and seed weight will be              
                                                                                             
              measured in the resulting progeny.  Analysis of variance will be               
                                                                                             
              used to decompose the relationship of genetic similarity at                    
                                                                                             
              electrophoretic marker loci and spatial proximity on the fitness               
                                                                                             
              consequences of outcrossing distance.
