Title       : SEM/TEM Study of Zeolite Crystallization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1992      
File        : a9103357

Award Number: 9103357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Thompson rwt@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research program deals with understanding of the                          
              mechanisms of crystallization of molecular sieve zeolite in                    
              hydrothermal systems.  Taking advantage of seeding techniques                  
              in zeolite syntheses results in somewhat larger particles, as                  
              expected and desired, but the degree of success has been                       
              limited, and the seed crystals themselves are converted into                   
              polycrystalline masses with quite irregular morphology.  This                  
              ongoing project continues the zeolite synthesis research to                    
              investigate the effects of seeding zeolite crystallization                     
              systems, and to study the effects on the seed crystals                         
              themselves.  While circumstantial evidence that initial                        
              breeding occurs in the seeded silicalite synthesis system has                  
              been obtained, an attempt to actually observe these by                         
              microscopic techniques is being made.  An attempt is also                      
              being made to demonstrate for several zeolite systems that                     
              some of these surface-bound initial bred nuclei remain on the                  
              seed crystal surface and generate the polycrystalline masses                   
              noted above.  Examination of these initial bred nuclei by                      
              scanning  and transmission electron microscope is attempted.                   
              An investigation of the effects that different growth                          
              environments have on the seed crystals themselves is done by                   
              these techniques and by selected area diffraction techniques.                  
              Crystals grown using the technique of late reagent addition                    
              during a crystallization also are investigated.  Lastly,                       
              zeolite crystal precipitate zeolite NaA and "Silicalite" are                   
              investigated.  The crystals have potential applications in                     
              sensors and in membrane separations.
