Title       : Reliable Shared Memory Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9103941

Award Number: 9103941
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Forbes D. Lewis                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duncan H. Lawrie lawrie@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2875,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate algorithms to build reliable shared             
              memory systems on distributed memory architectures.  Reliability is            
              crucial when the number of components increases in such architectures          
              and the large amount of work performed by a typical computation can            
              ill-afford to be lost in a failure.  The research is divided into two          
              stages.  The first stage is design of a collection of such algorithms.         
              The second stage is to evaluate the algorithms using simulations,              
              analytic models, and actual implementations.  The collection of                
              algorithms will address the tradeoff between recovery cost and the             
              overhead during normal execution.  They also distinguish between two           
              different models on shared memory:  one in which the entire process            
              address space is shared, and the other in which application-defined            
              segments of memory are shared.                                                 
              Performance evaluation is a crucial component of this research, since          
              recovery and overhead cost are closely related to the pattern of               
              communication in an actual shared memory system.  Address traces from          
              real application programs are used to simulate performance of the              
              reliability algorithms.  Analytic models are used to extend the                
              results beyond these applications.  Finally, implementations of                
              algorithms provide actual performance figures and verification of the          
              analysis and simulation.                                                       
              The algorithms borrow techniques from reliability research on message          
              passing systems.  The availability of shared memory applications,              
              however, allows an estimation of the overhead of reliability                   
              algorithms and a realistic comparison of these algorithms.
