Title       : International Travel Grant to Explore U.S-Korea Cooperative Exchange in
               Structural/Mechanics/Natural Hazards/Construc- tion Engineering and Materials
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1990   
File        : a9103375

Award Number: 9103375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mahendra P. Singh                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1990   
Expires     : May 31,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2403               (Estimated)
Investigator: Melvin R. Ramey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Travel Award
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1497      ARCHITECTURE & MECHAN SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1497,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is an international travel grant to                                       
              support the Principal Investigator's visit to                                  
              the Department of Civil Engineering, Korea                                     
              Advanced Institute of Science and Technology                                   
              in Seoul, where he will participate in two                                     
              seminars arranged by Professor Chang-Koon                                      
              Choi, Professor of Civil Engineering.  While                                   
              in Korea, Prof. Ramey will join Prof. D.                                       
              Parsons in visits to Korean Research                                           
              Institutes under arrangements made by Prof.                                    
              Choi.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The proposed activities will enable Prof.                                      
              Ramey to understand:                                                           
              a)   the differences in earthquake resistant                                   
                   design approaches in Korea as contrasted                                  
                   with U.S. practice,                                                       
                                                                                             
              b)   exchange information on fiber reinforced                                  
                   concrete in seismic joints and computer                                   
                   aided engineering, and                                                    
                                                                                             
              c)   current research efforts being                                            
                   undertaken in various research                                            
                   institutes and organized research units                                   
                   in Korea.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This effort will develop research cooperation                                  
              between U.S. and Korea in the areas of                                         
              advanced technologies involving seismic                                        
              design, composite materials and computer                                       
              engineering in connection with structural and                                  
              architectural systems.
