Title       : NSF Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2000     
File        : a9357983

Award Number: 9357983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reiko Mazuka mazuka@psych.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9357983  MAZUKA  This award provides support to Dr. Reiko Mazuka under the
              National  Science Foundation's Young Investigator Awards program.  The 
              objective of this program is to recognize outstanding young faculty  in science
              and engineering, to enhance the academic career of  recent PhD recipients by
              providing flexible support for research  and educational activities, and to
              foster contact and cooperation  between academia, industry, and institutions
              that support research  and education.  Dr. Mazuka has already made significant
              research  contributions to the field of psycholinguistics, and she has the 
              potential to become a leader in academic research and education.    Over the
              last few years, Dr. Mazuka's cross-linguistic  investigation of natural
              language processing has led to the  conclusion that there are significant
              differences between the ways  Japanese- and English-speaking children process
              language.  This  conclusion has critically challenged the hypothesis that
              mechanisms  of natural language processing are universal.  This award will 
              allow the investigator to pursue her research interests in cross-  linguistic
              comparisons of native Japanese and native English  speakers.  Dr. Mazuka will
              examine how Japanese speakers manage a  high degree of indeterminacy early in a
              sentence, through a series  of psycholinguistic experiments using methods of
              eye movement  monitoring, self-paced reading, and on-line grammaticality 
              judgments.  Since the analysis of temporal ambiguity has critically  shaped
              research in language processing, she will pay particular  attention to the fact
              that English is a Right-Branching, Head-  Initial language and Japanese is a
              Left-Branching, Head-Final  language.  The first year of the project will be
              conducted in Japan  at the University of Tokyo and NTT Basic Research Labs.   
              This research holds promise of forming a new interdisciplinary  research
              paradigm in the theory of language-cognition relations and  first language
              acquisition.  In addition, the results of t he  research will provide critical
              psycholinguistic data on Japanese  sentence processing.  ***
