Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Simulating Global Illumination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9357763

Award Number: 9357763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Heckbert ph+@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,9297,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               Synthesizing realistic images is a fundamental challenge for  computer
              graphics.  One of the most difficult aspects of this  task is the  simulation
              of global illumination:  the  interreflection of light between  surfaces.   
              This research applies finite element methods to the simulation of  global
              illumination.  The work is divided into three subprojects:  (1)  error metrics
              for global illumination,  (2)  adaptive meshing for radiosity, and  (3) 
              generalization to scenes with arbitrary reflectance. Rather than attempting to
              measure ``realism'', which is a  rather  nebulous perceptual quality, simpler,
              quantitative accuracy  measures  are being developed.  Using these error
              measures,  existing and future image  synthesis algorithms can be evaluated 
              and quantitatively ranked.    Adaptive  meshes for radiosity mesh generation is
              only partially automated in many  radiosity  systems, and little is known about
              the errors introduced by  various  meshes.  Recent experiments on simplified,
              two-dimensional scenes show that  the use of adaptive meshes and  higher degree
              approximations can lead to much  faster and/or more  accurate solutions than
              those of existing algorithms.  More  accurate, better looking pictures result
              when the radiosity mesh  follows  discontinuities in the solution function such
              as those at  shadow boundaries.  These ``discontinuity meshing'' techniques
              have been embraced by  researchers.  In this  research, meshes for radiosity
              are compared and  evaluated using  error metrics as an objective criterion. 
              This rigorous  analysis  of radiosity functions suggests new mesh generation
              techniques  allowing more accurate simulations.    Generalization to scenes
              with arbitrary  reflectance, the final sub-project, is the generalization of
              these methods to  scenes with realistic light scattering.  The reflectance of
              real  surfaces is  not purely diffuse or specular, but is described by a 
              complex bidirectional  reflectance  distribution function (BRDF).  Recent work
              suggests that the use of  spherical harmonics or other  appropriate basis
              functions greatly facilitates  the approximation  of direction-dependent light
              functions.  Such representations  for  functions of both position and direction
              are being analyzed and  developed.  The ultimate goal is the development of
              accurate,  efficient algorithms for  simulating global illumination on  complex
              scenes with arbitrary reflectance and  transmittance.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
