Title       : NSF Young Investigator Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1994      
File        : a9357986

Award Number: 9357986
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marisa Carrasco-Queijeiro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,9229,9297,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9357986  CARRASCO-QUEIJEIRO  This award provides support to Dr. Marisa
              Carrasco-Queijeiro under  the National Science Foundation's Young Investigator
              Awards  program.  The objective of this program is to recognize outstanding 
              young faculty in science and engineering, to enhance the academic  career of
              recent PhD recipients by providing flexible support for  research and
              educational activities, and to foster contact and  cooperation between
              academia, industry, and institutions that  support research and education.  Dr.
              Swain has already made  significant research contributions to the field of 
              perceptual/cognitive psychology, and she has the potential to  become a leader
              in academic research and education.    This award will allow the investigator
              to pursue her research  interests in the area of visual perception.  Visual
              perception is  thought of as a process involving analysis and synthesis.  The 
              brain analyzes visual stimuli into discrete components, which are  later
              synthesized into the perceptual wholes we apprehend.  Dr.  Carrasco-Queijeiro's
              research is in the area of "Visual Search",  which seeks to characterize the
              basic features of analysis and to  trace the steps of the subsequent synthesis.
               She will conduct a  series of psychophysical experiments in which the physical
               properties of the stimuli and the experimental tasks will be  manipulated, so
              as to allow her to compare and contrast current  cognitive models of visual
              search, and to develop an alternative  model which would better take into
              account the biological  constraints of the visual system.  Through this
              approach, she will  be able to understand whether (or how) the early stages of
              coding  of visual processing interact with attentional processes.    The goal
              of the research is to contribute to our understanding of  the relationship
              between the psychological and physiological  phenomena involved in some basic
              processes of visual perception,  and the impact of this understanding on models
              of visual attention.   This approach  promises to integrate central facts about
              the  integration of the nervous system with behavioral and cognitive 
              properties of visual search.  ***
