Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Coordination Chemistry of Redox-Active Tetradentate
               Hemilabile Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9357099

Award Number: 9357099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chad A. Mirkin CAMirkin@chem.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9183,9297,AMPP,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: 9357099  PI: Mirkin    Coordination chemistry will be the subject of 
              investigation for Professor Mirkin of Northwestern  University; he will conduct
              this research with support in  the form of an NSF Young Investigator Award from
              the  Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  Program.  One area
              of his research will be in the  synthesis and properties of "hemilabile"
              complexes.   These are complexes of ligands that bear a redox-active  site, are
              tetradentate in the reduced state and bidentate  in the oxidized state.  When
              the central metal ion is  Rh(I) it is thus expected to be inert when the ligand
              is  in the reduced state, but when in the oxidized state it  should be an
              effective catalyst for olefin hydrogenation.   This scheme provides an entree
              into redox-switchable  catalysis.  Another area of research deals with self- 
              assembled monolayers (SAMS).  Specific plans include  using derivatized
              metalloporphyrazines as the surface  layer, and, in particular, where the
              ligand design leads  to the plane of the ligand being perpendicular to the 
              surface; this will lead to a parallel orientation of the  ligand planes, which
              is expected to confer unusual  electrocatalytic properties on these SAMS.  %%% 
              The nascent concept of "molcular devices" poses many  opportunities in
              chemistry.  One approach is based on  traditional coordination chemistry, where
              a metal ion is  bound to another molecule (called a ligand) at several  sites. 
              An interesting development is to build into the  ligand the ability to donate
              an electron, for when this  is done the binding of the ligand to the metal ion
              can  change radically.  This change can make the difference  between a metal
              ion that is catalytic and one that is  not, and thus one has the elements of a
              method to switch  catalytic activity one and off.  Another development is  to
              design ligands that will cause themselves to adsorb to  a surface to form a
              highly oriented monolayer.  If the  surface is an electrode, then such a
              monolayer could  c onfer unique reactivity to the electrode.  Experiments  to
              test and develop these ideas form the core of the  research to be conducted in
              this project.
