Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1999 
File        : a9357637

Award Number: 9357637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Kepler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9357637  Kepler    This is a National Science Foundation Young Investigator
              Award.   The awardee is using a mathematical modeling approach to the  problem
              of how immunoglobulin-producing lymphocytes (B-cells)  develop in lymphatic
              tissue.  Specifically, he will elucidate the  process of somatic hypermutation
              within germinal centers by  mathematical modeling studies.  He will address
              mathematical  problems arising in stochastic population dynamic models with
              many  species interacting through competition for resources and random 
              mutation, in which very small and very large populations coexist  and which
              possess a non-trivial spatial structure.  %%%  One of the primary ways the
              vertebrate immune system defends  against pathogens is by producing
              immunoglobulins (antibodies) (Ig)  that bind specifically to molecular epitopes
              on the pathogen, thus  marking it for destruction by the effector mechanisms of
              the immune  system.  The system has no prior knowledge of the foreign epitopes 
              it will encounter, so it must have an efficient scheme for  generating
              sufficient diversity to cover the space of all potential  invaders.  That
              scheme is now in part understood.  Each Ig-  producing B-cells assembles its
              Ig-encoding genes more or less  randomly, with the resulting gene product (Ig)
              borne as a receptor  on its membrane.  Upon meeting a complementary antigen,
              the B-cell  is stimulated to divide rapidly and differentiate into Ig-secreting
               cells.  In warm-blooded animals, the immune system further sharpens  its
              initial response through affinity maturation, during which a  mutagenic process
              within the responding B cell populations is  activated and targeted
              specifically at the Ig genes.  Competition  for antigenic stimulation provides
              selective pressure, and the  average affinity of the responding population
              increases, often by  two or more orders of magnitude.  The immune system
              retains a  memory of its encounter through progeny "memory" B-cells, so  
              subsequent challenges by the same antigen are met with  a faster and  stronger
              response than initially.  This is the basis for  immunization.  These events
              (somatic hypermutation and development  of memory B cells) occur physically
              within histologically defined  structures called germinal centers (GC) which
              form in the  peripheral lymphoid tissue after antigenic challenge.  The goal of
               this research is to employ mathematical modeling and computer  simulation to
              examine the process.  The GC reaction is not only  critical to the functioning
              of the immune system, but is itself a  beautifully self-contained model of
              Darwinian evolution in  miniature (and in vivo).  The relevant genomes are
              small and the  "fitness function" is measurable in a manifestly non-circular
              way.   A thorough quantitative understanding of the GC reaction will thus 
              provide insight into matters fundamental to general biology as well  as to
              immunology per se.  ***
