Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9357373

Award Number: 9357373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. Kiley pjkiley@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9169,9183,9297,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9357373  Kiley  More than a century ago, Pasteur observed the profound effects
              of  oxygen on cell metabolism.  It is now known that oxygen has two  major
              effects.  First, excess oxygen can create reactive compounds  that damage key
              molecules in cells, and secondly, too little oxygen  may deplete energy
              resources vital for cell function.  Although  oxygen is known to play a pivotal
              role in cell physiology, little  is known about the molecular mechanism(s) used
              by cells to sense  and respond to changes in environmental oxygen
              concentrations.  To  begin to understand how this occurs, I will attempt to
              determine  how the Escherichia coli transcription factor Fnr is activated by 
              oxygen deprivation.  The increase in Fnr activity under anaerobic  conditions
              is critical for E. coli survival, since Fnr allows cells  to adapt to anoxia by
              altering expression of genes involved in  energy metabolism.  Since Fnr levels
              are not oxygen regulated, a  key problem is to identify the factor(s) which
              modulate its  activity.  Knowledge of such a factor(s) should ultimately allow 
              dissection of the pathway for cellular oxygen sensing.  In the  present
              research program biochemical, genetic and physiological  approaches will be
              used to learn how Fnr activity is regulated.   Specifically, we wish to define
              the steps in Fnr activation, so  that we may define how oxygen deprivation
              effects Fnr's  conformational and oligomeric state(s), and then identify
              factors  that regulate Fnr activity to gain insight into the pathway of 
              cellular oxygen sensing.  %%%  Many cells require oxygen to grow and to
              metabolism.  However, too  much oxygen can kill cells, and too little oxygen
              can stop their  growth.  As a result, for a cell to survive and grow
              efficiently,  there must be mechanisms which allow it to recognize oxygen and 
              protect itself against changing concentrations of the gas in its  environment. 
              Escherichia coli, a bacterium, has a factor called  Fnr, which may be involved
              in this detection system.  This factor  is formed  in cells when too little
              oxygen is available to support  cell growth.  In the absence of oxygen, the
              factor appears to  protect the cell by stopping the formation of certain
              enzymes  ordinarily needed to form energy in air.  The effect saves cell 
              energy until oxygen again is available and growth resumes.   Experiments in
              biochemistry, genetics and physiology will be  performed to determine how
              oxygen influences the structure of Fnr  and what other factor(s) might be
              involved in regulating its  formation.  ***
