Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9357274

Award Number: 9357274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd E. Dawson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Monica A. Geber  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1325,9169,9297,EGCH,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9357274  Dawson  Forests cover 37% of all terrestrial surfaces.  The trees
              that  compose these forests are a primary route by which water re-enters  the
              hydrologic cycle.  The objectives of this NSF Young  Investigator (NYI) Award
              are to understand and evaluate the  importance that trees and forests play in
              local and regional  hydroglogic processes.  This will be accomplished through
              an  investigation that has four specific goals: (1) describe the water  balance
              of isolated trees and of forests stands using O and H  stable isotope methods,
              eddy correlation and aerodynamic-energy  balance techniques, and the
              Bowen-ratio method, (2) characterize  the degree to which trees control
              movement and loss of water from  forest stands with leaf-, canopy- and
              stand-level transpiration  estimates and isotope techniques, (3) investigate
              how water uptake,  movement and loss respond (adjust) to experimental
              manipulation  mimicking climate change (e.g. irrigating trees, preventing 
              transpiration), and (4) integrate the information gathered from the 
              observational/descriptive studies (objectives 1 and 2), the  experimental
              studies (objective 3), and from both individuals and  entire stands into a
              comprehensive picture of the role that trees  and forests play in global water
              movement.  Because the overall  objective is to refine our understanding of the
              importance and role  that trees and forests play in the hydrologic cycle, it is
               necessary to use a variety of research methods.  The combination of  methods
              chosen will provide a means to validate information,  integrate different
              levels, and calibrate predictions.  The stable  isotope and eddy correlation
              methods are the most powerful.  An  analysis of the stable isotopic composition
              of water samples  obtained from source water, plant xylem-sap, and atmospheric
              water  vapor has been successfully used to evaluate water flux through the 
              soil-plant-atmospheric continuum.  The eddy correlation technique  is a
              powerful way to quantify water movement through pla nt canopies  and stands. 
              Aerodynamic-energy balance methods of water flux based  on the Penman-Monteith
              equation, and the Bowen-ratio method  (sensible/latent heat flux) can provide
              ways to independently check  the isotope and eddy correlation results.  The
              information obtained  from these studies will help us understand the impacts
              that climate  and climate change may have on the functional and structural 
              characteristics of forested regions of the world, refine our  empirical
              understanding of the role that vegetated surfaces play in  the hydrologic cycle
              and local and regional water balance, and to  forge a much-needed link between
              atmospheric and plant biological  research.  ***
