Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9357302

Award Number: 9357302
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Hallberg  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9169,9178,9251,9297,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9357302  Coleman  Atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other
              greenhouse gases  continue to rise.  This may lead to increases in the mean
              global  temperature as well as in yearly, and even daily, variations in 
              temperature.  One consequence of increasing variation in temperatures is  that
              plants may be exposed to sudden and severe increases of temperature  (i.e.,
              heat shocks) at a greater frequency than they are now.  The  ability of plants
              to withstand these hyperthermic episodes is most likely  related, at least in
              part, to their capacity for elevating levels of  certain heat shock proteins
              (hsps).  A great deal of information  regarding the molecular biology of these
              proteins in plants exists.  Yet,  little is known regarding how the
              physiological state of the cell or  whole-plant prior to the imposition of heat
              stress affects the synthesis  and accumulation of hsps or the ability of plants
              to survive heat stress.       This NSF Young Investigator Award supports
              research using several  genotypes of eastern cottonwood (Populus deltoides) in
              environments with  different availabilities of carbon, light and nitrogen
              resulting in  plants with different physiological states.  These plants will
              then be  exposed to acute increases in temperature, to chronic sub-lethal 
              temperature stress, or to control conditions to answer the following 
              questions.  (1) How does the physiological state of the plant affects the 
              kinetics and extent of accumulation of specific stress proteins in  response to
              a single acute heat shock, as well as a prolonged high-  temperature event and
              the recovery rate of normal protein synthesis?  (2)  How are patterns of heat
              shock protein synthesis and accumulation in  leaves correlated to the
              functioning of the photosynthetic apparatus  during and after acute and chronic
              heat stress?  (3) Does the synthesis  of stress proteins occur in lieu of the
              production or activation of  photosynthetic enzymes?  (4) Are any tradeoffs
              exacerbated when nitrogen  is limiting?  (5) Is  there a correlation between
              the dynamics of stress  protein production at the cellular level and
              whole-plant performance?   (6) How are these relationships affected by plant
              development stage or  plant genotype?    The results of this work are important
              for a number of reasons.  First,  global climate models predict that the future
              atmosphere will have  extremely high concentrations of carbon dioxide, and that
              the  accumulation of carbon dioxide, as well as other factors, may result in 
              temperature patterns that are subject to extreme fluctuations.   Furthermore,
              increasing levels of carbon dioxide, in and of itself, will  have substantial
              effects on the physiological status of plants.   Understanding how the stress
              response of plants might be altered in a  high-carbon dioxide world would
              therefore be an important step towards  understanding how plants in both
              agricultural and natural settings will  respond to the predicted changes in the
              global climate.  Second, the role  of stress proteins in the acquisition of
              stress tolerance is in the midst  of an intense debate.  Understanding the role
              that plant physiological  status plays in governing the heat shock response may
              provide essential  links to understanding when and if stress proteins function
              in promoting  stress tolerance in plant tissues.     ***
