Title       : Helioseismic Probing of Convection Zone Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9417337

Award Number: 9417337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juri Toomre jtoomre@jila.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1206,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Toomre  9417337  The study of the dynamics of the solar convection zone requires
              substantial advances in helioseismic inverse theory in order to develop new
              analysis techniques that are needed to make good use of the highdegree
              oscillation data to be provided by the Global Oscillations Network Group (GONG)
              and by other helioseismology observations.  The wave-field distortions and
              frequency splittings of high-degree oscillations should allow one to measure
              large-scale flows and associated temperature fluctuations in the convection
              zone immediately beneath the surface of the sun.  This project will develop and
              refine advanced inversion techniques to interpret the observed frequency
              splittings and distortions in the wave field following two approaches.  The
              first employs ring diagrams of power spectra obtained from 3-D Fourier
              transforms to do mosaic mapping of the flow fields and thermal fields, with the
              detailed shapes and displacements of such rings depending upon the averaged
              velocities and their gradients within each of the small areas being assessed. 
              The recent potential discovery of zonal jets below the surface using
              preliminary ring-diagram analysis adds strong impetus to this work.  The second
              method uses Hilbert Transforms of acoustic wave trains, analyzing their phase
              and amplitude variations to detect changes in wave propagation speeds caused by
              underlying temperature and magnetic fields.  Phase information provided by the
              Hilbert transform of distorted wave packets as they travel through an assembly
              of convection cells is used as input to inversion procedures to obtain spatial
              maps of sound-speed variations.  The ringdiagram and Hilbert wave-train
              analyses are complementary: ring analysis is a robust local procedure which
              sacrificeq certain global information for simplicity, whereas the Hilbert
              technique is more sophisticated, relating phases in widely separated regions of
              the flow to obtain higher spatial resolution than is possible by Fourier
              techniques.  Both methods are essential  to understanding how the solar
              convection zone operates.  Such procedures will be first employed on
              high-degree oscillation data now being obtained at the National Solar
              Observatory with the HighDegree Helioseismometer (HDH) in order to develop them
              as refined tools for later use on other helioseismic data sets, including those
              to be provided by the NSF-funded GONG project and by the SOI-MDI instrument on
              the SOHO spacecraft.  ***
