Title       : High Resolution Biostratigraphic Analysis of Molluscan FaunaAcross the K/T
               Boundary on Seymour Island, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1995       
File        : a9417776

Award Number: 9417776
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Zinsmeister   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9417776  This award supports research on recently collected  fossils from
              Seymour Island in the Antarctic Peninsula.  The Earth's high latitude regions
              are very sensitive to  global perturbations.  A close examination of the 
              geologic record from these regions of the Earth can  provide important insight
              into past global climatic  events.  Examination of the fossil record from the
              high  southern latitudes clearly indicates increased stresses  on the biosphere
              during the latest Cretaceous, but prior  to the K/T mass extinction event.  The
              excellent  paleontological record on Seymour Island provides new  and important
              insights into events in the high southern  latitudes at the end of the
              Cretaceous.    The Cretaceous/Tertiary sequence exposed on Seymour  Island,
              Antarctica is unique in several respects.  It is  appears to be characterized
              by relatively rapid and  nearly-continuous deposition of mid- to outer-shelf 
              sediments across the boundary.  In contrast to other K/T  boundary sections,
              the Seymour Island sequence contains  abundant and well-preserved macro and
              micro faunas and  floras from the Campanian into the Paleocene and  provides an
              unparalleled opportunity to study the biotic  changes of marine benthic fauna
              prior, during, and  following the terminal Cretaceous extinction event.  It 
              also provides an opportunity to compare the faunal  changes from the high
              southern latitudes with the  worldwide Late Cretaceous biotic crisis.    The
              objectives of this are to analyze the fossil  material collected during joint
              Argentine-US field work  in early 1995 and to complete the ongoing taxonomic 
              study of the molluscan fauna material obtained during  previous U.S. sponsored
              expeditions and previous joint  Argentine-U.S. expeditions.    During the
              highly successful joint U.S./Argentine  expedition to Seymour Island this past
              austral summer,  approximately 3,500 lb. of fossils and sediment samples  for
              microfossil and geochemical studies were collected.  The initial phase of our
              work during the comin g year  will focus on curating the fossil material and
              the  preparation of sediment samples that will be sent to  those scientists
              that have expressed an interest in  working on the material from Seymour
              Island.  In  addition to work on the samples, field observations  (geologic
              data and fossil localities) will be plotted on  the new USGS topographic maps. 
              This phase of our data  analysis is tedious and time consuming and is projected
               to take approximately 12 months.  Initial results from  the field season this
              year will be presented at the  Antarctic Symposium on Geology and Geophysics in
               September 1995 in Italy.
