Title       : Microstructural Evolution During Materials Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1997   
File        : a9417326

Award Number: 9417326
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce A. MacDonald                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $442409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond G. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1771,9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9417326 Thompson  This research program creates analytical models to describe
              the evolution of microstructure in metal alloys experiencing steep thermal
              gradients during rapid continuous heating, such as in the heat-affected zone of
              weldments.  The research develops analytical and numerical solutions to
              microstructural evolution at and above the eutectic temperature.  The models
              for microstructural evolution predict grain size, precipitate dissolution,
              liquation during heating, and solidification during cooling of liquid films
              that form along the grain boundaries.  Experimental studies compliment the
              analytical and numerical models.  Four experimental alloy systems are studied:
              a high purity metal (minimal solute drag on interface migration); a binary
              solid solution alloy (solute drag on interface migration); a two-phase binary
              alloy with no solid solubility (Zener pinning with minimal solute drag); and a
              two-phase binary alloy with solubility (Zener pinning with solute drag).  A
              finite element heat flow model of the weld heat-affected zone thermal cycle is
              tested by the data analysis.  Carefully prepared autogenous gas tungsten arc
              welds are made on the experimental systems.  The grain size, precipitate
              dissolution, and liquid film thickness are measured as a function of position
              in the heat-affected zone.  Analytical transmission electron microscopy
              analysis is performed on samples specially prepared to accentuate precipitate
              dissolution microstructures.  A goal of the analysis is to generate data on
              interface and matrix chemical composition gradients for comparison to the
              analytical models of precipitate dissolution.  %%% The strength of welded
              assemblies depends on the strength of the weld metal and base metal adjacent to
              the weld (referred to as the weld heat-affected zone). This research provides a
              means of predicting microstructure-related defects and provides design
              information to  avoid their occurrence. ***
