Title       : Engineered Biosynthesis of Novel Aromatic Polyketides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1995       
File        : a9417419

Award Number: 9417419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chaitan Khosla ck@chemeng.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1167,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Khosla  9417419  Our research focuses on understanding the relationships between
               structure and function of natural and designed biosynthetic  enzymes. 
              Polyketide synthases (PKSs) are examples of these  enzymes.  They catalyze the
              biosynthesis of polyketides (a  structurally diverse family of bioactive
              natural products) via  repeated condensations between carboxylic acid
              derivatives.  After  each condensation, the added  -keto group is suitably
              reduced.  It  is the controlled variation in chain length, choice of chain- 
              binding units, extent of each reductive cycle, and regiospecificity  in
              cyclization that leads to the variation among naturally  occurring polyketides.
               Our work seeks (i) to understand how PKS  structure controls catalysis,
              specificity, and subunit assembly,  and (ii) to develop biosynthetic rules for
              the rational design of  novel polyketides.  Towards this end, we have recently
              generated  and characterized several novel polyketides by using genetic 
              engineering.  On one hand, this knowledge leads to new insights of  molecule
              reconstruction and opens the possibility of expanding  nature's repertoire of
              polyketide compounds.  The present research  extends studies on a group of PKSs
              involved in aromatic polyketide  biosynthesis, which exhibit four principal
              catalytic degrees of  freedom.  The structural determinants of these degrees of
              freedom  will be defined.  %%%  Molecular biology owes much of its appeal and
              technological power  to the elucidation of mechanisms for DNA, RNA, and protein
               biosynthesis.  In particular, these biosynthetic mechanism have in  common the
              use of "template" molecules that determine the structure  of the product
              molecule. However, it is well-known that DNA, RNA,  and proteins are not the
              only biomolecules synthesized by iterative  mechanisms.  An examination of the
              molecular diversity of a number  of natural products leads one to speculate
              that the equivalent of  a genetic code must also exist for these molecules. 
              However, the  apparent absence of "t emplates" has frustrated attempts
              determine  how compound structural specificity is achieved along these 
              biosynthetic pathways.  Our work uses the complementary tools of  genetics and
              chemistry to unravel the structural and mechanistic  basis for molecular
              diversity in one family of natural products:  the polyketides. The research
              directions proposed here seek to (i)  understand how PKS structure controls
              catalysis, specificity, and  subunit assembly, and (ii) develop biosynthetic
              rules for the  rational design of novel polyketides.    This project is funded
              jointly by the Metabolic Biochemistry  Program (Division of Molecular and
              Cellular Biosciences) and the  Organic Synthesis Section of the Organic and
              Macromolecular  Chemistry Program (Division of Chemistry).  ***
