Title       : Dissertation Research: The Social Organization of Production at K'axob, Belize
               during the Late Formative and Classic Periods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9417473

Award Number: 9417473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy A. Sabloff   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Sabloff    Under the direction of Dr. Jeremy Sabloff, Ms. H. Hope Henderson 
              will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct 
              archaeological excavation at the Mayan site of K'axob which is  located in
              lowland Belize. The site includes components from both  the Formative and
              Classic periods and therefore documents the  transition from egalitarian to
              larger more complex stratified  society. The residential portion of K'axob
              includes a large  number of mounds which represent both single and multifamily 
              dwellings. Ms. Henderson will excavate a sample which includes  each type and
              each time period. On the basis of the lithic  remains, the ceramics and the
              faunal materials she will  reconstruct the range of activities conducted. This
              will permit  her to determine variability within each time period and to 
              examine change across time.     In recent years archaeologists have learned
              that most activities  in prehistoric societies were conducted on a household
              level and  that these units provided the main productive units. They have 
              hypothesized how household activity changes as societies increase  in size and
              grow more complex. Some theories postulate  specialization across households
              while other archaeologists have  suggested that the reverse occurs and the
              number of roles taken  within households increases. Given K'axob's time span
              and the  ease with households can be excavated, the site provides an  excellent
              context to examine this question.    This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide  data of interest to many archaeologists. It will
              yield new  insight into the development of complex societies and will assist 
              in the training of a promising young scientist.
