Title       : Copolymerization in Dispersed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9417306

Award Number: 9417306
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207440             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Joseph Schork joseph.schork@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary W. Poehlein  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9197,EGCH,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Poehlein - 9417306    Emulsion and dispersion polymerization are free
              radical processes that are used to produce polymeric dispersions with particle
              diameters that can vary from less than 100 nanometers (nm) to more than 10
              microns.  Commercial products that involve these polymer dispersions can be
              found in areas such as surface coating, adhesives, flocculants, bioactive
              materials, analytical column packing, engineering plastic tougheners, and
              additives in other products.  A primary driving force for the increased
              utilization of emulsion polymers has been environmentally motivated -
              replacement of organic solvent based systems with those having water as the
              continuous phase.  This increased interest in polymeric dispersions or latexes
              has resulted in more research aimed at understanding and controlling the
              complex phenomena that occur in multiphase polymerization reactions.    Recent
              work at Georgia Tech has involved the study of emulsion copolymerization with
              comonomers which have significantly different solubilities in the water phase. 
              This work will be continued in order to better understand the nature of the
              oligomeric radicals formed in the water phase and how they influence the
              surface characteristics of the polymer particles and the structure of the
              copolymer molecules formed.  The preliminary studies will be expanded by
              varying the size and concentration of seed particles, the influence of chain
              transfer agents and the solvency of the continuous phase for the monomer pairs.
               This work will be expanded into the area of dispersion polymerization in an
              effort to quantify the reaction  rates in both phases and how these rates
              influence competitive particle growth and the mix of copolymer molecules
              produced.  Batch, semi-batch  and continuous stirred-tank reactors will be
              used.  Another area of research is related to free radical graft reactions. 
              This will focus on the fundamentals of graft reaction kinetics in solution and
              emulsion systems.  Both oil- and water-soluble initiator s in emulsion
              polymerization will be tried to examine the influence of non-uniform radical
              distribution on grafting in latex particles.
