Title       : Nitrogen Excretion in Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1997  
File        : a9417748

Award Number: 9417748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331355             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Anderson   (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Eide  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wilmar L. Salo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9417748  Anderson    Most fish remove waste nitrogen (from protein metabolism)
              as ammonia, which diffuses across the gills into the water.  This is in
              contrast to most terrestrial vertebrate animals, which convert ammonia to urea
              that is stored and excreted periodically in the urine; the metabolic pathway
              for this conversion is called the urea cycle.  One group of fishes, the
              elasmobranchs (sharks, skates, and rays), synthesize and retain high
              concentrations of urea in their tissues for the purpose of maintaining an
              osmotic balance with the high salt concentration in sea water to prevent the
              loss of body water.  The urea cycle in these species is analogous to that in
              species that normally excrete urea, but with some significant differences.  The
              enzyme catalyzing the first reaction in the urea cycle is quite unique.  Dr.
              Anderson has determined the structure of the gene that expresses this enzyme in
              order to pursue the proposed studies in teleost (non-elasmobranch) fishes. 
              This same unique enzyme is found in the early development of some teleost
              fishes.  The proposed studies will help to establish if the gene for this
              enzyme of the urea cycle is present in all fish and when and how it is
              expressed.  Dr. Anderson's hypothesis is that this enzyme and the urea cycle
              are expressed only during embryogenesis (very early development) in most fish. 
              Ammonia toxicity is the number one problem in the aquaculture industry. 
              Understanding the mechanism of how expression of the urea cycle enzymes is
              regulated in fish may provide an opportunity to genetically modify fish to
              express the urea cycle and thus increase tolerance to ammonia.  ***
