Title       : Expression Analysis of the Genome of Escherichia Coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1997  
File        : a9417897

Award Number: 9417897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $807700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick C. Neidhardt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000904   Science Information                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9417897  Neidhardt  For the past 15 years this laboratory has been assembling a
              gene-protein database for the bacterium Escherichia coli. There studies were
              made possible by the ability of two-dimensional (2D) polyacrylamide gel
              electrophoresis to present a more or less complete picture of the cell's
              complement of proteins. The ultimate goal of this project is to trace every E.
              Coli protein to its structural gene, and to account for every gene of the cell.
              The 5th edition of the Gene-Protein Database contains just under 700 entries,
              accounting for one-sixth of the protein-encoding genes of E. Coli.  Most of
              these entries derive from methods (comigration with purified marker proteins,
              defective or overproducing mutants, etc.) that allow one-at-a-time
              identifications of protein spots on 20 gels as known proteins or the products
              of known genes. Early progress was rapid, but even so, many decades would be
              necessary to identify even the products of known genes, and with no hope of
              identifying all gene products by this approach.  The recent congruence of three
              technical advances means that it is now technically possible for a small
              research group, with the right tools, to elucidate the complete complement of
              the genes and gene products of E. coli in a reasonable length of time.  The
              three technical advances are (i) the Kohara library of recombinant phage
              carrying EcoR1-bordered fragments of the whole E. coli chromosome, (ii) the
              means to express selectively and totally all the genes from such segments, and
              (iii) the advanced state of sequencing of the E. coli chromosome. The research
              plan begins with the removal, one by one, of the chromosomal inserts from the
              Kohara phage library, and splicing them into one or another plasmid engineered
              to permit complete transcription of both strands of the chromosomal segment.
              These plasmids contain promoter sequences from phage T7 and phage T3 in
              opposite orientations. This transcription will occur in a host cell that can be
              prevented from transcribing its own chr omosomal genes and can be induced to
              form either the T7 or the T3 RNA polymerase. Proteins made from these
              transcripts can be radioactively labeled and thereby distinguished from the
              other cellular proteins. The labeled proteins expressed from the chromosomal
              fragment can then be resolved on 2D gels and assigned coordinates on the
              reference gel image for this organism. Each expressed protein spot can then be
              matched to its encoding DNA on the segment by comparing the mol. wgt. and the
              isoelectric point of the protein (as measured by its gel location) with those
              predicted by the nucleotide sequence of the segment.  In this way a Genome
              Expression Map will gradually be produced that displays the 2D gel location of
              every protein encoded by the E. Coli genome, and matches each protein spot to
              its gene. The Genome Expression Map will be published periodically, and
              maintained as a frequently updated, publicly accessible, electronic database. 
              %%%  The goal of this project is to trace every protein  in the bacterium
              Escherichia coli to is structure gene, and to account for every gene of the
              cell.  Most of  the nearly 700 entries in the current gene-protein database
              derive from methods that allow one-at-a-time identifications of protein spots
              on two dimensional (2D) gels as known proteins or the products of known genes. 
              Early progress was rapid, but even so, many decades would be necessary to
              identify even the products of  known genes, and with no hope of identifying all
              gene products by this approach.  The recent congruence of three technical
              advances means that it is now technically possible for a small research group,
              with the right tools, to produce a Genome Expression Map that displays the 2D
              gel location of every protein encoded by the  E. Coli genome, and matches each
              protein spot to its gene.  In addition, each protein of the cell will be sorted
              into general metabolic classes as they are identified.  The Genome Expression
              Map and the annotated physiological information about the cellular protei ns
              will be published periodically, and maintained as a frequently updated,
              publicity accessible, electronic database.  This database will greatly
              facilitate studies of global gene expression patterns and will be a model for
              work with more complex organisms.  ***
