Title       : Protein Stabilization and Destabilization by Guanidine Salts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9417773

Award Number: 9417773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Miller cmiller@bradeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Serge N. Timasheff  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9417773  Timasheff  The objectives of this research is to define on the
              thermodynamic  and molecular levels the interactions between guanidine salts
              and  proteins in the native and unfolded states and, thus, to gain an 
              understanding of the manner in which these interactions control the  state of
              folding of globular proteins; to establish the individual  contributions of the
              guanidinium (Gua+) in and the anions in the  Gua+ salts (C1, SO4-2, SCN-,
              Acetate-) to the stabilization and  unfolding of protein structure and to
              establish the rules of  additivity and compensation of the actions of these
              ions on the  thermodynamic and molecular levels; to define the role of water 
              molecules in contact with protein surface and interacting very  weakly with it
              in the modulation of i) protein destabilization by  Gua+ ions, and ii) the
              compensation and additivity of the Gua+  effects by the anions.  The system of
              guanidine salts involves the  simultaneous interactions of proteins with the
              Gua+ ions and the  salt anions.  This brings into play the phenomena of
              additivity  and compensation between the ions, as well as the expected 
              compensation between Gua ions interacting with different loci on  the protein
              surface.  Measurements of the thermodynamic  (preferential) binding of
              guanidine salts with proteins in the  intact and unfolded disulfide cleaved
              states will be carried out  over a broad concentration range (0.5 to 7.0 M
              GuaHC1) at several  solvent pHs.  From these, free energies of interaction
              isotherms  will be generated over the entire denaturant concentration range 
              for both the native and unfolded states of the protein.   Experiments as a
              function of temperature will give enthalpies and  entropies of interaction. 
              The preferential binding values will be  compared then with site occupancy data
              on the protein, which will  permit to decompose the water molecules in contact
              with the protein  surface into those that are exchangeable with co-solvent
              molecules  and of those at loci from which the Gua+ salts  are totally 
              excluded. The establishment of this balance will permit to define  the role of
              weakly interacting water in the stabilization of  protein structure. 
              Comparison between the Gua salts (from sulfate,  a stabilizer to thiocyanate, a
              strong denaturant) will permit to  define the role of the guanidinium ion in
              the destabilization  process.  The preferential interactions will be measured
              by  dialysis equilibrium coupled with high precision densimetry at  various
              temperature; various spectroscopic techniques will be used  to define protein
              transitions.  %%%  The research addresses the issue of the stabilization of
              proteins  by various added materials.  In the expression and processing of 
              newly synthesized proteins by recombinant techniques, such as used  in
              biotechnology, it is frequently necessary to dissolve them out  of large
              aggregates (inclusion bodies) formed in the cells and then  to fold them into
              an active structure, and to maintain that active  material intact.  The
              solubilization and refolding processes are  frequently done in the presence of
              guanidine hydrochloride which,  at high concentrations, is a destabilizing
              agent.  On the other  hand, the related salt, guanidine sulfate is a good
              stabilizing  agent,but a poor solubilizer.  At present the uses of such agents 
              are mostly empirical.  The rules that govern the actions of these  agents will
              be established by detailed physical chemical studies of  their interactions
              with proteins and the role played by water in  these actions will be
              established.  Such a rational development of  the rules of additivity and
              compensation between these, and other  additives to the solvent medium will
              permit, in turn, the rational  formulation of complex solvent mixtures of
              strong and weak  stabilizers and destabilizers to use systematically in the 
              extraction and folding of newly synthesized proteins, as well as in  their long
              range storage in active form.  ***
