Title       : Process Analysis and Fluxes for Electroslag Refining of Intermetallics,
               Indo-U.S. Cooperative Project, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1994     
File        : a9417428

Award Number: 9417428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12258              (Estimated)
Investigator: P K. Rao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst Tech Bombay
	      
	      Bombay, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,5919,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9417428  Rao    Description:  This project supports  collaboration between Dr.
              Ramana G. Reddy,  Department of Chemical and Metallurgical  Engineering at the
              University of Nevada at  Reno, and Dr. P. Krishna Rao, Department of 
              Metallurgical Engineering at the Indian  Institute of Technology (IIT) in
              Bombay.  The  topic relates to the factors controlling the  properties of
              intermetallic aluminides during  processing from the primary metals.  The 
              properties of superalloys depend to a large  extent on the segregation
              phenomena associated  with solidification. Electroslag refining (ESR)  is one
              method for controlling the parameters of  the melt and therefore the final
              product.  The  focus of this project is on investigating the  effect of ESR
              processing on the microstructure  and tensile properties of structure 
              intermetallics.  The scientists propose to: 1.  evaluate, collate, and generate
              the physico  chemical data for molten slags for ESR of  intermetallic
              aluminides; and 2. assess the  efficiency and reliability of various existing 
              mathematical models and where necessary develop  new models to predict the
              physico chemical  properties of fluxes.  The scientists at Reno  will work on
              data-base generation, and the  development of mathematical models, while 
              scientists at Bombay will process the various  intermetallic aluminides and
              study the  structural-property correlation.    Scope:  This project brings two
              complementary  capabilities, at the U. of Nevada, Reno, and at  the IIT,
              Bombay, to conduct a fundamental  chemical engineering study, with the
              objective  of understanding the relationship between the  slag conditions and
              properties of the resulting  alloys.  The work is likely to lead to  developing
              better models for these  relationships that can be used for design and 
              processing of various materials.  The  collaboration should be beneficial to
              the U.S.  and India and should advance scientific  knowledge in the area of
              metallurgy in general.   The project meets INT's objectives well.  ***
