Title       : Rheological, Rheooptical and Physical Chemical Studies on Nematic Polymers and
               their Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1998  
File        : a9417374

Award Number: 9417374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy C. Berry gcberry@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1773,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9417374  Berry    Rheological and rheooptical studies are being carried out on 
              nematic polymers and their solutions.  The linear and  nonlinear viscoelastic
              properties of this technologically  important class of materials are complex
              owing to the  inherent anisotropy of the properties of an ordered, nematic 
              phase.  Four nematogenic polymers are to be studied to  provide a systematic
              variation in the molecular  characteristics giving rise to nematic order. 
              Three of the  systems are solutions of chains with large persistence  lengths
              characterizing their conformation, but with  differing degrees of rigidity to
              the molecular conformation.  Two have high rigidity of structure, but with
              persistence  lengths differing by a factor of two: poly (1,4-phenylene- 
              2,6-benzobisthiazole), PBZT, and poly (1,4-phenylene-2,6-  benzobisoxazole),
              PBZO, with the former having the higher  persistence length.  The third,
              poly(1,4-phenylene-  terephthalate, has a persistence length similar to PBZO,
              but  is believed to have a less rigid structure.  The fourth  sample is a
              poly(1-olefin sulfone) known to form an ordered  fluid over a range of
              temperatures.  The proposed studies  include static and dynamic light
              scattering on aligned  monodomains to determine the Frank curvature
              elasticities  for distortion of the director field, and associated 
              viscosities, as functions of chain length, concentration and  other variables. 
              Third harmonic generation on the same  samples will be used to assess surface
              layers of special  alignment, including a biaxial nematic alignment, that may 
              be important to rheological behavior.  The emphasis will be  on the use of
              creep and recovery and rheooptical  measurements on nematic preparations, with
              no prior  treatment to induce overall alignment, augmented by studies  on
              monodomain samples to determine whether the preparations  align in a slow shear
              flow.  %%%  The rheology of isotropic solutions of nematogenic polymers 
              comprising rodlike sequences catenated by monomers imparting  a no n rodlike
              linkage will also be studied.  The study is  directed to elucidation of aspects
              of the molecular dynamics  of semiflexible chains.  It is postulated that
              chains may  exhibit a marked suppression in molecular mobility, perhaps 
              leading to a structural glass similar to one proposed  theoretically, but never
              found, for nematogenic rodlike  polymers.  This could occur owing to the severe
              restriction  to rotational motions expected for each of the rodlike  subunits,
              leading to an overall suppression of molecular  diffusion, and solid-like
              behavior under small stresses.  A  yield behavior to fluid-like behavior is
              anticipated at  larger stresses, owing to the relatively weak intermolecular 
              interactions leading to the structural glass.
