Title       : Organic Conductors in High Magnetic Fields: A Theoretical Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1996   
File        : a9417451

Award Number: 9417451
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor M. Yakovenko yakovenk@physics.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9417451  Yakovenko  The research involves the theory of quasi-one-dimensional 
              organic conductors with the emphasis on their behavior in  strong magnetic
              fields.  These artificially synthesized  conductors demonstrate metallic,
              insulating,  superconducting, charge- and spin-density wave, and Hubbard 
              paramagnetic insulator states.  Their rich physical  behavior, especially in
              magnetic fields, and its relation to  high temperature superconductors and the
              quantum Hall effect  makes these materials very desirable objects of study. 
              Proposed research includes the quantum Hall effect of a  moving density wave,
              "hot spots" on the Fermi surface, the  fraction quantum Hall effect,
              localization and the Hall  effect in high magnetic fields, the structure of the
              spin  density wave order parameter, and the effects of  superstructure produced
              by the orientational ordering of  anions.  Close connection with experimental
              studies is  anticipated.  %%%  This work involves theoretically studying
              special large  molecules that are stacked over each other and form parallel 
              chains which are good conductors of electricity.  These  materials have a wide
              variety of interesting properties,  including superconductivity, and are
              therefore known as  exotic materials.  Developing a theory of these materials 
              has particular advantages because of their chain-like  character.  The
              investigator is an expert in these materials  and is highly regarded in the
              community.  He especially  wants to focus on the properties of these materials
              in a  magnetic field and to connect with experimental studies.  Materials such
              as these often demonstrate completely  unexpected properties, so their study
              has the possibility of  resulting in applications which cannot currently be 
              predicted.  ***
