Title       : Aspen Global Change Institute Interdisciplinary Summer Science Sessions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1994    
File        : a9417138

Award Number: 9417138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143956             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Katzenberger johnk@agci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aspen Global Change Inst
	      100 E Francis
	      Aspen, CO  816111424    /   -

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 1314,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              The complex nature of problems associated with global environmental  change
              requires far more interdisciplinary research than  traditionally has occurred. 
              The development of interdisciplinary  collaborations requires scientists from
              different fields to become  familiar with the perspectives, experiences, and
              methods that each  employs.  This award supports three two-week sessions that
              will be  conducted by the Aspen Global Change Institute during July and  August
              1994.  The sessions will bring together natural and social  scientists for
              in-depth discussions during which they will share  the results from their
              latest work, learn from each other, and  stimulate new ideas regarding central
              topics for global change  research.  The three sessions in 1994 will deal with
              issues that  have been identified as being of major importance to agencies 
              participating in the U.S. Global Change Research Program (US/GCRP).   Those
              topics are (1) radiation feedbacks and the credibility of  atmospheric models,
              (2) anticipating global change surprises, and  (3) biological invasion as a
              global change.  The results of the  sessions will be disseminated through a
              variety of media.  Summary  reports will be published in widely circulated
              major newsletters.   Session chairs will conduct a briefing for US/GCRP agency 
              officials, and more complete written reports of session proceedings  and
              conclusions will be made available in both written and  electronic forms. 
              Support for this project is provided by NSF on  behalf of other US/GCRP
              agencies, including the Environmental  Protection Agency.       Through support
              of these sessions, new insights will be gained  about critical issues in global
              change research.  Of potentially  greater importance will be opportunities for
              leading scientists to  become familiar with counterparts from other
              disciplines.   Experience has shown that from initial discussions like those
              that  occur in these sessions, effective interdisciplinary collaborations 
              needed to conduct global change resea rch often develop.
