Title       : Graphics Workstations and Networking Equipment for Structure Determination Using
               Parallel Computer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9417734

Award Number: 9417734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Rossmann   (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dan C. Marinescu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              We  request funding for graphics workstations and high speed networking 
              equipment  to  be  installed in the Biological  Sciences  and  Computer 
              Sciences  Departments at Purdue University. This equipment is necessary  for  
              the   determination   of   crystal   structures   of   biological 
              macromolecular  assemblies  with a high level  of  non-crystallographic 
              symmetry  using the parallel computers. Such computationally  intensive 
              studies  require  the  development of  parallel  programs  and  problem 
              solving environments which facilitate access to parallel computers.        Most
               of  our  work  has  focused so far on  the  analyses  of  virus  structures at
              atomic resolution. This work will be expanded to  examine  all kinds of
              biological structures such as proteins and protein nucleic  acid  complexes.
              Until now, our program development efforts  have  been  concentrated  on 
              electron density averaging and modification,  and  on  Fourier syntheses and
              analyses. Attention will now be directed to  data  processing  by 
              parallelizing programs originally developed  at  Purdue  University.  It  is 
              hoped  that  these  programs,  among   the   first  crystallographic  parallel 
              program developments,  will  become  widely  adopted. The current interface,
              permitting easy access to the suite  of  structural biology programs is to be
              improved and the range of tasks of  the programs, is to be extended.        It 
              has  already  been  shown that parallel  computing  has  made  it  possible to
              perform tasks that were previously out of reasonable range.  Thus the
              availability of these programs has been an essential component  in   the  
              solution   of  a  variety  of  difficult   virus   structure  determinations 
              e.g.,  the  human Coxsakie  virus  B3  and  the  insect  Nodamura  viruses. It
              is therefore reasonable to anticipate that  these  developments  will  have  a 
              major  impact  in  the  study  of  complex  biological  molecules that perform
              basic and essential life  processes,  and  on  the study of  viruses whose
              processes might be halted  given  a  better knowledge of structure.        In 
              response  to the computing needs of our group, Purdue  University  acquired a
              140 compute node Paragon system in May 1994 and is providing  $200,000 in cost
              sharing for this proposal.
